Chapter 549 u Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Clinical Manifestations

The most common presenting feature of rhabdomyosarcoma is a mass
that may or may not be painful. Symptoms are caused by displacement
or obstruction of normal structures. Origin in the nasopharynx may
be associated with nasal congestion, mouth breathing, epistaxis, and
difficulty with swallowing and chewing. Regional extension into the
cranium can produce cranial nerve paralysis, blindness, and signs of
increased intracranial pressure with headache and vomiting. When the
tumor develops in the face or cheek, there may be swelling, pain, trismus, and, as extension occurs, paralysis of cranial nerves. Tumors in
the neck can produce progressive swelling with neurologic symptoms
after regional extension. Orbital primary tumors are usually diagnosed
early in their course because of associated proptosis, periorbital edema,
ptosis, change in visual acuity, and local pain. When the tumor arises
in the middle ear, the most common early signs are pain, hearing loss,
chronic otorrhea, or a mass in the ear canal; extensions of the tumor
produce cranial nerve paralysis and signs of an intracranial mass on
the involved side. An unremitting croupy cough and progressive stridor can accompany rhabdomyosarcoma of the larynx. Because most of
these signs and symptoms also are associated with common childhood
conditions, clinicians must be alert to the possibility of tumor.
Rhabdomyosarcoma of the trunk or extremities often is first noticed
after trauma and initially may be regarded as a hematoma. If the swelling
does not resolve or increases, malignancy should be suspected. Involvement of the genitourinary tract can produce hematuria, obstruction of
the lower urinary tract, recurrent urinary tract infections, incontinence,
or a mass detectable on abdominal or rectal examination. Paratesticular tumor usually manifests as a painless, rapidly growing mass in the
scrotum. Vaginal rhabdomyosarcoma may manifest as a grapelike mass
of tumor tissue bulging through the vaginal orifice, known as sarcoma
botryoides, and can cause urinary tract or large bowel symptoms. Vaginal bleeding or obstruction of the urethra or rectum may occur. Similar
findings can be noted with tumors arising from the uterus.

3137

Tumors in any location may disseminate early and cause symptoms
of pain or respiratory distress associated with pulmonary metastases.
Extensive bone involvement can produce symptomatic hypercalcemia or
bony pain. In such cases, it may be difficult to identify the primary lesion.

Diagnosis

Early diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma requires a high index of suspicion.
The microscopic appearance is that of a small, round blue cell tumor. Neuroblastoma, lymphoma, and Ewing sarcoma also are small, round blue
cell tumors from which suspected rhabdomyosarcomas must be differentiated. The differential diagnosis depends on the site of presentation.
Definitive diagnosis is established by biopsy, microscopic appearance,
and results of immunohistochemical stains and analysis of PAX/FOXO1
expression. A lesion in an extremity may be thought to be a hematoma or
hemangioma, an orbital lesion resulting in proptosis may be treated as an
orbital cellulitis, or bladder-­obstructive symptoms may be missed. Adolescents may ignore or be embarrassed to mention paratesticular lesions
for a long time. Unfortunately, several months often elapse between initial symptoms and biopsy. Diagnostic procedures are determined mainly
by the area of involvement. CT or MRI is necessary for evaluation of the
primary tumor site. With signs and symptoms in the head and neck area,
MRI should be performed to identify intracranial extension or meningeal
involvement and also to reveal bony involvement or erosion at the base of
the skull. For abdominal and pelvic tumors, CT with a contrast agent or
MRI can help delineate the tumor (Figs. 549.1 and 549.2). A radionuclide
bone or fluorodeoxyglucose PET (FDG-­PET) scan, chest CT, and bilateral
bone marrow aspiration and biopsy should be performed to evaluate the
patient for the presence of metastatic disease and to plan treatment. Some
low-­risk patients may not need bone marrow evaluation. The most critical
element of the diagnostic workup is examination of tumor tissue by an
experienced sarcoma pathologist, which includes the use of special histochemical stains and immunostains along with molecular genetics to detect
fusion transcripts as described earlier. Lymph nodes also should be sampled for the presence of disease spread, especially in tumors of the extremities and in males older than 10 years of age with paratesticular tumors.

Treatment

A

B

Fig. 549.1 A, Pelvic CT scan of a child with a bladder rhabdomyosarcoma. B, MR image of a child with a parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma.

A

B

Treatment is multidisciplinary and includes the pediatric oncologist,
pediatric surgeon or other surgical subspecialist, and often a radiation oncologist. Only if the tumor is able to be completely resected,
with negative margins, without loss of function or major cosmetic
deformity, should this be attempted initially. Unfortunately, most
rhabdomyosarcomas are not completely resectable at initial diagnosis. Treatment is based on risk classification of the tumor, which is
determined by the stage of tumor, the tumor histology and/or fusion
status, and the amount of tumor that was surgically resected prior to
chemotherapy (“surgical group”). Stage is dependent on primary site

C

Fig. 549.2 Rhabdomyosarcoma. A, Axial contrast-­enhanced CT scan at the level of the nasal cavity demonstrates a large, enhancing aggressive

soft tissue mass involving the right maxillary sinus and the infratemporal fossa (arrows). Axial MR image (B) and coronal contrast-­enhanced T1-­
weighted MR image (C) demonstrate an infiltrative mass involving the pharyngeal mucosal space, left infratemporal masticator space, skull base,
and sphenoid sinus (arrows). (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 26-­16, p. 769.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3138 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
(favorable vs unfavorable), tumor invasiveness (T1 or T2), lymph node
status, tumor size, and presence of metastasis. Favorable sites include
female genital, paratesticular, and head and neck (nonparameningeal)
regions; all other sites are considered unfavorable. Table 549.3 shows
the Children’s Oncology Group staging system for rhabdomyosarcoma.
Patients should be offered enrollment in clinical trials. Table 549.4
shows current risk stratification and outcome based on results of
recent studies. Patients with low-­risk disease can be cured with minimal therapy consisting of vincristine and actinomycin with or without
lower doses of cyclophosphamide; radiation therapy can be used in
the case of residual disease after initial surgery. Treatment for patients
with intermediate-­risk disease consists of vincristine, actinomycin, and
cyclophosphamide along with radiation. The addition of irinotecan has
recently been studied in intermediate risk rhabdomyosarcoma, and
the current trial for patients with intermediate risk disease is exploring the role of maintenance chemotherapy. For patients with high-­risk
disease, approaches using intensive multiagent chemotherapy have not
improved the outcome and new approaches are being investigated.

Some examples of late effects include infertility from cyclophosphamide,
late effects in the radiation field such as bladder dysfunction, infertility,
cataracts, impaired bone growth, and secondary malignancies.

OTHER SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS

The nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcomas constitute a heterogeneous group of tumors that account for 3% of all childhood malignancies
(Table 549.5). Because they are relatively rare in children, much of the
information about their natural history and treatment has been derived
from studies in adult patients. In children, the median age at diagnosis is
12 years, with a male:female ratio of 2.3:1. These tumors commonly arise
in the trunk or lower extremities. The most common histologic types are
synovial sarcoma (42%), fibrosarcoma (13%), malignant fibrous histiocytoma (12%), and neurogenic tumors (10%). Molecular genetic studies often prove useful in diagnosis, because several of these tumors have
characteristic chromosomal translocations. Tumor size, stage (clinical
group), invasiveness, and histologic grade correlate with survival.
Surgery remains the mainstay of therapy, but a careful search for
lung and bone metastases should be undertaken before surgical excision. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy should be considered for
large, high-­grade, and/or unresectable tumors. The role of chemotherapy for nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcomas is not as well
defined as for rhabdomyosarcoma. Patients with large (>5 cm) high-­
grade, or unresectable or metastatic disease are treated with multi­
agent chemotherapy in addition to irradiation and/or surgery. Patients
with completely resected small (<5 cm) tumors are generally treated
with surgery alone and can be expected to have an excellent outcome
regardless of whether the tumor is high or low grade.

Prognosis

Prognostic factors include age, stage, histology/fusion status, and primary site. Among patients with resectable tumor and favorable histology, 80–90% have prolonged disease-­free survival. Unresectable tumor
localized to certain favorable sites, such as the orbit, also has a high
likelihood of cure. Approximately 65–70% of patients with incompletely
resected tumor also achieve long-­term disease-­free survival. Patients
with disseminated disease have a poor prognosis; only approximately
50% achieve remission, and fewer than 50% of these are cured. Older
children have a poorer prognosis than younger children. For all patients,
surveillance for late effects of cancer treatment is extremely important.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 549.3  	 Staging System for Rhabdomyosarcoma
STAGE

SITE

T STAGE

SIZE

NODE STATUS

METASTASIS

1

Favorable

T1 or T2

a or b

N0 or N1 or Nx

M0

2

Unfavorable

T1 or T2

a

N0 or Nx

M0

3

Unfavorable

T1 or T2

a
b

N1
N0 or N1 or Nx

M0

4

Any

T1 or T2

a or b

N0 or N1 or Nx

M1

T1, confined to anatomic site of origin; T2, extension and/or fixative to surrounding tissue.
Size: a, <5 cm in diameter; b, ≥5 cm in diameter.
Nodes: N0, regional nodes not involved; N1, regional nodes involved; Nx, regional node status unknown.
Metastases: M0, no distant metastases; M1, metastases present (includes positive cytology in cerebrospinal, pleural, or peritoneal fluid).

Table 549.4  Risk Groups and Outcome for Rhabdomyosarcoma, Children’s Oncology Group
RISK GROUP

STAGE

CLINICAL GROUP

MOLECULAR FINDINGS

AGE

LONG-­TERM EFS (%)*

Very Low

1

I

FOXO1 -­, wildtype P53, wildtype MYOD1

Any

92

Low

1

II, III (orbit only)

FOXO1-­, wildtype P53, wildtype MYOD1

Any

87

Low

2

I, II

FOXO1 -­, wildtype P53, wildtype MYOD1

Any

87

Intermediate

1

III (non orbit)

FOXO1-­

Any

70-­85

Intermediate

1, 2, 3

I, II, III

FOXO1+

Any

63-­93

Intermediate

2, 3

III

FOXO1 -­

Any

63-­93

Intermediate

3

I, II

FOXO1-­

Any

63-­93

Intermediate

4

IV

FOXO1-­

<10 yr

60-­64

High

4

IV

FOXO1-­

≥10 yr

35

High

4

IV

FOXO1+

Any

9†

*4–5-­year EFS based on D9602, D9803, ARST0331, ARST0431, and ARST0531 studies.
†From Rudzinski ER, Anderson JR, Chi YY, et al. Histology, fusion status, and outcome in metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma: A report from the Children’s Oncology Group. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
2017;64(12):10.1002/pbc.26645.
EFS, event-­free survival,
Modified from Oberoi, S, Crane, JN, Haduong, JH, et al. Children’s Oncology Group’s 2023 blueprint for research: Soft tissue sarcomas. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2023;70(Suppl. 6):e30556.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.30556.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 549 u Soft Tissue Sarcomas

3139

Table 549.5  Clinical and Biological Features of the Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CELL ORIGIN AND
CYTOGENETICS/
PRODUCT

TUMOR*

COMMON
SITES

COMMON AGES

GOOD
PROGNOSTIC
FACTORS†

OUTCOME

THERAPY

Stages I and II,
70%; stages III
and IV, poor

WLE with/without
RT chemo: ifosfamide/doxorubicin

Synovial sarcoma

Mesenchymal cells/t(X;18)
(p11q11)/SSX1–
SYT (seen in biphasic
tumors) SSX2–SYT (seen
in monophasic tumors)/
translocation present in
>90%, MYCN over­
expression

Extremities
(lower twice
as common
as upper
extremity)

Adolescence/
young adulthood, accounts
for 30% of pediatric NRSTS

Age ≤14 years,
size <5 cm,
calcification,
chemosensitive

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP)

Dermis/t(17;22)
(q21;q13) ring
chromosome/COL1A1–
PDGFB

Trunk and
proximal
limbs, rare
head and
neck

20-­50 years, rare in
childhood

Complete excision, local
recurrence
60% with
incomplete
resection

MFH aka undifferentiated
pleomorphic
sarcoma

Unknown/19p+, complex
abnormalities

Lower
extremity,
trunk, head
and neck

In children, 10-­20
years, 40-­60
years common
radiation-­
induced sarcoma

Extremity site

5-­year survival,
27–53%

WLE chemo:
ifosfamide/
doxorubicin

Angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma

Fibroblast/t(2;22)(q34;q12)
t(12;16)(q13;p11) t(12;22)
(q13;q12)/EWSR1–
CREB1 TLS–ATF1
EWSR1–ATF1

Extremity,
trunk
and head
and neck
(subcutis
may infiltrate
dermis or
muscle)

Young children and
young adults

Much less
aggressive
than MFH

Excellent with
surgery alone

WLE

MPNST

Schwann cell or
fibroblast/17q;22q
loss or rearrangement,
complex abnormalities
in high-­grade tumors

Extremity,
retroperitoneum trunk

Younger patients
with neurofibromatosis
(NF1) develop
in 10% patients
with NF1 and
20–60% cases of
MPNST occur
in association
with NF1

Size <5 cm,
no NF1

53% survival
without NF,
16% with NF

WLE with/without RT
chemo:
neoadjuvant role,
ifosfamide/
doxorubicin

Fibrosarcoma

Fibroblast/t(X;18), t(2;5),
t(7;22)

Truncal/proximal site

Adolescence

5-­year survival
34–60%

WLE with/without
RT chemo: no
established role

Infantile fibro­
sarcoma

Fibroblast/t(12;15)
(p13;q25)/ETV6–NTRK3

Distal
­extremity

Most <2 years

5-­year survival
84%

WLE, RT/chemo if
WLE not possible
historically, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (with VA
± C). However, the
use of molecular
targeting with
NTRK inhibitor for
up to 26 cycles
has had dramatic
results and should
be considered
first-­line therapy

<5 years

WLE (3 cm) margin
pseudopod-­like
projections with
Mohs micrographic
surgery; RT
has been used
when WLE not
possible, imatinib
for unresectable;
locally advanced,
recurrent, or
metastatic disease

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 549.5

Clinical and Biological Features of the Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue Sarcomas—cont’d
CELL ORIGIN AND
CYTOGENETICS/
PRODUCT

COMMON
SITES

Leiomyosarcoma

Deletion 1p, other
complex abnormalities, smooth muscle-­
uterine t(12;14)
(q15;q24); HMGA2
rearrangement

Retro­
peritoneum
GI tract, any
soft-­tissue
or vascular
area

40-­70 years, when
in children, any
age, associated with human
­immunodeficiency
virus related
to EBV infection, reported
in patients who
received RT for
retinoblastoma
and Carney triad‡

<5 cm

33% disease-­free
survival at 1-­5
years

WLE chemo:
ifosfamide/
doxorubicin or
gemcitabine/
docetaxel

Alveolar soft part
sarcoma

der(17)t(X;17)
(p11;25)/ASPSCR1–TFE3

Orbit, head
and neck,
lower
extremity

15-­35 years

Young age,
orbital site,
<5 cm

5-­year survival
27–59%
(indolent; death
from disease
after 10-­20
years) 79%
metastatic
disease,
including brain

WLE chemo or RT
only after
recurrence chemo:
no clear role
Possible role of
vascular
endothelial growth
factor inhibitors
being explored

Hemangiopericytoma infantile
form (<1 year of
age)

Pericytes/t(12;19)
(q13;q13)/t(13;22)
(q22;q11)

Extremity,
retroperitoneum head
and neck
extremity,
trunk

20-­70 years, when
in children, 10-­20
years rare, but
typically 1 year

Low stage,
<5 cm,
infantile form

Stages I and II,
30–70% 5-­year
survival with adjuvant therapy
stages III and IV,
poor infantile—
excellent with
surgery alone

WLE, with/without
RT chemo: no
­established
role but can be
chemoresponsive,
infantile form
responds more
favorably to
chemotherapy

Liposarcoma
(myxoid)

Primitive
mesenchyme/t(12;16)
(q13p11)/FUS–DDIT3

Extremity,
retroperitoneum

0-­2 years and
second decade;
sixth decade
most common

Child, myxoid
type

Very good with
WLE, rarely
metastasizes

WLE, with/without RT
RT important in
retroperitoneal
lesion chemo: no
established role

Clear cell
­sarcoma

Mesoderm, melanin
deposits t(12;22)(p13;
q12)/EWSR1–ATF1

Tendons and
aponeuroses
of lower
extremity

Young adults,
females

<5 cm, no
necrosis,
­nonmetastatic

Adverse
prognosis;
5-­year survival
rates of 60–
70%. However,
only 30–40%
are long-­term
survivors due
to late
recurrences

WLE with sentinel
node biopsy
no clear role
for adjuvant
chemotherapy
Potential role for
immunotherapy
(e.g., translocation-­
targeted vaccines,
interferon, GM-­
CSF-­secreting
vaccine)

Epithelioid
­sarcoma

Inactivation of INI1
(hSNF5/SMAR CB1)
located on chromosome
22q11.2

Distal
extremities
(especially
hands)

Young adult

Younger age,
distal tumor
location, no
necrosis or
vascular
invasion,
negative nodal
status, and
microscopic
complete
resection

Tumor is highly
WLE with sentinel
aggressive and
lymph node
has a propensity
biopsy ± RT
for lymph node
and/or chemo:
metastases
ifosfamide/
Localized smaller
doxorubicin
tumors have
Clinical trial for use
better progof tazemetostat
nosis
recently
completed
Approval for patients
with metastatic or
locally advanced
epithelioid
sarcoma not
eligible for
complete resection

TUMOR*

COMMON AGES

GOOD
PROGNOSTIC
FACTORS†

OUTCOME

THERAPY

*Listed in order of decreasing incidence.
†Low histologic grade and low stage are good prognostic factors.
‡Carney triad: A condition consisting of gastric epithelioid leiomyosarcoma, pulmonary chondroma, functioning extraadrenal paraganglioma.
NRST, Nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma; GI, gastrointestinal; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; MFH, malignant fibrous histiocytoma; MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor; NF, neurofibromatosis; V, vincristine; C, cyclophosphamide; NTRK, neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase; RT, radiation therapy; WLE, wide local excision; GM-­CSF,
granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor.
From Amin S, Levy CF. Rhabdomyosarcoma and other soft-­tissue sarcomas. In: Fish JD, Lipton JM, Lanzkowsky P, eds. Lanzowsky’s Manual of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology.
7th ed. London: Elsevier; 2022: Table 25.1, p. 543–544.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

Chapter 550

Neoplasms of Bone
550.1 Malignant Tumors of Bone
Wendy A. Allen-­Rhoades and Carola A.S. Arndt
The annual incidence of malignant bone tumors in the United States is
approximately 8.2 cases per 1 million children younger than 14 years
and 14.7 per 1 million for adolescents age 15-­19. Osteosarcoma is the
most common primary malignant bone tumor in children and adolescents, followed by Ewing sarcoma (Table 550.1, Fig. 550.1). In children
<10 years old, Ewing sarcoma is more common than osteosarcoma.
Both tumor types are most likely to occur in the second decade of life.

OSTEOSARCOMA
Epidemiology

The annual incidence of osteosarcoma in the United States is 5.7 cases
per 1 million children 0-­19 years old. The highest risk period for
development of osteosarcoma is during the adolescent growth spurt,
suggesting an association between rapid bone growth and malignant
transformation. Patients with osteosarcoma are taller than their peers
of similar age.

Pathogenesis

Although the cause of osteosarcoma is unknown, certain genetic or
acquired conditions predispose patients to development of osteosarcoma.
Patients with hereditary retinoblastoma have a significantly increased
risk for development of osteosarcoma. The sites of osteosarcoma in these
patients include previously irradiated areas but also sites far from the
original retinoblastoma radiation field. Predisposition to development of
osteosarcoma in these patients may be related to loss of heterozygosity
of the RB gene. Osteosarcoma also occurs in Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
which is a familial cancer syndrome associated with germline pathogenic

3141

variants of the P53 gene. Kindreds with Li-­Fraumeni syndrome have a
spectrum of malignancies in first-­degree relatives, including carcinoma
of the breast, soft tissue sarcomas, brain tumors, leukemia, adrenocortical
carcinoma, and other malignancies. Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome is
a rare condition associated with short stature, skin telangiectasia, small
hands and feet, hypoplasticity or absence of the thumbs, and a high
risk of osteosarcoma. Diamond-­Blackfan anemia is also a risk factor
for osteosarcoma. Osteosarcoma can also be induced by irradiation for
Ewing sarcoma, craniospinal irradiation for brain tumors, or high-­dose
irradiation for other malignancies. Other benign conditions that can be
associated with malignant transformation to osteosarcoma include Paget
disease, enchondromatosis, multiple hereditary exostoses, and fibrous
dysplasia (see Chapter 550.2).
The pathologic diagnosis of osteosarcoma is made by demonstration of a highly malignant, pleomorphic, spindle cell neoplasm associated with the formation of malignant osteoid and bone. There are
four pathologic subtypes of conventional high-­grade osteosarcoma:
osteoblastic, fibroblastic, chondroblastic, and telangiectatic. No significant differences in outcome are associated with the various subtypes, although the chondroblastic component of that subtype may not
respond as well to chemotherapy.
Telangiectatic osteosarcoma may be confused with aneurysmal bone
cyst (ABC) because of its lytic appearance on radiography. High-­grade
osteosarcoma typically arises in the diaphyseal region of long bones and
invades the medullary cavity. It also may be associated with a soft tissue
mass. Two variants of osteosarcoma, parosteal and periosteal, should be
distinguished from conventional osteosarcoma because of their characteristic clinical features. Parosteal osteosarcoma is a low-­grade, well-­
differentiated tumor that does not invade the medullary cavity and most
frequently is found in the posterior aspect of the distal femur. Surgical
resection alone often is curative in this lesion, which has a low propensity for metastatic spread. Periosteal osteosarcoma is a rare variant that
arises on the surface of the bone but has a higher rate of metastatic spread
than the parosteal type and an intermediate prognosis.

Clinical Manifestations

Pain, limp, and swelling are the most common presenting manifestations of osteosarcoma. Because these tumors occur most often in active

Table 550.1  Comparison of Features of Osteosarcoma and the Ewing Family of Tumors
FEATURE

EWING FAMILY OF TUMORS*

OSTEOSARCOMA

Age

Second decade

Second decade

Ethnicity

All

Primarily Whites

Sex (M:F)

1.5:1

1.5:1

Predisposition

Retinoblastoma, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, Paget disease,
radiotherapy

None known

Site

Metaphyses of long bones

Diaphyses of long bones, flat bones, soft tissues

Presentation

Local pain and swelling; often history of injury;
pathologic fracture

Local pain and swelling; fever, palpable mass, pathologic
fracture

Radiographic findings

Sclerotic destruction (less often lytic); sunburst
pattern, Codman triangle

Primarily lytic, multilaminar periosteal reaction
(“onion-­skinning”), “moth-­eaten,” Codman triangle

Differential diagnosis

Ewing sarcoma, osteomyelitis, hematoma

Osteomyelitis, eosinophilic granuloma, lymphoma,
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, FUO

Metastasis

Lungs, bones

Lungs, bones, bone marrow

Treatment

Chemotherapy

Chemotherapy

Ablative surgery of primary tumor

Radiotherapy and/or surgery of primary tumor

Without metastases, 70% cured; with metastases at
diagnosis, ≤20% survival

Without metastases, 65–75% cured; with metastases at
diagnosis, 20–30% survival

Outcome
FUO, Fever of unknown origin.

*Ewing family of tumors includes: (1) Ewing sarcoma of bone; (2) extraosseous (extraskeletal) Ewing tumor; (3) peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PPNET). A PPNET arising

from the chest wall is an Askin tumor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3142 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Osteosarcoma

24
21

Males
949
Females 700
Total
1649

Percent

18
15
12

Jaw

9

35

32

127
61
11
20
48
8
8
3
3
8 2
3
27
14 2
11
15
4
18
119
88
18
8 74
248

6

22
33

3

508
1
38
3
8
16
2
3

0
1

A

2

3

4
5
6
Age in decades

7

8

33
30
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0

9

4
10

Males
303
Females 209
Total
512

3
2
13
4
1
1
13
21

41
33

2

3

4
5
6
Age in decades

7

33
12
8
4
3
4
66
46

10

39

3

26
18
10

11
11

8
9

27

1

B

24

Ewing Sarcoma

Percent

27

1

4

8

Fig. 550.1 A, Age and skeletal distribution of 1,649 cases of osteosarcoma in the Mayo Clinic files. B, Age and skeletal distribution of 512 cases of
Ewing sarcoma in the Mayo Clinic files. (From Unni KK, ed. Dahlin’s Bone Tumors: General Aspects and Data on 11,087 Cases. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-­Raven; 1996. Reprinted by permission of the Mayo Foundation.)

adolescents, initial complaints may be attributed to a sports injury or
sprain; any bone or joint pain not responding to conservative therapy
within a reasonable time should be investigated thoroughly. Additional
clinical findings may include limitation of motion, joint effusion,
tenderness, and warmth. Results of routine laboratory tests, such as
a complete blood cell count and chemistry panel, are usually normal,
although alkaline phosphatase or lactate dehydrogenase values may be
elevated.

Diagnosis

Bone tumor should be suspected in a patient who presents with
deep bone pain, often causing nighttime awakening, and has a palpable mass with radiographs that demonstrate a lesion. The lesion
may be mixed lytic and blastic in appearance, but new bone formation is usually visible. The classic radiographic appearance of osteosarcoma is the sunburst pattern (Fig. 550.2). When osteosarcoma is
suspected, the patient should be referred to a center with experience
in managing bone tumors. The biopsy and the surgery should be
performed by the same surgeon so that the incisional biopsy site can
be placed in a manner that will not compromise the definitive surgical procedure. Tissue usually is obtained for molecular and biologic
studies at the time of the initial biopsy. Before biopsy, MRI of the
primary lesion and the entire bone should be performed to evaluate
the tumor for its proximity to nerves and blood vessels, soft tissue and joint extension, and skip lesions. The metastatic workup
includes CT of the chest and radionuclide bone scanning or positron emission tomography (PET) scan to evaluate for lung and bone
or soft tissue metastases, respectively. The differential diagnosis
of a lytic bone lesion includes histiocytosis, Ewing sarcoma, lymphoma, and bone cyst.

Treatment

Fig. 550.2 Radiograph of an osteosarcoma of the femur with typical

With chemotherapy and surgery, 5-­year disease-­free survival of
patients with nonmetastatic extremity osteosarcoma is 65–75%.
Complete surgical resection of the tumor is important for cure.
The current approach is to treat patients with preoperative chemotherapy in an attempt to facilitate limb salvage operations and to
treat micrometastatic disease immediately. Up to 80% of patients
are able to undergo limb salvage operations after initial chemotherapy. It is important to resume chemotherapy as soon as possible after surgery. Lung metastases present at diagnosis should be
resected by thoracotomies at some time during treatment. Active
agents in use in multidrug chemotherapy regimens for conventional osteosarcoma include doxorubicin, cisplatin, methotrexate,
and ifosfamide.
One of the most important prognostic factors in osteosarcoma is the histologic response to chemotherapy; a poor histologic
response is ≥10% viable tumor (<90% necrosis in resected tissue). MAP (methotrexate, doxorubicin, cisplatin) is the standard

sunburst appearance of bone formation.

chemotherapy regimen for osteosarcoma. After limb salvage surgery, intensive rehabilitation and physical therapy are necessary
to ensure maximal functional outcome. Intensification of therapy
by addition of ifosfamide and etoposide in patients with poor histologic response after induction chemotherapy with MAP has not
improved outcome.
For patients who require amputation, early prosthetic fitting
and gait training are essential to enable patients to resume normal
activities as soon as possible. Before definitive surgery, patients
with tumors on weight-­bearing bones should be instructed to use
crutches to avoid stressing the weakened bones and causing pathologic fracture. The role of chemotherapy in parosteal and periosteal
osteosarcomas is not well defined, and chemotherapy is generally
reserved for use in patients with tumors that have a high-­grade
microscopic appearance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

3143

Prognosis

Surgical resection alone is curative only for patients with low-­grade parosteal osteosarcoma. Conventional high-­grade osteosarcoma requires
multiagent chemotherapy. Up to 75% of patients with nonmetastatic
extremity osteosarcoma are cured with current multiagent treatment protocols. The prognosis is not as favorable for patients with pelvic tumors
as for those with primary tumors in the extremities. From 20–30% of
patients who have limited numbers of pulmonary metastases also can
be cured with aggressive chemotherapy and resection of lung nodules.
Patients with bone metastases and those with widespread lung metastases have an extremely poor prognosis. Long-­term follow-­up of patients
with osteosarcoma is important to monitor for late effects of chemotherapy, such as cardiotoxicity from anthracycline and hearing loss from
cisplatin. Patients in whom late, isolated lung metastases develop may be
cured with surgical resection of the metastatic lesions alone.

EWING SARCOMA
Epidemiology

The incidence of Ewing sarcoma in the United States is 3.1 cases per 1
million children ages 0-­19 years. It is rare among Black children. Ewing
sarcoma, an undifferentiated sarcoma of bone, also may arise from soft
tissue. Treatment protocols for these tumors are the same whether the
tumors arise in bone or soft tissue. Anatomic sites of primary tumors
arising in bone are distributed evenly between the extremities and the
central axis (pelvis, spine, and chest wall). Primary tumors arising in
the chest wall are often referred to as Askin tumors.

Pathogenesis

Immunohistochemical staining assists in the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma to differentiate it from small, round, blue cell tumors such as
lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and neuroblastoma. Histochemical
stains may react positively with certain neural markers on tumor cells
(neuron-­specific enolase and S-­100), especially in peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors. Reactivity with muscle markers (e.g., desmin, actin) is absent. Additionally, MIC-­2 (CD99) staining is usually
positive. A specific chromosomal translocation, t(11;22) (q24;q12), or a
variant is found in most of the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors. Analysis for the translocation by next generation sequencing, fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH), or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for the chimeric fusion gene products EWS/FLI1 or EWS/ERG (or
other variants) are used routinely in diagnosis.

Fig. 550.3 Radiograph of tibial Ewing sarcoma showing periosteal
elevation or “onion-­skinning.”

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms of Ewing sarcoma are similar to those of osteosarcoma.
Pain, swelling, limitation of motion, and tenderness over the involved
bone or soft tissue are common presenting symptoms. Patients with
large chest wall primary tumors may present with respiratory distress.
Patients with paraspinal or vertebral primary tumors may present with
symptoms of cord compression. Ewing sarcoma often is associated
with systemic manifestations, such as fever and weight loss, and may
be accompanied by elevated inflammatory markers; patients may have
undergone treatment for a presumptive diagnosis of osteomyelitis or
a fever of unknown origin. Patients also may have a delay in diagnosis when their pain or swelling is attributed to a sports injury. Biopsy
and tissue diagnosis should be considered for patients presenting with
suspicious bone lesions, because even the gross appearance of Ewing
sarcoma can appear similar to infection and the time course can be
rapid. Surgical procedures for treatment of infection can contaminate
the surgical field and impact treatment outcomes.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma should be suspected in a patient who
presents with pain and swelling, with or without systemic symptoms,
and with a radiographic appearance of a primarily lytic bone lesion
with periosteal reaction, the characteristic onion-­skinning (Fig.
550.3). A large, associated soft tissue mass often is visualized on MRI
or CT (Fig. 550.4). The differential diagnosis includes osteosarcoma,

Fig. 550.4 MR image of tibial Ewing sarcoma showing a large associated soft tissue mass.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3144 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
osteomyelitis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, primary lymphoma of
bone, metastatic neuroblastoma, or rhabdomyosarcoma in the case of
a pure soft tissue lesion. Patients should be referred to a center with
experience in managing bone tumors for evaluation and biopsy. Thorough evaluation for metastatic disease includes CT of the chest, radionuclide bone scan, or PET scan. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
specimens from at least two sites are generally required but can be
omitted for certain lower risk patients. MRI of the tumor and the entire
length of involved bone should be performed to determine the exact
extension of the soft tissue and bony mass and the proximity of tumor
to neurovascular structures. Studies are also using fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) PET to evaluate response to therapy.
To avoid compromising an ultimate potential for limb salvage by
a poorly planned biopsy incision, the same surgeon should perform
the biopsy and the surgical procedure. CT-­guided biopsy of the lesion
often provides diagnostic tissue. It is important to obtain adequate tissue for special stains and molecular studies.

Treatment

Tumors of the Ewing sarcoma family are best managed with a
comprehensive multidisciplinary approach in which the surgeon,
chemotherapist, and radiation oncologist plan therapy. Multiagent
chemotherapy is important because it can shrink the tumor rapidly and is usually given before local control is attempted. In North
America, standard chemotherapy for nonmetastatic Ewing sarcoma
includes vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and
ifosfamide. Chemotherapy usually causes dramatic shrinkage of the
soft tissue mass and rapid, significant pain relief. Patients with nonmetastatic Ewing sarcoma have a better outcome when treated on a
14-­day rather than on a 21-­day schedule. An international cooperative group trial found that myeloablative chemotherapy and stem cell
rescue was not superior to chemotherapy with lung irradiation for
patients with pulmonary metastases.
Ewing sarcoma is considered a radiosensitive tumor, and local control may be achieved with irradiation or surgery. Radiation therapy
is associated with a risk of radiation-­induced second malignancies,
especially osteosarcoma, as well as failure of bone growth in skeletally
immature patients. It is important to provide the patient with crutches
if the tumor is in a weight-­bearing bone to avoid a pathologic fracture
before definitive local control. Many centers prefer surgical resection,
if possible, to achieve local control. Chemotherapy should be resumed
as soon as possible after surgery.

Prognosis

Patients with small, nonmetastatic, distally located extremity tumors
have the best prognosis, with a cure rate of up to 75%. Patients
with pelvic tumors have, until recently, had a much worse outcome.
Patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis, especially bone or
bone marrow metastases, have a poor prognosis, with <30% surviving long term.
Long-­term follow-­up of patients with Ewing sarcoma is important because of the potential for late effects of treatment, such as
anthracycline-­induced cardiotoxicity, infertility, and second malignancies, especially in the radiation field, and late relapses, even as long as
10 years after initial diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

550.2 Benign Tumors and Tumor-­Like
Processes of Bone
Carola A.S. Arndt and A. Noelle Larson
Benign bone lesions in children are common compared with the relatively rare malignant neoplasms of bone. A broad range of diagnostic
possibilities must be considered when the physician is confronted with
an undiagnosed bone lesion (Table 550.2). Some, although histologically

benign, can be life-­threatening, while others can be locally destructive
to bone. Many represent an incidental finding that, if asymptomatic, can
be observed. A group of benign characteristic lesions including osteochondroma, nonossifying fibroma, unicameral bone cyst, and enchondroma may occur in 19% of children in a historic cohort of children and
can readily be diagnosed on standard radiographs without additional
imaging studies. Other conditions require further study to determine
a diagnosis where no single element in the history or diagnostic test is
sufficient to rule out malignancy. Benign lesions are usually painless but
may be painful, especially if the lesion is causing local bone destruction
or there is an impending pathologic fracture. Night pain that awakens a
child suggests malignancy, but relief of such pain with aspirin is common
with osteoid osteomas. Rapidly enlarging lesions usually are associated
with malignancy, but several benign lesions, such as ABCs, can enlarge
faster than most malignancies. Several conditions, such as osteomyelitis,
can simulate the appearance of bone tumors.
Many benign bone tumors are diagnosed incidentally or after pathologic fracture. Initial management of these fractures is similar to that of
nonpathologic fractures in the same location. It is unusual for benign
bone tumors to interfere with fracture healing, but the area of weakness
typically remains, and refracture is common. Fractures rarely result in
resolution of the tumor, which usually is treated after the fracture has
healed. Fractures around the hip, however, frequently require immediate treatment to stabilize the femoral neck and restore anatomic
alignment.
Radiographs of any suspected bone lesion should always be obtained
in two planes. Additional studies may be necessary to help arrive at
the correct diagnosis and to guide treatment. Although these lesions
are benign, selected lesions require intervention. If biopsy is performed, both microbiology and pathology evaluations should always
be obtained.
Osteochondroma (exostosis) is one of the most common benign
bone tumors in children. Because many are completely asymptomatic
and unrecognized, the true incidence of this lesion is unknown. Osteochondromas develop in childhood, arising from the metaphysis of a
long bone, particularly the distal femur, proximal humerus, and proximal tibia. The lesion enlarges with the child until skeletal maturity.
Children commonly present at 5-­15 years of age, when the child or parent notices a bony, nonpainful mass. Some are discovered because they
are irritated by soft tissues rubbing over the lesion during athletic or
other activities. Fracture is rare. Osteochondromas appear radiographically as stalks or broad-­based projections from the surface of the bone,
usually in a direction away from the adjacent joint (Fig. 550.5A). The
bone is in continuity with the medullary canal. Invariably, the lesion is
radiographically smaller than suggested by palpation because the cartilage cap covering the lesion is not seen. This cartilage cap may be up
to 1 cm thick. Both the cortex of the bone and the marrow space of the
involved bone are continuous with the lesion. Malignant degeneration
of a chondrosarcoma is rare in children but occurs in as many as 1%
of adults. Routine removal is not performed unless the lesion is large
enough to cause symptoms, such as pain or nerve compression, most
commonly presenting as foot drop. Osteochondromas can be diagnosed by radiographs alone, and unless patients present with unusual
symptoms such as night pain, further studies such as CT or MRI are
not typically indicated. Patients should be referred to an orthopedic
practice for counseling, but routine radiographic follow-­up and treatment should be based on symptoms.
Multiple hereditary osteochondrosis (exostoses) is a related but
rare condition characterized by the presence of multiple osteochondromas (see Fig. 550.5B). This is an autosomal dominant disorder due to
pathogenic variants in EXT1 or EXT2. Severely involved children can
have short stature, limb-­length inequality, premature partial physeal
arrests, deformity of both the upper and lower extremities including
genu valgum, dislocation of the radial head at the elbow, and neurovascular impingement or entrapment in areas adjacent to the tumor
and neurovascular compartments. These children must be monitored
carefully during growth by a pediatric orthopedist. Malignant transformation may occur but is rare. Screening MRI of the entire spine is recommended during childhood to detect bony lesions growing into the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

3145

Table 550.2  Features of Pediatric Benign Bone Tumors
LESION

TYPICAL COURSE

MOST COMMON WORKUP
TO CONFIRM DIAGNOSIS

Fibroma (nonossifying fibroma, fibrous
cortical defect, metaphyseal fibrous
defect)

Observation; surgery to treat fracture/impending
fracture (rare, large lesions)

Radiographs

Enchondroma

Observation; treat if symptomatic

Radiographs, occasionally MRI

Osteochondroma

Observation; excise if symptomatic

Radiographs

Subungual exostosis

Symptoms warrant excision for most patients

Radiographs

Unicameral/simple bone cyst

Observation; treat if fracture occurs to prevent
further fractures

Radiographs, occasionally MRI

Osteoid osteoma

NSAIDs; but symptoms warrant percutaneous
ablation for most patients

Radiographs, CT

Heterotopic ossification

Observation; if symptomatic, excise after bone is
mature (>6 mo)

Radiographs, ± MRI, CT

Fibrous dysplasia

Observation; treat if pain or bony deformities

Radiographs, ± MRI, ± biopsy

Chronic regional multifocal osteomyelitis
(reactive bone condition)

Observation; medical treatment available if
symptomatic; pathology is identical to
osteomyelitis

Radiographs, MRI; bone scan to look for other
lesions; antibiotics to rule out osteomyelitis;
biopsy

Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Variable; depends on extent of disease

Skeletal survey, MRI, biopsy, workup to rule out
systemic disease

Infection

Treat with prolonged antibiotics, typically some
intravenously; surgery for joint/growth plate
involvement, abscess, and chronic disease

CRP, sedimentation rate, CBC with differential,
blood cultures, radiographs, ± MRI, ± biopsy

Osteoblastoma

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, CT, MRI, biopsy

Aneurysmal bone cyst

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Chondroblastoma

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Chondromyxoid fibroma

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Osteofibrous dysplasia

Possibly locally aggressive; variable

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Adamantinoma

Malignant, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

CBC, Complete blood count; CRP, C-­reactive protein; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

canal, which can result in spinal cord compression which may occur in
up to 20–30% of patients (see Fig. 550.5C).

SUBUNGUAL EXOSTOSIS

This lesion is an osteochondroma that forms underneath the nailbed
in an otherwise healthy child. The nailbed may become discolored
or raised, and the condition is typically painful (Fig. 550.6). It can be
differentiated from a paronychia or ingrown toenail by findings of an
osteochondroma on radiographs. Radiographs should be taken, which
will show a bony protuberance under the nailbed. Treatment should
be nailbed removal and surgical excision with nailbed repair. Despite
surgical excision, recurrence can occur up to 5% of the time.
Enchondroma is a benign lesion of hyaline cartilage that occurs
centrally in the bone. These lesions are asymptomatic and frequently
occur in the hands. Most are discovered incidentally, although pathologic fractures often lead to the diagnosis. Radiographically, the lesions
occupy the medullary canal, are radiolucent, and are sharply marginated. Punctate or stippled calcification may be present within the lesion,
but this is much more common in adults than in children. Almost all
enchondromas in children are solitary and small. Most can simply be
observed, with curettage and bone grafting reserved for lesions that are
symptomatic or large enough to weaken the bone structurally. Large
lesions with extensive involvement may represent low-grade chondrosarcoma. Multifocal involvement is referred to as Ollier disease
and can result in bone dysplasia, short stature, limb-­length inequality,
and joint deformity. Surgery may be necessary to correct or prevent
such deformities. When multiple enchondromas are associated with

angiomas of the soft tissue, the condition is referred to as Maffucci
syndrome. A high rate of malignant transformation has been reported
in both of these multifocal conditions.
Chondromyxoid fibroma is an uncommon benign bone tumor in
children. This metaphyseal lesion usually causes pain and local tenderness. The lesion occasionally is asymptomatic. Chondromyxoid
fibroma appears radiographically as eccentric, lobular metaphyseal
radiolucency with sharp, sclerotic, and scalloped margins. The lower
extremity is involved most often. Treatment usually consists of curettage and bone grafting or en bloc resection.
Osteoid osteoma is a small benign bone tumor typically found in
the proximal tibia and femur and the posterior elements of the spine.
Most of these tumors are diagnosed between 5 and 20 years of age. The
clinical pattern is characteristic, consisting of unremitting and gradually
increasing pain that often is worst at night and is relieved by NSAIDs.
Boys are affected more often than girls. Vertebral lesions can cause
scoliosis or symptoms that mimic a neurologic disorder. Examination
can reveal a limp, atrophy, and weakness when the lower extremity is
involved. Palpation and range of motion do not alter the discomfort.
Radiographs may show cortical thickening, and CT shows distinctive findings, with a round or oval metaphyseal or diaphyseal lucency
(0.5-­1.0 cm in diameter) surrounded by dense sclerotic bone (Fig.
550.7). The central lucency, or nidus, shows intense uptake on bone
scan. Approximately 25% of osteoid osteomas are not visualized on
plain radiographs but can be identified with CT. Because of the small
size of the lesion and its location adjacent to thick cortical bone, MRI
is poor at diagnosing osteoid osteomas, revealing only extensive T2

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3146 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A
A

B

Fig. 550.7 MRI and CT in 15-­yr-­old female with left tibial night pain.

A, Coronal T2 weighted MR of the bilateral tibias shows increased T2
signal change in the left tibia diaphysis. B, Sagittal CT scan shows cortically based lesion <1 cm typical for osteoid osteoma. Patient was treated with percutaneous radiofrequency ablation.

B

C

Fig. 550.5 A, Lateral radiograph of the right humerus showing iso-

lated osteochondroma. Bone lesion is in continuity with the medullary
canal and points away from the growth plate. B, Hip-­to-­ankle radiograph in a child with multiple hereditary exostoses (MHE) showing many
osteochondromas about the knees and ankles. C, Sagittal T2 weighted
MR image of the cervical spine in a 15-­yr-­old female with MHE who underwent routine cervical screening MRI, which detected asymptomatic
spinal stenosis caused by C6 osteochondroma. She underwent urgent
decompression.

A

B

Fig. 550.6 A, Photograph of the great toe showing nailbed abnor-

mality. B, Lateral and oblique views of the left great toe showing subungual exostosis. These lesions are typically painful and require surgical
removal.

signal change throughout the region. Treatment is directed at removing the lesion. Patients may be treated with NSAIDs, and the symptoms
typically resolve within 1-­2 years. Most patients and families elect for
treatment. Percutaneous treatments such as radiofrequency ablation
and cryoablation have become the standard of care for routine lesions.
There is still an occasional role for open surgical resection, if there is
concern for osteomyelitis (Brodie’s abscess), or the lesion is in close
proximity to articular cartilage or neurovascular structures.
Osteoblastoma is a locally destructive, progressively growing
lesion of bone with a predilection for the vertebrae, although almost
any bone may be involved. Most patients note the insidious onset of
dull aching pain, which may be present for months before patients
seek medical attention. Spinal lesions can cause neurologic symptoms
or deficits. The radiographic appearance is variable and less distinctive than that of other benign bone tumors. CT or MRI is indicated.
Approximately 25% show features suggesting a malignant neoplasm,
making biopsy necessary in many cases. Expansile spinal lesions
often involve the posterior elements. Treatment involves curettage
and bone grafting or en bloc excision; care must be taken to preserve
nerve roots when treating spinal lesions. Surgical stabilization of the
spine may be necessary.
Fibromas (nonossifying fibroma, fibrous cortical defect, metaphyseal fibrous defect) are fibrous lesions of bone that occur in up to
40% of children older than 2 years of age. They most likely represent
a defect in ossification rather than a neoplasm and usually are asymptomatic. Most are discovered incidentally when radiographs are taken
for other reasons, usually to rule out a fracture after trauma. Occasional pathologic fractures can occur through large lesions. Physical
examination usually is unrevealing. Radiographs show a sharply marginated eccentric lucency in the metaphysis or metaphyseal cortex
(Fig. 550.8). Lesions may be multilocular and expansile, with extension
from the cortex into the medullary bone. The long axis of the lesion
runs parallel to that of the bone. Approximately 50% are bilateral or
multiple. Because of the characteristic radiographic appearance, most
lesions do not require axial imaging, biopsy, or treatment. If the child
is asymptomatic, no further monitoring is needed for characteristic
lesions. Spontaneous regression can be expected after skeletal maturity. Curettage and bone grafting may be considered for symptomatic
lesions or lesions occupying >50% of the bone diameter due to the risk
of a pathologic fracture.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

Fig. 550.8 Anteroposterior radiograph of the knee showing nonossifying fibroma, which was discovered incidentally.

3147

are typically treated due to the risk of pathologic fracture. Treatments
include aspiration and injection with methylprednisolone or calcium
phosphate. A randomized controlled trial (RCT) showed 42% healing
rate with steroid injections (1-­3, mean 1.7 injections) compared with
injection of bone marrow aspirate (23% healing rate, 1-­3 injections,
2.1 mean). Open biopsy and bone grafting with or without internal
fixation can also be performed. Recurrence is common despite surgical
treatment. Repeat injections are frequently necessary to treat recurrent
lesions. Healing rates are higher with injection or surgical treatment
compared with observation, and internal fixation is recommended for
proximal femoral lesions given the high risk of fracture.
Fibrous dysplasia is a developmental abnormality characterized
by fibrous replacement of cancellous bone. Lesions may be solitary or
multifocal (polyostotic). Lesions may progress over time or may be
stable. Some children are asymptomatic, although others have bone
pain. Those with skull involvement might have swelling or exophthalmos. Pain and limp are characteristic of proximal femoral involvement,
which also may indicate impending pathologic fracture. Limb-­length
discrepancy, bowing of the tibia or femur, and pathologic fractures may
be presenting complaints. The triad of polyostotic disease, precocious
puberty, and cutaneous pigmentation is known as McCune-­Albright
syndrome. Radiographic features of fibrous dysplasia include a lytic
or ground-­glass expansile lesion of the metaphysis or diaphysis. The
lesion is sharply marginated and often is surrounded by a thick rim of
sclerotic bone. Bowing, especially of the proximal femur, may be present. Treatment usually involves observation for asymptomatic lesions.
Surgery is indicated for patients with progressive deformity, pain, or
impending pathologic fractures. Bone grafting is not as successful in
the treatment of fibrous dysplasia, because the lesion recurs within the
grafted bone. Reconstructive surgical techniques with metal implants
often are necessary to provide stability and treat pain, particularly in
the proximal femur. In addition to surgical stabilization, bisphosphonate therapy has been used to treat bone pain, although a recent RCT
showed improvement in regional bone mineral density but no change
in pain scores.

LOCALLY AGGRESSIVE LESIONS

Fig. 550.9 External rotation view of the left humerus in a 9-­yr-­old fe-

male who presented with pain after falling off her bicycle. Imaging is
consistent with simple bone cyst.

Unicameral bone cysts can occur at any age in childhood but are
rare in children younger than 3 years of age and after skeletal maturity.
The cause of these fluid-­filled lesions is unknown. Spontaneous resolution after skeletal maturity is expected, although pathologic fracture
can be a significant problem in the interim. Diagnosis usually follows a
pathologic fracture (Fig. 550.9). Such fractures can occur with relatively
minor trauma, such as with throwing or catching a ball. Unicameral
bone cysts appear radiographically as solitary, centrally located lesions
within the medullary portion of the bone. These cysts are most common in the proximal humerus or femur. They often extend to (but not
through) the physis and are sharply marginated. The cortex expands,
but that does not exceed the width of the adjacent physis. Treatment involves allowing the pathologic fracture to heal. Subsequently,
humerus lesions can be observed or treated. Proximal femoral lesions

Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is a reactive lesion of bone seen in persons younger than 20 years of age. The lesion is characterized by cavernous spaces filled with blood and solid aggregates of tissue. Although the
femur, tibia, and spine are commonly involved, this progressively growing, expansile lesion can develop in any bone. Radiographs show eccentric lytic destruction and expansion of the metaphysis surrounded by
a thin sclerotic rim of bone. Expansion of the bone frequently extends
beyond the diameter of the physis. Pain and swelling are common. Spinal involvement can lead to cord or nerve root compression and associated neurologic symptoms, including paralysis. Posterior elements of
the spine are involved more commonly than the vertebral body. Unlike
most other benign bone tumors, which usually are confined to a single
bone, ABCs can involve adjacent vertebrae. Spinal lesions can require
stabilization after excision. As with other benign tumors, attempts are
made to preserve nerve roots and other vital structures. Rapid growth
is characteristic and can lead to confusion with malignant neoplasms
(Fig. 550.10). ABCs can occur with concomitantly with neoplasms,
confounding pathology results from biopsy. Treatment consists of percutaneous injection, curettage and bone grafting, or excision. Recurrence after surgical treatment occurs in 20–30% of patients, is more
common in younger than older children, and usually occurs in the first
1-­2 years after treatment. Treatment approaches also include percutaneously treatment with polidocanol or doxycycline, which targets the
specific matrix metalloproteinase upregulation pathway seen in ABCs
and has shown promising results.

CHARACTERISTIC LESIONS OF THE TIBIA

Osteofibrous dysplasia affects the tibia in children. Most children present with anterior swelling or enlargement of the leg. Radiographs show
solitary or multiple lucent cortical diaphyseal lesions surrounded by
sclerosis. Anterior bowing of the tibia often is present, and pathologic
fracture can occur. The radiographic appearance closely resembles that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3148 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 550.10 Aneurysmal bone cyst. A, A 10-­yr-­old female presents with right tibia pain after playing softball. PA radiograph of the right proximal
tibia reveals an eccentric, lytic lesion. B, Repeat imaging 4 months later shows rapid expansion. C, Coronal T2 MR image. D, Sagittal T2 MR image
shows fluid-­fluid levels classically seen with aneurysmal bone cysts. E, The patient was treated with curettage, bone grafting, and plate fixation to
prevent fracture.

Table 550.3  Summary of Prognosis and Treatment of Vascular Bone Tumors
CLASSIFICATION

ENTITY

PROGNOSIS

TREATMENT

Benign

Hemangioma

100% survival, 0% metastasis

Treat symptoms

Intermediate

Epithelioid hemangioma

100% survival, 2% metastases, 9%
local recurrence

Curettage or marginal excision

Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma

Limited follow-­up, stable or
progressive osseous disease

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma

85% survival, 25% metastases

Wide resection

Angiosarcoma

30% survival

Wide resection, consider systemic
therapy

Malignant

From van IJzendoorn DGP, Bovee JVMG. Vascular tumors of bone: the evolvement of a classification based on molecular developments. Surg Pathol Clin. 2017;10:621–635. Table 1.

of adamantinoma, a malignant neoplasm, making biopsy more common than with other benign bone tumors. Some believe osteofibrous
dysplasia is a precursor lesion to adamantinoma. Treatment options
include observation, excision and bone grafting, or wide resection.
Adamantinoma is a rare malignancy, typically found in adults,
but occasionally in children. In contrast to osteofibrous dysplasia, the
lesion involves the medullary canal. Resection is indicated, as there are
no known benefits to radiation or chemotherapy for this slow-­growing
tumor.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis is a monostotic or polyostotic disease
that can also involve the skin, liver, or other organs. Single-­site disease
should be distinguished from the other forms of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (Hand-­Schüller-­Christian or Letterer-­Siwe variants), which
can have a less favorable prognosis (see Chapter 556.1). Langerhans cell
histiocytosis usually occurs during the first 3 decades of life and is most
common in males 5-­10 years of age. The skull is commonly affected,
but any bone may be involved. Patients usually present with local pain
and swelling. Marked tenderness and warmth often are present in the
area of the involved bone. Spinal lesions can cause pain, stiffness, and
occasional neurologic symptoms. Vertebra plana with uniform compression or flattening of the vertebral body is commonly but not always
associated with Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The radiographic appearance of the skeletal lesions is similar in all forms of Langerhans cell
histiocytosis but is variable enough to mimic many other benign and

malignant lesions of bone as well as infection. The radiolucent lesions
have well-­defined or irregular margins with expansion of the involved
bone and periosteal new bone formation. A skeletal survey is warranted
as lesions may not be apparent on bone scan. Polyostotic involvement
and the typical skull lesions strongly suggest the diagnosis of eosinophilic granuloma. Biopsy often is necessary to confirm the diagnosis
because of the broad radiographic differential diagnosis. Treatment for
isolated bone lesions includes curettage and bone grafting, or observation for asymptomatic lesions because most osseous lesions heal
spontaneously and do not recur. All children with bone lesions should
be evaluated for visceral involvement because multisystem organ disease may exist with the bone lesion and may not be obvious. Treatment of multisystem disease is more complex and often systemic and
may require chemotherapy. For multisystem disease, bone lesions frequently improve with systemic chemotherapy, and operative treatment
may not be necessary.

VASCULAR TUMORS OF BONE

There is a wide spectrum of vascular bone tumors (Table 550.3), which,
depending on severity, may produce local sclerosis or osteopenia (see
also Chapter 554). More severe lesions are locally aggressive and result
in cortical destruction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 551 u Retinoblastoma 3149

Chapter 551

Retinoblastoma
Cynthia E. Herzog
Retinoblastoma is an embryonal malignancy of the retina and the most
common intraocular tumor in children. Although the survival rate of
children with retinoblastoma in the United States and developed countries is extremely high, retinoblastoma progresses to metastatic disease
and death in >40% of children in low income countries. Furthermore,
the associated loss of vision and side effects of therapy are significant
problems that remain to be addressed.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Approximately 200-300 new cases of retinoblastoma are diagnosed each
year in the United States, with no known racial or gender predilection.
The cumulative lifetime incidence of retinoblastoma is approximately 1
in 20,000 live births, and retinoblastoma accounts for 2% of all pediatric malignancies. The median age at diagnosis is approximately 2 years,
and >90% of cases are diagnosed in children <5 years old. Overall,
66–75% of children with retinoblastoma have unilateral tumors, with
the remainder having bilateral retinoblastoma. Bilateral involvement
is more common in younger children, particularly in those diagnosed
before age 1 year, and is always heritable. Risk of retinoblastoma may
be increased in children conceived by in vitro fertilization.
Retinoblastoma can be either hereditary or sporadic. Hereditary
cases usually are diagnosed at a younger age and are multifocal and
bilateral, whereas sporadic cases are usually diagnosed in older children who tend to have unilateral, unifocal involvement. The hereditary
form is associated with loss of function of the retinoblastoma gene
(RB1) via a pathogenic variant or deletion. RB1 is located on chromosome 13q14 and encodes the retinoblastoma protein, a tumor-­
suppressor protein that controls cell cycle phase transition and has
roles in apoptosis and cell differentiation. Children with 13q deletion
syndrome are at increased risk to develop retinoblastoma. Many different causative pathogenic variants have been identified, including
translocations, deletions, insertions, point pathogenic variants, and
epigenetic modifications such as gene methylation. The nature of the
predisposing pathogenic variant can affect the penetrance and expressivity of retinoblastoma development.
According to Knudson's “2-­
hit” model of oncogenesis, two
pathogenic variant events are required for retinoblastoma tumor
development (see Chapter 541). In the hereditary form of retinoblastoma, the first pathogenic variant in RB1 is inherited through
germinal cells, and a pathogenic variant occurs subsequently in
somatic retinal cells. Second pathogenic variants that lead to retinoblastoma often result in the loss of the normal allele and concomitant loss of heterozygosity. Parents and siblings of a child with
a germline pathologic genetic variant should be referred to a genetic
specialist for testing; most children with hereditary retinoblastoma
have spontaneous new germinal pathogenic variants, and both parents have wild-­type retinoblastoma genes. All first-­degree relatives
of children with known or suspected hereditary retinoblastoma
should have retinal examinations to identify retinomas or retinal
scars, which may suggest hereditary retinoblastoma even though
malignant retinoblastoma did not develop. In the sporadic form of
retinoblastoma, the two pathogenic variants occur in somatic retinal
cells. Heterozygous carriers of oncogenic RB1 pathogenic variants
demonstrate variable phenotypic expression.

PATHOGENESIS

Histologically, retinoblastoma appears as a small, round blue cell tumor
with rosette formation (Flexner-­Wintersteiner rosettes). It may arise
in any of the nucleated layers of the retina and exhibit various degrees

of differentiation. Retinoblastoma tumors tend to outgrow their blood
supply, resulting in necrosis and calcification.
Endophytic tumors arise from the inner surface of the retina and
grow into the vitreous and can also grow as tumors suspended within
the vitreous itself, known as vitreous seeding. Exophytic tumors grow
from the outer retinal layer and can cause retinal detachment. Diffuse
infiltrating tumors grow intraretinally and remain flat; these are less
common and can cause iris neovascularization. Tumors can also be
both endophytic and exophytic. These tumors can also spread by direct
extension to the choroid or along the optic nerve beyond the lamina
cribrosa to the central nervous system, or by hematogenous or lymphatic spread to distant sites, including bones, bone marrow, and lungs.

SCREENING

Children with a positive family history of retinoblastoma should
undergo a dilated eye examination under general anesthesia early in
life and at regular intervals until genetic testing is performed and results
are available. Infants with a negative genetic test require no further
screening; infants with a positive genetic test require regular screening
ophthalmologic examinations until age 7 years.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Retinoblastoma classically presents with leukocoria, a white pupillary reflex, which often is first noticed when a red reflex is not present
at a routine newborn or well-­child examination or in a flash photograph of the child (Fig. 551.1). Strabismus often is an initial presenting complaint. Decreased vision, orbital inflammation, hyphema, and
pupil irregularity can occur with advancing disease. Pain can occur if
secondary glaucoma is present. Only about 10% of retinoblastoma
cases are detected by routine ophthalmologic screening in the context
of a positive family history.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is established by the characteristic ophthalmologic findings of a chalky, white-­gray retinal mass with a soft, friable consistency.
Imaging studies are not diagnostic, and biopsies are contraindicated.
Indirect ophthalmoscopy with slit-­lamp evaluation can detect retinoblastoma tumors, but a complete evaluation requires an examination

A

B
Fig. 551.1 A, Leukocoria noted in the left eye of a child presenting

with retinoblastoma. B, A large white tumor mass noted within the posterior chamber of the enucleated eye. (From Shields JA, Shields CL.
Current management of retinoblastoma. Mayo Clin Proc. 1994;69:50–
56.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3150 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
PROGNOSIS

Fig. 551.2 Axial contrast-­enhanced CT scan shows calcified retinoblastoma of the left eye. (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of
the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017. Fig. 20-­32.)

under general anesthesia by an experienced ophthalmologist to obtain
complete visualization of both eyes, which also facilitates photographing and mapping of the tumors. Retinal detachment or vitreous hemorrhage can complicate the evaluation.
Orbital ultrasonography, CT, or MRI is used to evaluate the extent
of intraocular disease and extraocular spread (Fig. 551.2). In approximately 5% of cases, a pineal area (primitive neuroectodermal) tumor is
detected in a child with hereditary and bilateral retinoblastoma, a phenomenon known as trilateral retinoblastoma. MRI allows for better
evaluation of optic nerve involvement. Metastatic disease is rarely present at diagnosis; evaluation of the cerebrospinal fluid and bone marrow
for tumor metastasis and radionuclide bone scan are required only if
indicated by other clinical, laboratory, or imaging findings.
The differential diagnosis of retinoblastoma includes other causes
of leukocoria, including persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous,
Coats disease, vitreous hemorrhage, cataract, endophthalmitis from
Toxocara canis, choroidal coloboma, retinopathy of prematurity, and
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy.

TREATMENT

Treatment is determined by the size and location of the tumors, if the
disease is localized to the eye or has spread either to the brain or to the
rest of the body, and whether the child has hereditary or sporadic disease. The primary goal of treatment is always cure; the secondary goals
include preserving vision and the eye itself and decreasing the risk of
late side effects, mainly secondary malignancies. With current modalities for local control of intraocular tumors and more effective systemic
chemotherapy, primary enucleation is being performed less often.
Most unilateral disease presents with a solitary, large tumor. Enucleation is performed if useful vision cannot be salvaged. With bilateral
disease, chemoreduction in combination with focal therapy (laser photocoagulation or cryotherapy) has replaced the traditional approach
of enucleation of the more severely affected eye and irradiation of
the remaining eye. If feasible, small tumors can be treated with focal
therapy with careful follow-­up for recurrence or new tumor growth.
Larger tumors often respond to multiagent chemotherapy, including
carboplatin, vincristine, and etoposide given intravenously. However,
systemic therapy is generally reserved for patients with unilateral disease when high-­risk features are noted after enucleation, or in very
young patients with bilateral disease that are at higher risk of complications with intraarterial chemotherapy. The delivery of chemotherapy
via the ophthalmic artery is becoming more common, as is delivery
of intravitreal chemotherapy. If these approaches fail, external-­beam
irradiation should be considered, although this approach may result
in significant orbital deformity and increased incidence of second
malignancies in patients with germline RB1 pathologic genetic variants. Brachytherapy, or episcleral plaque radiotherapy, is an alternative
with less morbidity. Enucleation may be required for unresponsive or
recurrent tumors. Intense multiagent chemotherapy with autologous
stem cell rescue may be used for patients with metastatic disease.

Approximately 95% of U.S. children with retinoblastoma are cured
with modern treatment. Current efforts using chemotherapy in combination with focal therapy are intended to preserve useful vision and
avoid external-­beam radiation or enucleation. Unfortunately, the diagnosis of retinoblastoma in many children from resource-­poor countries is delayed, resulting in spread of the tumor outside the orbit. The
prognosis for children with retinoblastoma that has spread outside the
eye is poor. Trilateral retinoblastoma, disease involving both eyes and
the pineal region, is almost universally fatal.
Children with germline RB1 pathologic genetic variants are at significant risk for development of second malignancies, especially osteosarcoma, as well as soft tissue sarcomas and malignant melanoma. The
risk of second malignancies is further increased by the use of radiation
therapy. Other radiation-­related late adverse effects include cataracts,
orbital growth deformities, lacrimal dysfunction, and late retinal vascular injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 552

Gonadal and Germ Cell
Neoplasms
Cynthia E. Herzog and Winston W. Huh
EPIDEMIOLOGY

Malignant germ cell tumors (GCTs) and gonadal tumors are rare, with
an incidence of 12 cases per 1 million persons younger than 20 years.
Most malignant tumors of the gonads in children are GCTs. The incidence varies according to age and sex, although the incidence of GCTs
in adolescent males has increased over time. Sacrococcygeal tumors
occur predominantly in infant females. Testicular GCTs occur predominantly before age 4 years and after puberty. Klinefelter syndrome
is associated with an increased risk of mediastinal GCTs. Trisomy 21,
undescended testes, infertility, testicular atrophy, testicular microlithiasis, testicular dysgenesis syndrome, and inguinal hernias are associated with an increased risk of testicular cancer. The risk of testicular
cancer in patients with cryptorchidism is reduced but not eliminated
if orchiopexy is performed before 13 years of age. The risk of testicular
GCT is increased in first-­degree relatives and is highest among monozygotic twins.

PATHOGENESIS

The GCTs and non-­GCTs arise from primordial germ cells and coelomic epithelium, respectively. Testicular and sacrococcygeal GCTs
arising during early childhood characteristically have deletions at chromosome arms 1p and 6q and gains at 1q, and they lack the isochromosome 12p that is highly characteristic of malignant GCTs of adults.
Testicular GCTs also may demonstrate loss of imprinting. Ovarian
GCTs from older females characteristically have deletions at 1p and
gains at 1q and 21. Dysregulation of microRNAs have been linked to
GCTs. Because GCTs may contain benign and mixed malignant elements in different areas of the tumor, extensive sectioning is essential
to confirm the correct diagnosis. The many histologically distinct subtypes of GCTs include teratoma (mature and immature), endodermal
sinus tumor, and embryonal carcinoma (Fig. 552.1). Non-­GCTs of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 552 u Gonadal and Germ Cell Neoplasms

3151

Normal germ cell development
Migration of PGCs to
genital ridge
then gonads

Inner cell mass

Sertoli cells

PGCs

Blastocyst

Spermatogenesis

A

Seminiferous tubules

Migration
Seminomas
Teratomas

TGCT
development

?
(Embryonic)

Seminiferous
tubule

Combined
tumors

Embryonal carcinomas
Choriocarcinomas
IGCNU

B

(Extra-embryonic)

Invasion

Yolk sac
tumors

Table 552.1  Main Histologic Types of Testicular Germ Cell
Tumors*
NONINVASIVE GERM CELL NEOPLASIA
Germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS; previous synonyms: carcinoma in
situ testis, intratubular germ cell neoplasia unclassified)
Gonadoblastoma (in patients with disorders of sex development;
tumor also contains sex cord–stromal elements)
GERM CELL TUMORS DERIVED FROM GCNIS
Seminoma
Nonseminoma (nonseminomatous germ cell tumors)
Embryonal carcinoma
Teratoma (postpubertal type)
Yolk sac tumor (postpubertal type)
Choriocarcinoma and other trophoblastic tumors
GERM CELL TUMORS UNRELATED TO GCNIS
Childhood tumors
Teratoma (prepubertal type)
Yolk sac tumor (prepubertal type)
Spermatocytic tumor (median age at diagnosis: approximately 50 yr)
*Based on updated WHO classification of tumors of the testis and paratesticular tissue.
Adapted from Raypert-­De Meyts E, McGlynn KA, Okamoto, et al. Testicular germ cell
tumours, Lancet 2016;387:1762–1770.

ovary include epithelial (serous and mucinous) and sex cord–stromal
tumors; non-­GCTs of the testicle include sex cord–stromal (e.g., Leydig
cell, Sertoli cell) tumors. DICER1 pathogenic variants have been observed
in nonepithelial ovarian cancers, especially in Sertoli-­Leydig tumors.
Table 552.1 provides a histologic classification of testicular GCTs.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The clinical presentation of germ cell neoplasms depends on location
(Table 552.2). Ovarian tumors often are quite large by the time they
are diagnosed (Fig. 552.2). Extragonadal GCTs occur in the midline,
including the suprasellar region, pineal region, neck, mediastinum,
and retroperitoneal and sacrococcygeal areas (Fig. 552.3). Symptoms

Nonseminomas

Fig. 552.1 A, Normal germ cell de-

velopment. B, Model for the origin and
histogenesis of different subtypes of
testicular germ cell tumors. IGCNU, Intratubular germ cell neoplasia unclassified; PGCs, primary germ cells; TGCT,
testicular germ cell tumor.

relate to mass effect, but the intracranial GCTs often present with anterior and posterior pituitary deficits (see Chapter 546).
The serum α-­fetoprotein (AFP) level is elevated with endodermal
sinus tumors and may be minimally elevated with teratomas (Table
552.3). Infants normally have higher levels of AFP, which usually falls
to normal adult levels by about age 8 months; consequently, high AFP
levels must be interpreted with caution in this age-­group. Elevation of
the β subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (β-­hCG), which is
secreted by syncytiotrophoblasts, is seen with choriocarcinoma and
germinomas. Lactate dehydrogenase, although nonspecific, may be a
useful marker. If elevated, these markers provide important confirmation of the diagnosis and provide a means for risk stratification and to
monitor the patient for tumor response and recurrence. Both serum
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should be assayed for these markers in
patients with intracranial lesions. MicroRNA-­371 is a superior tumor
marker in GCT, but its use is still limited.
Diagnosis begins with physical examination and imaging studies,
including plain radiographs of the chest and ultrasonography of the
abdomen. CT or MRI can further delineate the primary tumor. If germ
cell malignancy is strongly suggested, preoperative staging with CT of
the chest and bone scan is appropriate. Primary surgical resection is
indicated for tumors deemed resectable. For older patients with testicular tumors, ipsilateral retroperitoneal lymph node sampling may be
required to determine extent of the disease and aid in treatment planning. Ovarian tumors also require detailed surgical evaluation, including lymph node removal and pelvic washings for cytologic analysis for
peritoneal spread. Diagnosis of intracranial lesions can be established
with imaging and AFP or β-­hCG determinations of serum and CSF.
Gonadoblastomas often occur in patients with gonadal dysgenesis
and all or parts of a Y chromosome. Gonadal dysgenesis is characterized by failure to fully masculinize the external genitalia. If this syndrome is diagnosed, imaging of the gonad with ultrasonography or CT
is performed, and surgical resection of the tumor usually is curative.
Prophylactic resection of dysgenetic gonads at the time of diagnosis
is recommended, because gonadoblastomas, some of which contain
malignant GCT elements, often develop. Gonadoblastomas may produce abnormal amounts of estrogen.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3152 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 552.2  Clinical Features of Germ Cell Tumors
CLINICAL FEATURES
TUMOR TYPE

FEMALE

MALE

Mature/immature teratoma

Abdominal pain, abdominal mass
10% bilateral
Gliomatosis peritonei does not affect prognosis

Nontender scrotal mass
Excellent survival with surgery alone in prepubertal
males

Dysgerminoma/seminoma

Rapidly developed intraabdominal mass
20% bilateral
14–25% mixed with other germ cell elements

Virtually not seen in children, most common testicular
tumor in adult males. Most patients present in their
30s

YST

Most common malignant histology
75% stage I

Most common malignant histology, most pediatric
tumors are pure YST
85% stage I

Embryonal carcinoma

Associated with precocious puberty, amenorrhea, and
hirsutism

Higher incidence of metastatic disease at presentation,
patients can present with retroperitoneal mass

Choriocarcinoma

Rare in children, when present in infants related to
maternal metastatic disease

Frequent pulmonary metastatic disease at presentation,
patients can present with hemoptysis due to
hemorrhage of metastases

Gonadoblastoma

Associated with gonadal dysgenesis
Presents mostly in phenotypical females with a
Y chromosome

Very rare

YST, Yolk sac tumor.
Modified from Fonseca A, Olson TA. Extracranial germ cell tumors. In: Fish JD, Liptin JM, Lanzkowsky P, eds. Lanzkowsky’s Manual of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology. 7th ed.
London: Elsevier; 2022: Table 28.2, p. 600.

Table 552.3  Serum Tumor Marker Levels for Pediatric
GCTs
AFP

β-­hCG

MT

-­

-­

-­

IT

+/–

-­

+/–

Seminoma/dysgerminoma

-­

-­

+

Yolk sac tumor

+

-­

-­

Choriocarcinoma

-­

+

-­

Embryonal carcinoma

+

+

+/–

GCT TYPE

Teratoma

B

A

Fig. 552.2 A, Postnatal MR image showing a left ovarian teratoma

with bony calcification. B, Massive ovarian teratoma. (From Lakhoo K.
Neonatal teratomas. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:643–647.)

Internal

External
A Sacrococcygeal teratoma

B

Fig. 552.3 A, Prenatal MR image showing sacrococcygeal teratoma

with a small internal and large external component. B, Postnatal large,
bleeding sacrococcygeal teratoma. (From Lakhoo K. Neonatal teratomas. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:643–647.)

LDH

+, Usually elevated; +/–, may be elevated; -­, usually not elevated.
GCT, Germ cell tumor; AFP, α-­fetoprotein; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LDH,
lactate dehydrogenase; MT, mature teratoma; IT, immature teratoma.
From Weil BR, Billmire DF. Management of germ cell tumors in pediatric patients. Surg
Oncol Clin N Am. 2021;30:325–338. Table 1.

Teratomas occur in many locations, presenting as masses. They
are not associated with elevated markers unless malignancy is present. The sacrococcygeal region is the most common site for teratomas.
Sacrococcygeal teratomas occur most commonly in infants and may
be diagnosed in utero or at birth, with most found in girls. The rate
of malignancy in this location varies, ranging from <10% in children
younger than 2 months to >50% in children older than 4 months.
Germinomas occur intracranially, in the mediastinum, and in the
gonads. In the ovary, they are called dysgerminomas, and in the testis,
they are called seminomas. They usually are tumor-­marker–negative
masses despite being malignant. Endodermal sinus or yolk sac tumor
and choriocarcinoma appear highly malignant by histologic criteria.
Both occur at gonadal and extragonadal sites. Embryonal carcinoma
most often occurs in the testes. Choriocarcinoma and embryonal carcinoma rarely occur in the pure form and are usually found as part of
a mixed malignant GCT.
Non–germ cell gonadal tumors are very uncommon in pediatrics
and occur predominantly in the ovary. Epithelial carcinomas (usually an adult tumor), Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors, and granulosa cell

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 553 u Neoplasms of the Liver
tumors may occur in children. Carcinomas account for ∼30% of ovarian tumors in females <20 years old; most of these occur in older teens
and are of the serous or mucinous subtype. Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors
and granulosa cell tumors produce hormones that can cause virilization, feminization, or precocious puberty, depending on pubertal stage
and the balance between Sertoli cells (estrogen production) and Leydig cells (androgen production). Diagnostic evaluation usually focuses
on the chief complaint of inappropriate sex steroid effect and includes
hormone measurements, which reflect gonadotropin-­independent sex
steroid production. Appropriate imaging also is performed to rule out
a functioning gonadal tumor. Surgery usually is curative. No effective
therapy for nonresectable disease has been found.

TREATMENT

Complete surgical excision of the tumor usually is indicated, except for
patients with intracranial tumors, for whom the primary therapy consists of radiation therapy and chemotherapy. For testicular tumors, an
inguinal approach is indicated, and complete resection should include
the entire spermatic cord. When complete excision cannot be accomplished, preoperative chemotherapy is indicated, with second-­
look
surgery, especially if retroperitoneal lymph node enlargement persists.
For teratomas, both mature and immature, and completely resected
malignant tumors of the testes and ovary, surgery alone is the treatment. For ovarian tumors, unless the contralateral ovary is obviously
also involved by tumor, a fertility-­sparing surgery should be performed.
Cisplatin-­based chemotherapy regimens usually are curative in GCTs
that cannot be completely resected, even if metastases are present.
However, sex cord–stromal tumors tend to be refractory to chemotherapy. Except for GCTs of the central nervous system, radiation therapy is
limited to those tumors that are not amenable to complete excision and
are refractory to chemotherapy. High-­dose chemotherapy followed by
autologous stem cell rescue is an option in those with refractory disease.

PROGNOSIS

The overall cure rate for children with GCTs is >80%. Age is the most
predictive factor of survival for extragonadal GCTs. Children >12 years
old have a fourfold higher risk of death and a sixfold higher risk if the
tumor is thoracic. Histology has minimal effect on prognosis. Patients
with nonresected extragonadal GCTs have a slightly worse prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 553

Neoplasms of the Liver
Fiorela N. Hernandez Tejada and
Cynthia E. Herzog
Hepatic tumors are rare in children. Primary tumors of the liver account
for approximately 1% of malignancies in children younger than 15
years, with an annual incidence of 1.5 cases per 1 million children in the
United States (Table 553.1). Between 50% and 60% of hepatic tumors in
children are malignant, with >65% of these malignancies being hepatoblastomas and most of the remainder being hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Rare hepatic malignancies include embryonal sarcoma,
angiosarcoma, malignant germ cell tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma of the
liver, and undifferentiated sarcoma. More common childhood malignancies, such as neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, and lymphoma, can
metastasize to the liver. Benign liver tumors, which usually present
in the first 6 months of life, include hemangiomas, hamartomas, and
hemangioendotheliomas.

3153

Table 553.1  Pediatric Liver Tumors Consensus
­Classification
Epithelial tumors
Hepatocellular

Biliary

Benign: Hepatocellular adenoma,
focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH),
regenerative nodules, and dysplastic nodules
Malignant: Hepatoblastoma (various
types), hepatocellular carcinoma
(classic HCC and fibrolamellar
HCC), hepatocellular malignant
neoplasm not otherwise specified
(NOS)
Benign: Bile duct adenoma, biliary
hamartoma
Malignant: Cholangiocarcinoma,
combined HCC-­
cholangiocarcinoma

Mesenchymal tumors

Benign: Hemangioma, mesenchymal hamartoma
Malignant: Embryonal sarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, malignant
vascular tumors (epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma,
angiosarcoma)

Other rare malignancies

Malignant rhabdoid tumor, germ
cell tumors, desmoplastic small
round cell tumor, peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor

Metastases (and secondary)

From solid tumors: neuroblastoma,
Wilms, acute myeloid leukemia,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis,
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis

Modified from Chavhan GB, Siddiqui I, Ingley KM, Gupta AA. Rare malignant liver
tumors in children. Pediatr Radiol. 2019;49:1404–1421. Table 1.

HEPATOBLASTOMA
Epidemiology

Approximately 100 new cases of hepatoblastoma are diagnosed
each year in the United States. The incidence of hepatoblastoma has
increased over the last 30 years by as much as 2.7% per year, probably related to increasing survival of very low birthweight premature
infants. Hepatoblastoma occurs predominantly in children <3 years
old, and the median age of diagnosis is 1 year. The etiology is unknown.
Hepatoblastomas are associated with familial adenomatous polyposis. Alterations in the antigen-­presenting cell/β-­catenin pathway have
been found in most of the tumors evaluated. Hepatoblastomas are also
associated with Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), hemihyperplasia, and other somatic overgrowth syndromes. Increased expression
of insulin-­like growth factor 2 secondary to genetic pathogenic variants
or epigenetic changes is implicated in hepatoblastoma development in
patients with BWS. All children with BWS or hemihyperplasia should be
routinely screened with α-­fetoprotein (AFP) levels and abdominal ultrasounds. Prematurity/low birthweight is associated with increased incidence of hepatoblastoma, with the risk increasing as birthweight decreases.
Aicardi syndrome, trisomy 18, other trisomies, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
Prader-­Willi syndrome, Alagille syndrome, glycogen storage disease (type
1), Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome, and fetal alcohol syndrome have
also been associated with increased risk of hepatoblastoma.

Pathogenesis

Hepatoblastoma arises from precursors of hepatocytes and is histologically
classified as whole epithelial type, containing fetal or embryonal malignant
cells (either as a mixture or as pure elements), and mixed type, containing
both epithelial and mesenchymal elements. Histologic classification has a
direct correlation with clinical outcome. Pure fetal histology and low mitotic
activity predicts the best outcome, and the small cell undifferentiated subtype associated with normal AFP levels predicts the worse outcome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3154 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A

B

C

D

Fig. 553.1 Hepatoblastoma in a 3-­yr-­old child. A, Pre-

contrast CT scan shows well-­demarcated, heterogeneous hypodense mass (arrow). B, Postcontrast CT scan
shows heterogeneous internal enhancement (arrow). C
and D, The mass (arrow) demonstrates heterogeneous
hypointensity on T1-­weighted (C) and hyperintensity on
T2-­weighted (D) MR images.

Clinical Manifestations

Hepatoblastoma usually presents as a large, asymptomatic abdominal
mass, with no associated systemic symptoms. Jaundice is uncommon. It
arises from the right lobe three times more often than the left and usually is
unifocal. When the disease progresses, fatigue, fever, weight loss, anorexia,
vomiting, and abdominal pain may ensue. Rarely, hepatoblastoma presents with hemorrhage secondary to trauma or spontaneous rupture. Metastatic spread of hepatoblastoma most often involves regional lymph nodes
and the lungs.

Child with liver mass

Cross-sectional imaging of
the abdomen and chest
using CT or MRI
Serum level of AFP

Diagnosis

A biopsy of liver tumors is necessary to establish the diagnosis. A valuable serum tumor marker, AFP, is used in the diagnosis and monitoring
of hepatic tumors. AFP is normally elevated in the newborn period and
then declines to <10 ng/mL by 1 year of age. The AFP levels are elevated
in almost all hepatoblastomas. Bilirubin and liver enzymes usually are
normal. Anemia is common, and thrombocytosis occurs in approximately 30% of patients. Serologic testing for hepatitides B and C should
be performed, but the results usually are negative in hepatoblastoma.
Diagnostic imaging should include plain radiographs and ultrasonography of the abdomen to characterize the hepatic mass. US can differentiate malignant hepatic masses from benign vascular lesions. Either
CT or MRI is an accurate method of defining the extent of intrahepatic
tumor involvement and the potential for surgical resection. Evaluation
for metastatic disease should include CT of the chest (Fig. 553.1).

Treatment

Resectable
by standard lobectomy

No

Treatment is guided by the degree of local tumor burden determined by
the pre-­and posttreatment extent of disease. In general, the cure of malignant hepatic tumors in children depends on complete resection of the
primary tumor (Fig. 553.2); as much as 85% of the liver can be resected,
with hepatic regeneration noted within 3-­4 months after surgery. Treatment of hepatoblastoma is based on surgery and systemic chemotherapy using cisplatin in combination with vincristine and 5-­fluorouracil
(5-­FU), and for intermediate-­and high-­risk patients, doxorubicin is also
used. The role of radiation therapy is questionable, because the effective
antitumor dose exceeds the hepatic tolerance. Radiation therapy may
have a role in shrinking unresectable disease or managing incompletely
resected tumors. In 30% of cases, tumors are resectable at diagnosis; a
safe attempt for initial gross total resection should be made, followed
by adjuvant chemotherapy. Unresectable tumors with or without metastatic disease at presentation usually respond to chemotherapy; preresection chemotherapy is indicated, and excision of the primary tumor and

Yes

Biopsy to confirm diagnosis

Resect

Chemotherapy

Histology of lesion

Restudy every 2 cycles
CT scan and AFP

Chemotherapy
unless pure fetal
histology

Resectable by conventional
surgery after 4 cycles of
chemotherapy

No

Yes

List for liver transplant*

Resect

Transplant

Complete chemotherapy

Chemotherapy – 2 cycles
*Consider continuation of chemotherapy or living-related liver transplantation
if cadaveric liver transplant not available in a timely fashion

Fig. 553.2 Algorithm for the management of a child who presents

with a hepatoblastoma. AFP, α-­Fetoprotein. (From Tiao GM, Bobey N,
Allen S, et al. The current management of hepatoblastoma: a combination of chemotherapy, conventional resection, and liver transplantation.
J Pediatr. 2005;146:204–211.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 553 u Neoplasms of the Liver
extrahepatic disease should be attempted as soon as it becomes feasible,
followed by additional chemotherapy. Orthotopic liver transplant is a
viable option for unresectable primary hepatic malignancies and results
in good long-­term survival. The pretransplant medical condition is an
important predictor of outcome, and thus transplant is much more effective as the primary surgery than as salvage therapy. Alternative treatment
options currently under investigation include other systemic chemotherapy agents such as carboplatin, ifosfamide, etoposide, irinotecan,
and temsirolimus. Other treatment approaches include transarterial
chemoembolization, cryoablation, and radiofrequency ablation (RFA).

Prognosis

In low-­stage tumors, survival rates >90% can be achieved with multimodal treatment, including surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. With
tumors unresectable at diagnosis, survival rates of approximately 60%
can be obtained. Metastatic disease further reduces survival, but complete regression of disease often can be obtained with chemotherapy
and surgical resection of the primary tumor and isolated pulmonary
metastatic disease, resulting in survival rates of approximately 25%.
Treatment-­related long-­term adverse effects include cardiac toxicity
with doxorubicin and renal and ototoxicity with cisplatin.

Glycogen storage diseases
Types 1 and 3
Poor metabolic control
Size and number of adenomas
Malignant transformation in adenoma
Congenital portosystemic shunts
Complete absence of PV (Type 1a)
Presence of NRH, adenoma,
dysplasia

3155

HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
Epidemiology

HCC occurs mostly in adolescents and often is associated with perinatal acquired hepatitis B infection and tyrosinemia. It is more common in
East Asia and other areas where hepatitis B is endemic; the incidence has
decreased following the introduction of hepatitis B vaccination. In these
areas, HCC also tends to occur in a bimodal pattern, with the younger
age peak overlapping the age of hepatoblastoma presentation. HCC also
occurs in the chronic form of glycogen storage disease, α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, biliary atresia, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, Alagille
syndrome, congenital portosystemic shunts, Budd-­Chiari syndrome, status postirradiation for liver metastatic Wilms tumor, and with other liver
diseases producing chronic inflammation or cirrhosis (Fig. 553.3).

Pathogenesis

Pediatric HCC arises in cirrhotic and noncirrhotic backgrounds and
presents as a multicentric, invasive tumor consisting of large pleomorphic cells of epithelial origin. Compared to adults, cirrhosis in children is less common, and congenital liver disorders are more common.
HCCs are classified as classical or fibrolamellar. The fibrolamellar
variant occurs more often in adolescent and young adult patients, is
not associated with cirrhosis, and represents one fourth of the pediatric

Hepatitis-B infection2

Tyrosinemia

Perinatal acquisition
Immunoclearance state
Early seroconversion (< 3 yr)
HBeAg negative (Precore mutants)
Genotype B >>> C
High HBV-DNA
Persistent DNA positivity
Male gender
Maternal HBeAg positivity
Family history of HCC
Absent or incomplete HBV vaccination

Nonusage of NTBC
Late introduction of NTBC (after 1 mo of
age)
Familial intrahepatic cholestasis:
BSEP deficiency
Non-D482G pathogenic variants
Presence of 2 protein-truncating pathogenic
variants
TJP2 pathogenic variants
MDR3 deficiency

HVOTO/BCS
Long standing obstruction
Presence of NRH
IVC obstruction
Male gender
Factor-V Leiden pathogenic variant

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
PiZZ phenotype
Male gender

Other metabolic derangements

Biliary atresia

Acute intermittent porphyria1
Porphyria cutaneous tarda1
Hypercitrullinemia1

Alagille syndrome

Genetic syndromes
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Fanconi anemia
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Neurofibromatosis

Other associations:
HCC
without
cirrhosis

HCC
with
cirrhosis

Autoimmune hepatitis1
Glycogen storage disease Type 4
Wilson disease1
Hereditary hemochromatosis1

Sporadic HCC
33%-50% of Pediatric HCC

Fig. 553.3 Risk factors for pediatric hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 1Conditions cause HCC in adults, and very rarely in children; 2Hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-­related HCC may occur in the presence or absence of cirrhosis. BCS, Budd-­Chiari syndrome; HVOTO, hepatic venous outflow tract obstruction; IVC, inferior vena cava; NRH, nodular regenerative hyperplasia; BSEP, bile salt export pump; MDR3, multidrug resistance protein-­3; NTBC, [2
-­(2-­nitro4-­trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-­1,3-­cyclohexanedione (Nitisinone); PiZZ, homozygous PiZ phenotype of α1-­antitrypsin; PV, Portal vein; TJP: tight
junction protein. (From Khanna R, Verma SK. Pediatric hepatocellular carcinoma. World J Gastroenterol. 2018;24[35]:3980–3999. Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3156 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
HCC cases. This variant has been reported to have a distinct translocation, DNAJB1-­PRKACA. A rare subtype called transitional liver
tumor occurs in older children and has clinical and histopathologic
findings of both hepatoblastoma and HCC.

Clinical Manifestations

HCC usually presents as a hepatic mass with abdominal distention and
symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, jaundice, and abdominal pain. HCC
can present as an acute abdominal crisis with rupture of the tumor and
hemoperitoneum. Metastatic spread usually involves regional lymph
nodes and the lungs. The AFP level is elevated in approximately 60%
of children with conventional HCC, but not in the fibrolamellar variant. Evidence of hepatitis B usually is found in endemic areas but not in
Western countries or with the fibrolamellar type. Liver enzymes may be
abnormal.
Diagnostic imaging should include plain radiographs and US of the
abdomen to characterize the hepatic mass. US can differentiate malignant hepatic masses from benign vascular lesions. Either CT or MRI
is an accurate method of defining the extent of intrahepatic tumor
involvement and the potential for surgical resection. Evaluation for
metastatic disease should include CT of the chest.

Treatment

Complete tumor resection is crucial for curative treatment. Because of
the multicentric origin of HCC and underlying liver disease, complete
resection is accomplished in only 20–30% of cases. A gross total resection should be attempted at diagnosis when possible; if not, neoadjuvant chemotherapy should be given to convert nonresectable tumors
into resectable ones. Combination chemotherapy following surgery is
necessary. For unresectable tumors, chemotherapy followed by surgical assessment is essential, and liver transplant should be decided
individually for each patient with HCC. Chemotherapy, including
cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin, and etoposide, has shown activity
against this tumor, but improved long-­term outcome has been difficult to achieve if tumor is not completed resected. Sorafenib, a small
inhibitor of several tyrosine protein kinase showed antitumoral activity
in adult patients with HCC, and initial studies have been published in
the pediatric population with encouraging results. Other techniques
are under study in adults, including cryosurgery, RFA, transarterial
chemoembolization, and radiation therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 554

Complex Vascular
Anomalies
Alexandra J. Borst and Denise M. Adams
Vascular anomalies in children encompass a spectrum of disorders
that may be divided into vascular malformations and vascular tumors
(Tables 554.1-­554.4; see Chapter 691). Vascular malformations are
developmental disorders of blood vessel formation. Malformations do
not regress; rather, they slowly enlarge. They should be named after the
predominant vessel(s) forming the lesion: arterial, capillary, lymphatic,
or venous, or combinations of these (see Table 554.1). Vascular tumors
exhibit endothelial cell hyperplasia and proliferation. The International
Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies (ISSVA) continues to update
the classification structure for vascular disorders as new disorders are

identified and as the biology and genetic causes for established disorders are found. The complete classification, associated syndromes,
and causative pathogenic variants can be found at www.issva.org. The
discovery of the molecular basis of many vascular malformations
and tumors has allowed for improved understanding of the etiology
of these disorders as well as new targeted therapeutic approaches for
management.

GENETIC BASIS FOR VASCULAR ANOMALIES

Two key intracellular signaling pathways have been implicated in
the pathogenesis of most vascular malformations, syndromes, and
tumors. The RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways are crucial for cell cycle regulation, proliferation, and migration (Fig. 554.1).
Pathogenic, somatic variants in the PIK3CA gene have been identified
in patients with venous malformations, lymphatic malformations,
and several vascular anomalies and overgrowth syndromes (see Table
554.4). Pathogenic variants in the RAS/MAPK pathway have been
identified in capillary and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs),
central conducting lymphatic anomalies, as well as many of the vascular tumors.
Discovery of the molecular basis for vascular malformations and
tumors has led to the ability to find targeted therapies for management of these conditions. Sirolimus has been utilized successfully in
vascular malformations and tumors. The identification of the crucial
role of PIK3CA pathogenic variants in vascular anomalies has led to
the investigation of PI3K inhibitors as important targeted therapies.
Agents that target the RAS/MAPK pathway, such as MEK inhibitors,
have also been trialed in complicated AVMs as well as Kaposiform
lymphangiomatosis (KLA).

COMPLEX LYMPHATIC ANOMALIES

Lymphatic anomalies represent a rare disease entity, with an estimated
incidence of 1:10,000 for the most common form of lymphatic malformations, but with only a few hundred case reports in the literature
for complex lymphatic anomalies. Lymphatic anomalies arise from
developmental defects in lymphangiogenesis. They carry significant
risk for comorbidities, including pain, infection, disfigurement, and
life-­threatening organ dysfunction. Lymphatic anomalies encompass
a broad range of developmental and functional defects in lymphatic
vessels that range from discrete malformations to complex anomalies
(generalized lymphatic anomaly [GLA], KLA, and Gorham-­Stout disease [GSD]) and primary lymphedema syndromes.
Most lymphatic anomalies are thought to arise from somatic pathogenic variants in genes involved in lymphangiogenesis, but germline
predispositions also exist. Pathogenic variants in the PIK3CA/AKT/
mTOR and VEGFC/VEGFR3 pathways have been found in many isolated lymphatic malformations; variants in the RAS/MAPK pathway
have been identified in patients with complex lymphatic anomalies (Fig.
554.2). However, most patients remain without a genetic diagnosis.

Generalized Lymphatic Anomaly

Previously known as lymphangiomatosis, GLA is characterized by a
nonneoplastic, multicentric proliferation of dilated lymphatic vessels,
with multiple sites resembling common lymphatic malformations (Fig.
554.3). The lesions are present since birth but generally become clinically apparent within the first 2 decades of life. The lesions can affect the
bones, liver, spleen, mediastinum, lung, and soft tissues. Bone involvement is typically osteolytic, with punched out lesions and intact cortex. Clinical response depends on location and extent of disease, with
thoracic involvement having the poorest prognosis. Patients with GLA
most commonly have pathogenic somatic variants in PIK3CA leading
to overactivity in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and disrupted lymphatic development and growth. Many patients have been successfully
managed with sirolimus.

Gorham-­Stout Disease

GSD (also known as vanishing bone disease) has significant clinical
overlap with GLA but tends to involve a single site or adjacent sites.
Patients may present with adjacent soft tissue mass or small areas of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies
Table 554.1

3157

Overview of Vascular Anomalies
VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS

VASCULAR TUMORS

SIMPLE

COMBINED*

Benign

Capillary malformations
Lymphatic malformations

CMV, CLM
LVM, CLVM

Locally aggressive or
borderline

Venous malformations
Arteriovenous malformations†

CAVM†
CLAVM†

Malignant

Arteriovenous fistula†

Others

OF MAJOR NAMED
VESSELS

ASSOCIATED WITH
OTHER ANOMALIES

See Table 554.2

See Table 554.3

*Defined as two or more vascular malformations found in one lesion.
†High-­flow lesions.

A list of casual genes and related vascular anomalies is available in Tables 554.3 and 554.4
CVM, Capillary venous malformation; CLM, capillary lymphatic malformation, LVM, lymphatic venous malformation, CLVM, capillary lymphatic venous malformation, CAVM, capillary
arteriovenous malformation; CLAVM, capillary lymphatic arteriovenous malformation.
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file/ISSVA-­
Classification-­2018.pdf

Lymphatics

life-­threatening, and frequently hemorrhagic, pleural effusions (Fig.
554.5). Patients often have a coagulopathy at presentation due to
the same Kasabach-­Merritt phenomenon (KMP) seen in patients
with Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma. Patients typically present
at a younger age than those with GLA or GSD; the mortality has been
reported as high as 50–60% prior to the introduction of sirolimus.

Veins

Central Conducting Lymphatic Anomaly

Table 554.2  Anomalies of Major Named Vessels (Also
Known as “Channel Type” or “Truncal”
Vascular Malformations)
Affect

Diameter (aplasia, hypoplasia, stenosis, ectasia / aneurysm)

Central conducting lymphatic anomaly (CCLA), also known as lymphangiectasia, is classified as a channel-­type lymphatic anomaly. CCLA
is caused by lymphatic channel dysmotility and distal obstruction/malformation affecting lymphatic drainage and leading to recurrent effusions (Fig. 554.6). Patients with other complex lymphatic anomalies
may have a component of CCLA. Pathogenic variants in EPHB4 and
ARAF have been identified in patients with CCLA and both mTOR
and MEK inhibition have been used in its management with mixed
success. Patients frequently needed targeted interventional procedures
to embolize abnormal lymphatic vessels.

Valves

Treatment of Complex Lymphatic Anomalies

Arteries
Anomalies of
Origin
Course
Number
Length

Communication (AVF)
Persistence (of embryonal vessel)
AVF, Arteriovenous fistula.
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file
/ISSVA-­Classification-­2018.pdf

microcystic lymphatic malformation. The upper axial skeleton is commonly affected, and there is osteolysis of both the medullary and cortical bone (Fig. 554.4). This osteolysis can be profound and result in
significant morbidity, including dysfunction of an appendage or even
spinal column instability. Some molecular findings in patients with
GSD have suggested that somatic activating variants in KRAS and dysfunction of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway drive the pathogenesis
of GSD. Many patients have been treated with sirolimus with adjunctive bisphosphonate therapy.

Kaposiform Lymphangiomatosis

KLA has been considered an aggressive subtype of GLA but is histologically and molecularly distinct. Many patients with KLA harbor
somatic activation variants in the RAS pathway, rather than the PI3K/
AKT/mTOR pathway identified as causative in GLA. KLA presents
with distinct foci of spindled endothelial cells on a background of
malformed lymphatic vessels. KLA can affect multiple organs and sites
but primarily affects the thoracic cavity with patients presenting with

Management of complex lymphatic anomalies is principally aimed at
control, not cure. This can include a variety of medical, surgical, and
interventional procedures to control symptoms and prevent morbidity.
Sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, has been shown to decrease symptoms
of lymphatic leak such as lymphatic blebs, decrease the size of macrocystic and microcystic malformations, decrease chylous production,
and may slow the pathologic dissolution of bone by lymphatic malformation. MEK inhibition has shown promise in the management of
KLA and CCLA, both found to be driven more by perturbations affecting RAS/MAPK signaling. Adjunctive therapy with bisphosphonates
is often used in GSD and in patients with GLA and KLA with bony
vertebral lesions.

COMPLEX VENOUS ANOMALIES

Venous anomalies are slow-­flow lesions that represent abnormal or
excessive growth of venous structures. Venous malformations are the
most common vascular malformations with an incidence of 1 in 5,000
to 10,000. Due to the slow and sometimes turbulent flow, they commonly are associated with pain, swelling, and intralesional thrombosis.
Venous malformations have been found to have somatic pathogenic
variants in both PIK3CA and TIE2/TEK, an endothelial cell–specific
tyrosine kinase receptor that functions through the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway (see Fig. 554.1).

Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus Syndrome

Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome (BRBNS) is characterized by multiple
cutaneous and internal venous malformations, primarily hepatic and intestinal (Fig. 554.7). Many cases have been found to be due to gain-­of-­function

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3158 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 554.3

Vascular Malformations Associated with Other Anomalies

SYNDROME

LESIONS

GENES

Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome*:

CM + VM +/− LM + limb overgrowth

PIK3CA

Parkes-­Weber syndrome:

CM + AVF + limb overgrowth

RASA1

Servelle-­Martorell syndrome:

limb VM + bone undergrowth

Sturge-­Weber syndrome:

facial + leptomeningeal CM + eye anomalies
+/− bone and/or soft tissue overgrowth

Limb CM + congenital nonprogressive limb
overgrowth
Maffucci syndrome:

GNAQ
GNA11

VM +/− spindle-­cell hemangioma +
enchondroma

IDH1/IDH2

Macrocephaly-­CM (M-­CM/MCAP)*

PIK3CA

Microcephaly-­CM (MICCAP)

STAMBP

CLOVES syndrome*:

LM + VM + CM +/– AVM + lipomatous
overgrowth

PICK3CA

Proteus syndrome:

CM, VM, and/or LM + asymmetrical somatic
overgrowth

AKT1

Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndrome:

AVM + VM + macrocephaly, lipomatous
overgrowth

PTEN

CLAPO syndrome*:

lower lip CM + face and neck LM + asymmetry
and partial/generalized overgrowth

PIK3CA

*These lesions belong to the PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS)
CM, Capillary malformation; VM, venous malformation; LM, lymphatic malformation; AVF, arteriovenous fistula; M-­CM, macrocephaly-­capillary malformation; MCAP, megalocephaly-­
capillary-­malformation-­polymicrogyria; MICCAP, microcephaly-­capillary malformation; CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi,
skeletal/scoliosis/spinal anomalies; CLAPO, lower lip CM + face and neck LM + asymmetry and partial/generalized overgrowth.
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file/ISSVA-­
Classification-­2018.pdf

Table 554.4

PIK3CA-­Related Overgrowth Spectrum

PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) group lesions with
heterogeneous segmental overgrowth phenotypes with or without
vascular anomalies due to somatic PIK3CA activating variants.
This spectrum includes:
• Fibroadipose hyperplasia or overgrowth (FAO)
• Hemihyperplasia multiple lipomatosis (HHML)
• Congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations,
epidermal nevi, scoliosis/skeletal, and spinal (CLOVES) syndrome
• Macrodactyly
• Fibroadipose infiltrating lipomatosis/facial infiltrative lipomatosis
• Megalencephaly-­capillary malformation (MCAP or M-CM )
• Dysplastic megalencephaly (DMEG)
• Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file
/ISSVA-­Classification-­2018.pdf

TIE2/TEK pathogenic variants; both sporadic and autosomal dominant
inheritance have been described. Significant morbidity can arise due to
intestinal venous malformations, which can lead to severe bleeding and
secondary iron deficiency anemia. Patients must be monitored closely for
signs and symptoms of bleeding. The mainstay of management is control
of disease with sirolimus and supportive care for anemia.

Glomuvenous Malformation (Glomangioma)

Glomuvenous malformations, also known as glomangiomas or glomus
tumors, are one of the rare germline conditions in vascular anomalies. Glomuvenous malformations result from an autosomal dominant

loss-­of-­function variant in the GLMN gene, which encodes a protein
essential for normal vascular development. Patients present with multiple superficial cutaneous lesions with a cobblestone appearance (Fig.
554.8). There is 100% penetrance but variable expressivity. Painful
lesions can be treated with surgical resection, laser, or sclerotherapy.

SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH VASCULAR
ANOMALIES
PIK3CA-­Related Overgrowth Spectrum Disorders

PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) encompasses a group
of disorders caused by somatic mosaic mutations in the PI3K/AKT/
mTOR pathway (see Table 554.4). The PIK3CA (phosphatidylinositol-­
4,5-­bisphosphate 3-­kinase catalytic subunit α) gene encodes a group of
lipid kinases (PI3 kinases) that are key to regulating cell proliferation and
survival via the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Patients with PROS present
with a wide spectrum of clinical phenotypes, but progressive segmental
overgrowth and vascular malformations are key components.

Klippel-­Trenaunay Syndrome

Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome (KTS) is characterized by overgrowth of
one lower extremity in combination with combined slow-­flow vascular malformation (capillary, venous, and/or lymphatic). Complications
include lymphatic overgrowth, infection, oozing and/or bleeding from
lymphatic blebs, and thromboembolism (Fig. 554.9). Patients with
KTS have an anomalous venous return system composed of dilated and
incompetent veins, often with a larger marginal vein. The deep venous
system may also be poorly developed. Patients can have lymphatic
involvement of the skin, musculature, and intestinal tract. Venous
malformation may affect the bladder and urethra. Due to variability in
diagnostic criteria and identification of KTS over the years, the genetic
etiology of KTS is not completely confirmed, but many patients have
been identified to have a somatic variants in PIK3CA; KTS is considered part of PROS disorders. Surgical and interventional procedures
may be important for some patients with KTS. Medical management
currently includes sirolimus and anticoagulation therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies

TIE2/RTK
VM
VMCM
BRBN
MVM

TIE2 INHIBITOR

HHT1
endoglin

VEGFR2

EphB4

CM-AVM2

PIP3

PIP2

CM-AVM1

RASA1
GNAQ/11

PTEN
PG
KLA
GSD

PHTS
ALPELISIB

SMADs
1/5/8

Integrin
VEcadherin

PAZOPANIB

PIK3CA

VM
LM
CLOVES
KTS
MCAP
(PROS)

RICH
NICH
PG
CM

RAS

PG

BRAF

VEMURAFENIB

AVM

MEK1

TRAMETINIB
SULMETINIB

AKT
JPHT

ICAP1
KRIT1 HCCVM
CCM1

Malcavernin CCM2
PDCD10 CCM3

MAP3K3

SMAD4

β-catenin

HHT5
BMP9/10
HHT2
ALK1

THALIDOMIDE

VEGF

BEVACIZUMAB

3159

Integrin signaling

VVM
RAPAMYCIN/EVEROLIMUS
EC migration,
proliferation,
vessel
formation

mTOR

EC

ERK

Proliferation, cell growth,
differentiation, angiogenesis

TGFβ
HGF

TGFβR
migration
FKBP12
SMAD

PI3K

vSMC/
EC

RAPAMYCIN?
glomulin
p70S6K

vSMC differentiation
GVM

Fig. 554.1 PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling and RAS/MAPK signaling in vascular anomalies. Red, gain of function; blue, loss of function; black, en-

hanced signaling; gray, decreased signaling. (From Queisser A, Seront E, Boon LM, Vikkula M. Genetic basis and therapies for vascular anomalies.
Circ Res. 2021;129[1]:155–173. Fig. 3.)

CLOVES

CLOVES, or congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi, and scoliosis/spinal/skeletal anomalies, is
a disorder that results from an early embryonic pathogenic variant in PIK3CA. In addition to extremity hypertrophy, patients can
have significant fatty lipomatous overgrowth (Fig. 554.10). Spinal
involvement is common. Patients with vascular malformations usually have a combination of capillary, venous, and lymphatic malformations. AVMs are less common but have been reported with spinal
involvement. Deep venous anomalies increase the risk for venous
thromboembolism. Patients with CLOVES have an increased risk
of Wilms tumor and require serial monitoring with abdominal
ultrasonography in early childhood. Patients may require sclerotherapy, surgery, and other interventional procedures depending on
symptoms. Patients have also been successfully managed with
sirolimus.

Macrocephaly-­Capillary Malformation

Macrocephaly-­capillary malformation (M-­CM) syndrome is a PROS
disorder characterized by macrocephaly, brain abnormalities, CM
(often in a reticular pattern), overgrowth, and developmental delays
(Fig. 554.11). Neurologic manifestations can include hydrocephalus,
cortical dysplasia, polymicrogyria, and posterior fossa crowding with
cerebellar tonsillar herniation. Patients require supportive care for

overgrowth and other vascular anomalies, as well as close monitoring
of brain growth and development.

AKT-­RELATED OVERGROWTH SPECTRUM
Proteus Syndrome

Proteus is an overgrowth disorder caused by a somatic mosaic
pathogenic variant in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Clinical features include overgrowth (including lipomatous), bony abnormalities, cerebriform connective tissue nevus, vascular malformations
(capillary, venous, lymphatic), epidermal nevi, cerebral abnormalities and accompanying intellectual disability, and increased risk for
secondary neoplasms and venous thromboembolism. Management
of proteus disorders has primarily been supportive, although use of
AKT1 inhibition is currently being evaluated.

RASopathies

RASopathies refers to a group of medical conditions caused by
pathogenic variants in the RAS/MAPK pathway. It includes both
germline conditions, as well as somatic variants. The RAS/MAPK
pathway is important in cell cycle regulation, proliferation, migration, and stress response. RAS/MAPK pathway pathogenic variants
have been identified in patients with solitary CMs and AVMs, GLA,
KLA, verrucous venous malformation, cerebral CM, pyogenic granuloma (PG), and congenital hemangiomas.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3160 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Kaposiform
lymphangiomatosis

Central
conducting
lymphatic
anomaly

TKR
VEGFR2/3
PDGFR
TIE1/TIE2

Primary lymphedema
Generalized
lymphatic
anomaly

RAS
PIK3CA
Lymphatic
malformations
RAF
AKT

MEK
mTOR

ERK
Vascular
growth and
differentiation

Fig. 554.2 Molecular pathways identified in lymphatic anomalies.

A
Capillary Malformation-­Arteriovenous Malformation
Syndrome

Capillary malformation-­arteriovenous malformation (CM-­AVM) is an
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by diffuse, circumscribed
CMs and increased risk for intra-­or extracranial AVMs. AVMs are
found in ∼80% of patients. The CMs have a distinct appearance with
a round or ovoid shape and surrounding pale halo. Most cases of CM-­
AVM are caused by a loss-­of-­function pathogenic variant in RASA1, but
variants in EPHB4 have also been reported (CM-­AVM type 2). Familial
penetrance is high, and screening is important due to the high risk for
life-­threatening complications from AVMs. AVMs may require treatment with a combination of interventional and surgical procedures.

Parkes-­Weber Syndrome

Parkes-­Weber syndrome (PKWS) is associated with pathogenic variants in RASA1. The syndrome includes multiple microscopic arteriovenous fistulae in association with a CM. PKWS is also associated with
soft tissue and bony overgrowth of an extremity.

KAPOSIFORM HEMANGIOENDOTHELIOMA

Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE) is a rare and potentially
life-­threatening vascular tumor. KHE classically presents as a red
to purple firm plaque on the lateral neck, axilla, trunk, or extremities. Visceral tumors occur as well. Lesions may occasionally get
smaller over time but rarely resolve completely. Tufted angioma,
once thought to be a separate tumor on the same clinical spectrum as KHE, is considered under the umbrella term of KHE (Fig.
554.12). The main complication of these tumors is the development
of KMP, which may be fatal; therefore early diagnosis and treatment is important. Retroperitoneal or intrathoracic lesions in the
absence of cutaneous lesions are uncommon but are often associated with KMP.

B
Fig. 554.3 A, MRI imaging of vertebral body lymphatic malforma-

tions in a patient with generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA). B, Splenic and vertebral body lesions in a patient with GLA. (B from Joshi M,
Phansalkar DS. Simple lymphangioma to generalized lymphatic anomaly: role of imaging in disclosure of a rare and morbid disease. Case Rep
Radiol. 2015;2015:603859.)

Kasabach-­Merritt Phenomenon

KMP is a life-­threatening combination of a rapidly enlarging KHE, thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and an acute or chronic
consumption coagulopathy. The clinical manifestations are usually evident
during early infancy. The vascular lesion is usually cutaneous and is only

Fig. 554.4 Osteolytic destruction of the left scapula in a patient with
Gorham-­Stout disease (GSD). Axial CT image of the left scapula demonstrates intramedullary lucent lesions with cortical thinning.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies

3161

Fig. 554.5 A, Large hemorrhagic pleural effusion in a patient with Kaposiform lymphangiomatosis (KLA). B, Abnormal lymphatic fluid
distribution and central lymphatic drainage in a
patient with KLA.

B

A

Fig. 554.6 MR lymphangiography study showing a dilated and mal-

formed thoracic duct and central lymphatics with retrograde flow into
the mediastinum and pericardium (arrows) in a patient with central conducting lymphatic anomaly (CCLA).

rarely located in viscera. The associated thrombocytopenia may lead to
precipitous hemorrhage accompanied by ecchymoses, petechiae, and a
rapid increase in the size of the vascular lesion. Severe anemia from hemorrhage or microangiopathic hemolysis may ensue. The thrombocytopenia
has been attributed to sequestration or increased destruction of platelets
within the lesion. Hypofibrinogenemia and decreased levels of consumable clotting factors are relatively common (see Chapter 533.6). KMP is
seen in KHE or tufted angioma, as well as to a milder extent in very large
congenital and hepatic hemangiomas but not in infantile hemangiomas.
Treatment includes surgical excision of small lesions, although this is
often difficult because of coagulopathy and the infiltrative nature of the
tumor. Additional pharmacologic treatments include systemic steroids
with or without vincristine as first-­line therapy in most cases. mTOR
inhibition with sirolimus has been found to be successful as an alternative
first-­line treatment for KHE. The optimal initial combination of medical

B
Fig. 554.7 Multiple venous malformations on the tongue (A) and
subcutaneous tissues of the foot (B) in a patient with blue rubber bleb
nevus syndrome (BRBNS).

therapies is not yet known. Antiplatelet, antifibrinolytic, and other chemotherapeutic agents have been used with mixed results. The mortality rate
overall once patients have KMP is high.

OTHER RARE VASCULAR TUMORS
Benign Tumors (Other Than Infantile Hemangiomas)
(see Chapter 691)
Epithelioid Hemangiomas

Epithelioid hemangioma (EH) is a very rare vascular tumor, usually
occurring in the skin or subcutaneous tissues, but occasionally occurring

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3162 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
PGs are benign but a nuisance because they bleed easily with trauma
and may recur if incompletely removed. Numerous satellite papules
have developed after surgical excision of PGs from the back, particularly in the interscapular region. Small lesions may regress after
cauterization with silver nitrate; larger lesions require excision and
electrodesiccation of the base of the granuloma. Small (<5 mm) lesions
may be treated successfully with pulsed dye laser therapy.

Spider Angioma

Fig. 554.8 Cobblestoned appearance of a patient with a glomangi-

oma, or glomuvenous malformation, caused by a germline pathogenic
variant in the glomulin gene (GLMN). Family members all with similar
appearing lesions.

A vascular spider (nevus araneus) consists of a central feeder artery
with many dilated radiating vessels and a surrounding erythematous
flush, varying from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter (see Fig. 691.17). Pressure over the central vessel causes blanching;
pulsations visible in larger nevi are evidence for the arterial source of
the lesion. Spider angiomas are associated with conditions in which
there are increased levels of circulating estrogens, such as cirrhosis and
pregnancy, but they also occur in up to 15% of normal preschool-­age
children and 45% of school-­age children. Sites of predilection in children are the dorsum of the hand, forearm, nose, infraocular region,
lips, and ears. Lesions often regress spontaneously after puberty. If
removal is desired, pulsed dye laser therapy is the mode of choice; resolution is achieved in 90% of cases with a single treatment.

Maffucci Syndrome

The association of spindle cell hemangiomas with nodular enchondromas
in the metaphyseal or diaphyseal cartilaginous portion of long bones is
known as Maffucci syndrome. Maffucci syndrome is caused by somatic
mosaic pathogenic variants in the IDH1 and IDH2 genes. Vascular lesions
are typically soft, compressible, asymptomatic blue to purple subcutaneous
masses that grow in proportion to a child’s growth and stabilize by adulthood. Mucous membranes or viscera may also be involved. Onset occurs
during childhood. Bone lesions may produce limb deformities and pathologic fractures. Malignant transformation of enchondromas (chondrosarcoma, angiosarcoma) or primary malignancies (ovarian, fibrosarcoma,
glioma, pancreatic) may be a complication (see Chapter 550).

LOCALLY AGGRESSIVE RARE VASCULAR TUMORS
Retiform Hemangioendothelioma

Retiform hemangioendothelioma (RHE) is an intermediate, or rarely
metastasizing, vascular tumor. They usually present as a slow-­growing
mass with plaque-­like or nodular appearance. They can involve the entire
dermis and extend into the subcutaneous tissue. Histologically, hobnail
endothelial cells are found, but only variably lymphatic endothelial cell
markers. Treatment is with surgical excision, though local recurrence is
common and regional lymph node metastases have been reported.

Papillary Intralymphatic Angioendothelioma
Fig. 554.9 Overgrown right lower extremity with capillary-­venous-­
lymphatic malformation in a patient with Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome.

in other sites such as bone. They may be mistaken for infantile hemangiomas or PGs and can be reactive due to trauma or infection. EHs are
well-­circumscribed proliferations of capillaries that stain for endothelial
cell and lymphatic markers but are without any cytologic atypia or mitoses. Primary treatment is with surgical excision, though they can recur
locally. FOS gene rearrangements have been identified in some EHs.

Pyogenic Granuloma (Lobular Capillary Hemangioma)

A PG is a small red, glistening, sessile, or pedunculated papule that often
has a discernible epithelial collarette (see Fig. 691.16). The surface may be
weeping and crusted or completely epithelialized. PGs initially grow rapidly, may ulcerate, and bleed easily when traumatized because they consist
of exuberant granulation tissue. They are relatively common in children,
particularly on the face, arms, and hands. Such a lesion located on a finger
or hand may appear as a subcutaneous nodule. PGs may arise at sites of
injury, but a history of trauma often cannot be elicited.

Papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (PILA), also referred to
as Dabska tumor, is a locally aggressive hemangioendothelioma. PILA
occur within the dermis and superficial soft tissues of the head, neck,
trunk, or extremities. On occasion they have been reported to arise from
preexisting lymphatic or venolymphatic malformations, or within an
extremity affected by lymphedema. They appear as violaceous nodules
similar to RHE but histologically appear similar to lymphatic malformations and contain hobnail endothelial cells. Primary treatment is with
excision, but regional lymph node metastasis and even death due to distant metastasis have been reported. Systemic chemotherapy based on
sarcoma treatment may be used in recurrent or refractory cases.

Composite Hemangioendothelioma

Composite hemangioendotheliomas (CHE) contain overlapping histologic features with epithelioid, retiform, and spindle-­cell hemangioendotheliomas. Some also contain angiosarcoma-­like features within the same
tumor. Fewer than 40 cases have been reported in the literature, and they
can present at any age and in association with other vascular anomalies.
Treatment options include surgical excision, chemotherapy, and radiation
therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies

3163

Fig. 554.10 A, Soft tissue and bony overgrowth of the digits of

A

B

the bilateral hands in a patient with CLOVES. Also noted is overlying capillary malformation (CM). B, Overgrowth of digits of the
feet and right sandal-­toe gap deformity in a patient with CLOVES.
Also noted are CM and dilated venous pattern from underlying
bilateral venous malformation of the lower extremities.

A

Fig. 554.11 Infant with macrocephaly, prominent forehead, de-

pressed nasal bridge, short neck, bluish white iris, and reticulated port-­
wine stains over body, consistent with macrocephaly-­capillary malformation (M-­CM). (From Panigrahi I, Bhushan M, Yadav M, Khandelwal
N, Singhi P. Macrocephaly-­capillary malformation syndrome: three new
cases. J Neurol Sci. 2012;313:178–181. Fig. 5.)

Pseudomyogenic Hemangioendothelioma (Epithelioid Sarcoma-­Like Hemangioendothelioma)

Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma (PMH) is a rare vascular
tumor that presents more commonly in males than females (4:1 predominance) and usually in young adulthood (<40 years). The typical
presentation is multifocal presentation within one extremity, and it
does frequently have bony involvement. Histologically, it shares some
features with epithelioid sarcoma, with myoid-­appearing spindle cells,
but has very low metastatic potential. Primary treatment is with surgical resection, but local recurrence is common, and mTOR inhibition
with sirolimus has shown promise in its management.

MALIGNANT TUMORS
Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) is variant of angiosarcoma,
which is locally aggressive and has metastatic potential. It usually
occurs in middle-­age adults and presents as a solitary mass in the soft
tissues, viscera, or bone, with liver as the most common site. Thirty

B
Fig. 554.12 A, Patient with Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma

(KHE) of the thigh who presented with Kasabach-­Merritt phenomenon
(KMP) with thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenemia unresponsive
to all therapy until introduction of sirolimus. B, Premature infant with
KHE of the arm who presented with KMP.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3164 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
percent present with metastases, and occasionally patients present with
hemolytic anemia or consumptive coagulopathy. EHE is characterized
by the WWTR1/CAMTA1 translocation, with some also expressing a
YAP1-­TFE3 gene fusion. Histologically, EHE are epithelioid tumors
arranged in nests or cords. They may contain spindle endothelial cells
and express Fli-­1 and CD31. Treatment depends on location and metastatic pattern but includes surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy.
Overall survival for those with progressive disease is quite poor.

Angiosarcoma

Angiosarcomas account for ∼2% of all soft tissue sarcomas, occur
mostly in adults, and very rarely affect children. In children, they may
be cutaneous or in the deep tissues or viscera. Angiosarcomas present
as rapidly enlarging purplish plaques or nodules that ulcerate and can
leak serosanguinous fluid. Necrosis and hemorrhage within the tumor
are common. Due to risk for rapid progression and metastasis, multimodal therapy including resection and intensive chemotherapy is generally pursued. Combined treatment with mTOR and MEK inhibition
has shown some promise, but progression-­free and overall survival
remain very poor.
Hepatic angiosarcomas appear to be a distinct subtype of angiosarcoma, presenting in earlier childhood, usually between age 1 and
5 years (Fig. 554.13). There is sometimes a history of infantile hepatic
hemangioma, although cutaneous infantile hemangiomas do not
appear to progress to angiosarcoma. Patients can present with anemia
and thrombocytopenia due to intratumoral bleeding. Liver function
tests may be abnormal, but α-­fetoprotein is normal or only minimally
elevated. Risk of local invasion and metastasis is quite high, so rapid
diagnosis, surgical resection, and initiation of sarcoma-­based chemotherapy is important. Unfortunately, complete cure is very rare.
Lymphangiosarcoma is a distinct subtype of angiosarcoma arising
from the lymphatic endothelium of a site of lymphedema. Lymphangioma
resembles angiosarcoma both clinically and histologically and appears to
harbor the same c-­myc amplification seen in postradiation angiosarcoma
of the breast. Similar to the “hemangiosarcoma” form of angiosarcoma,
lymphangiosarcomas are managed similarly and have similar overall poor
prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 554.13 Angiosarcoma of the liver. (From Potanos KM, Hodgkinson N, Fullington NM, et al. Long-­term survival in pediatric hepatic angiosarcoma (PHAS): a case report and review of the literature. J Pediatr
Surg Case Rep. 2015;3:410–413. Fig. 1.)

Chapter 555

Rare Tumors
555.1 Thyroid Tumors
Jonathan D. Wasserman
See Chapter 607.

BENIGN THYROID TUMORS

Benign thyroid tumors represent approximately 75% of all thyroid nodules presenting in the pediatric population and generally
require no treatment unless they result in compressive symptoms or
thyroid hormone hypersecretion. The workup of a suspected thyroid nodule includes the laboratory assessment of thyroid function
(thyroid-­stimulating hormone [TSH]), ultrasound (US) to assess
characteristics of the nodule(s) and regional lymph nodes, and US-­
guided fine-­needle aspiration biopsy (of the primary nodule and
suspicious lymph nodes) for cytopathologic diagnosis if imaging is
suspicious for malignancy. Nuclear scintigraphy using radioactive
iodine (123I) or technetium 99m (99mTc)-­pertechnetate are not recommended in the initial diagnostic evaluation, except in the event
of a suppressed TSH level.

MALIGNANT THYROID TUMORS

Pediatric thyroid malignancies are rare tumors that include medullary
thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and the differentiated thyroid carcinomas
(DTCs), namely, papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and follicular thyroid carcinoma. Findings suggestive of a thyroid malignancy are noted
in Table 555.1.
PTC represents the majority of thyroid cancers in children. The
incidence of pediatric thyroid cancer has been rising, with the highest rate in adolescence, and a female predominance emerges around
the time of puberty. With few exceptions, children with PTC have a
highly favorable prognosis, with anticipated survival over decades,
even in the presence of distally metastatic disease at diagnosis.
The major established risk factor for development of PTC is exposure to ionizing radiation, typically in the context of antineoplastic
therapy.
MTC is an uncommon disease in childhood that usually occurs
in the context of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a (MEN2A)
or type 2b (MEN2B), autosomal dominant, hereditary endocrine
tumor syndromes that arise secondary to activating variants in
the RET proto-oncogene. In addition to the almost complete penetrance of MTC in patients with the most common RET variants,
patients with MEN2A and MEN2B have up to a 50% lifetime risk of
developing pheochromocytomas (PHEOs). Up to 20% of MEN2A
patients also develop primary hyperparathyroidism. Patients with
MEN2B do not develop hyperparathyroidism but have a distinct
clinical phenotype that includes a characteristic facial appearance,
marfanoid body habitus, aerodigestive tract ganglioneuromatosis,
and oral and ocular mucosal neuromas (Fig. 555.1). The diagnosis of MEN2B is often delayed (usually after the MTC has already
metastasized) because its pathognomonic features are not apparent in very early childhood, although an inability to cry tears (alacrimia) and constipation represent the earliest clues to diagnosis.
MTC may be sporadic or familial without features of MEN 2A or
2B; it may also be associated with Hirschsprung disease.
Children with sporadic DTC typically present with an asymptomatic thyroid mass and/or cervical lymphadenopathy. Lymph node
metastases are present in most PTC cases, and lung metastases are
identified in up to 20% of patients, primarily in those children with a
high burden of neck disease. In contrast, children with MEN2-­related
MTC are often diagnosed only after a positive genetic test result or, in
the case of MEN2B, after the clinical phenotype is recognized. When

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 555 u Rare Tumors 3165
Table 555.1  Clinical Findings Associated with Malignant
Thyroid Nodules
HISTORIC FEATURES
Neck irradiation during childhood or adolescence
Rapid growth
Recent, persistent changes in speaking, breathing, or swallowing
Family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Firm, fixed, and irregular consistency of nodule
Vocal cord paralysis or hoarseness
Persistent regional lymph adenopathy
Modified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of
Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 14.3, p. 439.

Fig. 555.1 Classic appearance of oral mucosal neuromas on the

tongue in a boy with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b (MEN2B)
secondary to the typical M918T variant in the RET protooncogene.

a family history is known, presymptomatic surveillance may identify
MTC at earlier stages. As with PTC, MTC also frequently metastasizes to cervical lymph nodes.
There are well-­
documented genotype-­
phenotype correlations
in MEN2, and the biologic aggressiveness of MTC depends on
the hereditary setting in which it develops. With the availability
of genetic testing for RET variants, MTC has become one of the
few malignancies that can be prevented by prophylactic
thyroidectomy.
The age at which prophylactic thyroidectomy is recommended is
determined based on the specific RET variant, serum calcitonin levels,
and parent and child preference.
The primary therapy for thyroid cancer, regardless of histologic type, is thyroidectomy and, if there is evidence of lymph node
metastasis, a compartment-­oriented lymph node dissection performed by a highly experienced thyroid cancer surgeon. In DTC,
adjuvant radioactive iodine (131I) may be used postoperatively to
treat iodine-­avid distant metastasis and unresectable residual neck
disease. The use of 131I is limited to children at higher risk for residual or recurrent disease who are most likely to benefit from treatment. Children with MTC do not require 131I therapy.
In children with DTC, the TSH level is initially suppressed by giving supraphysiologic levothyroxine, because TSH may stimulate DTC
tumor growth; the TSH level is kept normal in MTC.
Oral multikinase inhibitors and oncogene-­targeted therapy (for children with tumors driven by BRAF, RET, or NTRK substitutions or oncogenic fusions) have demonstrated benefit for the treatment of advanced
MTC and DTC in adults. These are rarely indicated in pediatric patients
but may be considered for symptomatic and/or progressive disease.

Long-­term follow-­up of thyroid cancer survivors involves monitoring of tumor markers (thyroglobulin/thyroglobulin antibody in DTC,
calcitonin/carcinogenic embryonic antigen in MTC) and routine
imaging, primarily neck US.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

555.2 Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
Cynthia E. Herzog
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is rare in the pediatric population, but
it is one of the most common nasopharyngeal tumors in pediatric
patients. In adults, the incidence is highest in South China, but it is
also high among the Inuit people and in North Africa and Northeast
India. In China, this diagnosis is rare in the pediatric population,
but in other populations, a substantial proportion of cases occur
in the pediatric age-­group, primarily in adolescents. It occurs in
males twice as often as in females and is more common in Black
people. In the pediatric population, the tumors are more frequently
of undifferentiated histology and associated with Epstein-­Barr
virus (EBV). Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is associated with specific
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) types; other genetic factors may
play a role, especially in low-­incidence populations.
Most pediatric patients present with advanced locoregional
disease manifesting as cervical lymphadenopathy. Epistaxis, trismus, and cranial nerve deficits also may be present. The diagnosis
is established from biopsy of the nasopharynx or cervical lymph
nodes. In most cases the lactate dehydrogenase level is elevated, but
this finding is nonspecific. CT or MRI evaluation of the head and
neck is performed to determine the extent of locoregional disease.
Chest radiography, CT, bone scan, and liver scan are used to evaluate for metastatic disease. PET scans appear to be useful for monitoring primary disease and looking for metastases. EBV DNA levels
correlate with disease stage, have prognostic value, and can be used
to monitor for recurrence.
Treatment is a combination of chemotherapy and irradiation.
Cisplatin, given concurrently with radiation, with either neoadjuvant or adjuvant cisplatin-­based chemotherapy, is the standard
treatment. The outcome depends on the extent of disease; patients
with distant metastases have a very poor prognosis. Using intensity-­
modulated radiation therapy improves local control and reduces
the late adverse effects associated with radiation therapy, including
hormonal dysfunction, dental caries, fibrosis, and second malignancies. Use of proton therapy may result in further reduction of
adverse effects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

555.3 Adenocarcinoma of the Colon and
Rectum
Cynthia E. Herzog and Winston W. Huh
Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is rare in the pediatric population,
with an estimated incidence rate of approximately one case per 1
million. Even in patients with predisposing conditions, CRC usually
does not present until late adolescence or adulthood; only 35–40%
of CRC in this age-­group are association with a known predisposition factor. Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC)
(Lynch Syndrome) is an autosomal dominant disorder, with germline pathogenic variants in DNA mismatch repair genes (MMR)
causing DNA repair errors and microsatellite instability (MSI).
MYH-­associated polyposis, Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome, and juvenile
polyposis also predispose to CRC.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3166 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Genetic testing is available, and screening for cancer in HNPCC
and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) should begin during
childhood or adolescence. Likewise, genetic evaluation for these
conditions should be pursued in young patients presenting with
colon cancer, even when there is no history of predisposing genetic
conditions.
Presenting symptoms include bloody stools or melena, abdominal pain, weight loss, and changes in bowel patterns. In many cases,
signs are vague, often resulting in a delay in diagnosis, sometimes
not until the disease has reached an advanced stage. The histologic subtype differs from that seen in adults, with most pediatric
tumors being either mucinous adenocarcinoma or signet ring cell
carcinoma. Pediatric patients tend to have tumors with MSI and
tend to present with more advanced disease. Treatment is based on
guidelines used in adults with CRC and consists of surgical resection when possible with chemotherapy for unresectable tumors.
Adequate lymph node removal should be performed at surgical
resection of primary tumor. Radiation therapy is useful in select
cases. Pediatric patients have a worse overall prognosis compared
with adult patients, but the reasons for this discrepancy are not
clear.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PGL syndromes (1, 2, 3, 4) caused by variants in the succinate
dehydrogenase (SDHx) genes. MEN2 (types 2A and 2B) and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) are also included in the differential diagnosis but are more often associated with a PHEO diagnosis during
adulthood (Table 555.2). Overall, germline pathogenic variants in
at least 16 different genes have been associated with predisposition
to PHEO/PGL. PHEO/PGL is also associated with congenital cyanotic heart disorders (somatic gain-­of-­function variant in EPAS1).
Hypertension is usually sustained in pediatric patients with PHEO/
PGL, who may also lack the triad of intermittent headache, palpitations, and diaphoresis typically seen in adults. Nonetheless, PHEO/
PGL accounts for <1% of pediatric hypertension. Additional manifestations may include chest pain, pallor, tremor, fever, cardiomyopathy, or exacerbations with exercise; flushing is not typical of
PHEO/PGL. The differential diagnosis is noted in Table 555.3. The
most appropriate screening test for PHEO/PGL is measurement
of fractionated plasma and/or urine metanephrine levels. Initial
imaging studies, when metanephrine levels are elevated, include
CT or MRI. When indicated, to confirm abnormal biochemistry
and/or cross-sectional imaging, 18F-­D OPA and 68Ga-­D OTATATE
(DOTA-­octreotate) PET/MRIs are the functional imaging modalities of choice given greater sensitivity and specificity than earlier
radioisotopes (Fig. 555.2). 131I-Metaiodobenzyguanidine (MIBG)
imaging may also be considered in such circumstances.

555.4 Adrenal Tumors
Jonathan D. Wasserman
See Chapters 617-­621.
The adrenal gland is comprised of two embryologically distinct
layers, the steroid-­secreting outer cortex and the catecholamine-­
secreting inner medulla. Adrenocortical tumors (ACTs) arise
from the cortex, whereas pheochromocytomas (PHEOs) derive
from the chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla. Additionally,
catecholaminergic tumors arising from the parasympathetic and
sympathetic ganglia outside the adrenal medulla are called paragangliomas (PGLs). Both ACTs and PHEOs are strongly associated with hereditary tumor predisposition syndromes, and thus
diagnosis of either in childhood should initiate a thorough family
history and referral to an expert in cancer genetics for counseling
and germline testing.
ACTs are very rare and, in children, tend to present before age 10
years. They have a female predominance and are functional (hormone secreting) in >90% of cases, primarily producing androgens
and/or glucocorticoids and causing clinically apparent virilization
with or without Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 619). ACTs may
also present as an abdominal mass or pain. In children, ACTs are
most frequently associated with Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (germline inactivating variants in the TP53 tumor-­suppressor gene) and
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), but they can also be seen
in hemihyperplasia other than that seen as part of BWS, MEN1,
McCune-­Albright syndrome, FAP, and very rarely, congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Unusual causes of bilateral nodular adrenocortical disease, which also typically present with Cushing syndrome,
include the Carney complex and macronodular adrenocortical
hyperplasia.
PHEOs/PGLs are rare tumors that are more likely to be bilateral, malignant, and secondary to a heritable tumor syndrome
when diagnosed in childhood compared with adulthood (see Chapter 621). Von Hippel-­L indau disease is the most common genetic
association in the pediatric population, followed by the familial

Fig. 555.2 Appearance of pheochromocytoma on functional imag-

ing (18F-­l -­dihydroxyphenylalanine [18F-­DOPA] PET/CT). Focal uptake is
seen in the left suprarenal fossa. (From Duh QY, Livhits M, Yeh MW. The
adrenal glands. In: Mattox KL, Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers
BM, eds. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2022. Fig. 40.18A.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 555.2  Germline Pathogenic Variants Associated with Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma
SYNDROME/NAME

GENE

TYPICAL TUMOR LOCATION AND OTHER ­ASSOCIATIONS

HYPOXIC PATHWAY: CLUSTER 1*
SDHD (familial paraganglioma type 1)†

SDHD

SDHAF2 (familial paraganglioma type 2)†
SDHC (familial paraganglioma type 3)

SDHAF2
SDHC

SDHB (familial paraganglioma type 4)

SDHB

SDHA

SDHA

VHL disease

VHL

Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma
(Reed syndrome)—fumarate hydratase variant
Hypoxia-­inducible factor (HIF) 2α
Familial erythrocytosis associated with pathogenic
variant in prolyl hydroxylase isoform 1 (PDH1)
Familial erythrocytosis associated with pathogenic
variant in prolyl hydroxylase isoform 2 (PDH2)
KIF1B

FH
HIF2A
EGLN2

Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally adrenal ­medulla, mediastinum,
abdomen, pelvis; GIST; possible pituitary adenoma
Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally abdomen and pelvis
Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally abdomen, pelvis, or chest;
GIST; possible pituitary adenoma
Abdomen, pelvis, and mediastinum; rarely adrenal medulla, skull base,
and neck; GIST; renal cell carcinoma; possible pituitary adenoma
Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally abdomen and pelvis; GIST;
possible pituitary adenoma
Adrenal medulla, frequently bilateral; occasionally paraganglioma that
may be localized from skull base to pelvis
Multifocal and metastatic; associated with hereditary
leiomyomatosis, uterine fibroids, and renal cell cancer
Paraganglioma, polycythemia, and rarely somatostatinoma
Polycythemia associated with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma

EGLN1

Polycythemia associated with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma

KIF1B

Neuroblastoma

KINASE SIGNALING PATHWAY: CLUSTER 2‡
MEN2A and MEN2B
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
MAX†
Familial pheochromocytoma

RET
NF1
MAX
TMEM127

Adrenal medulla, frequently bilateral
Adrenal or periadrenal
Adrenal medulla
Adrenal medulla; possible renal cell carcinoma

*Cluster 1 tumors are mostly extraadrenal paragangliomas (except in VHL, where most tumors are localized to the adrenal) and nearly all have a noradrenergic biochemical phenotype.
†Associated with maternal imprinting.
‡Cluster 2 tumors are usually adrenal pheochromocytomas with an adrenergic biochemical phenotype.

GIST, Gastrointestinal stromal tumor; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; VHL, von Hippel-­Lindau disease.
Modified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 16.4, p. 550.

Table 555.3  Differential Diagnosis of Pheochromocytoma-­Type Spells
ENDOCRINE CAUSES
Carbohydrate intolerance
Hyperadrenergic spells
Hypoglycemia
Pancreatic tumors (e.g., insulinoma)
Pheochromocytoma
Thyrotoxicosis
CARDIOVASCULAR CAUSES
Orthostatic hypotension
Paroxysmal cardiac arrhythmia
Pulmonary edema
Renovascular disease
Syncope (e.g., vasovagal reaction)
PSYCHOLOGIC CAUSES
Factitious (e.g., drugs, Valsalva maneuver)
Hyperventilation
Severe anxiety and panic disorders
Somatization disorder
PHARMACOLOGIC CAUSES
Chlorpropamide-­alcohol flush
Combination of a monoamine oxidase inhibitor and a decongestant
Illegal drug ingestion (cocaine, phencyclidine, lysergic acid diethylamide)
Sympathomimetic drug ingestion
Vancomycin (red man syndrome)
Withdrawal of adrenergic inhibitor
NEUROLOGIC CAUSES
Autonomic neuropathy
Diencephalic epilepsy (autonomic seizures)
Migraine headache
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
Stroke
OTHER CAUSES
Carcinoid syndrome
Mast cell disease
Recurrent idiopathic anaphylaxis
Unexplained flushing spells
Modified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 16.3, p. 547.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3168 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
The initial treatment of ACT and PHEO/PGL is resection by a surgeon experienced in the management of these tumors. Children with
suspected or confirmed PHEO/PGL require preoperative medical
management with α-­adrenergic blockade (and sometimes β-­blockade)
to mitigate risk of hypertensive crisis.
Medical therapy for metastatic ACT includes mitotane and chemotherapy with cisplatin, etoposide, and doxorubicin. Endocrine
therapy targeting hormonal overproduction may also be needed to
palliate symptoms and improve quality of life. Metastatic PHEO/
PGL has historically been poorly responsive to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Kinase inhibitor therapy and peptide-­receptor radiotherapy (such as 177Lu-­D OTATATE) have demonstrated promise in
some studies.
Long-­term follow-­up is warranted for both ACTs and PHEOs to
monitor for recurrence, particularly in the context of hereditary tumor
predisposition syndromes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

555.5 Desmoplastic Small Round Cell Tumor
Cynthia E. Herzog
Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a very rare
and aggressive mesenchymal tumor that occurs predominantly
in adolescent and young adult males. It is associated with a diagnostic chromosomal translocation between the Ewing tumor gene
and the Wilms tumor gene, t(11;22) (p13;q12), creating a chimeric gene (EWS-­WT1) that encodes a chimeric protein with oncogenic properties. Patients typically present at advanced stage with a
bulky abdominal mass, multiple peritoneal and omental implants,
and symptoms of abdominal sarcomatosis, including pain, ascites,
intestinal obstruction, hydronephrosis, and weight loss. DSRCT
mainly involves the abdominal cavity but can spread to the lymph
nodes, liver, lungs, and bones, and in ∼10% of cases, arise outside
of the abdomen. There is no standard treatment approach. Aggressive treatment with combination chemotherapy, debulking surgery,
and whole abdominopelvic irradiation results almost universally in
a poor outcome. Median survival ranges between 17 and 25 months,
and the 5-­year overall survival remains <20%. Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy may be of benefit but requires further
study. Novel targeted agents and radioimmunotherapy with monoclonal antibodies targeting different surface antigens on tumor cells
are being studied.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 556

Histiocytosis Syndromes
of Childhood
Stephan Ladisch
INTRODUCTION

Childhood histiocytoses constitute a diverse group of disorders that
are frequently severe in their clinical expression. These disorders
are individually rare and are grouped together because they have in
common a prominent proliferation or accumulation of cells of the

monocyte-­
macrophage system of bone marrow (myeloid) origin.
Although these disorders sometimes are difficult to distinguish clinically, accurate diagnosis is essential for facilitating progress in treatment. A current systematic classification of histiocytoses is based on
histopathologic, clinical, and genetic findings (Tables 556.1-­556.3) A
thorough, comprehensive evaluation of a biopsy specimen obtained at
diagnosis is critical. This evaluation includes studies such as immunostaining, molecular genetic analyses, and electron microscopy that may
require special sample processing.

CLASSIFICATION AND PATHOLOGY

Three classes of childhood histiocytosis are defined, based on histopathologic findings. The first and best known is Langerhans cell
histiocytosis (LCH), previously called histiocytosis X. LCH includes
the clinical entities of bone or skin limited disease (eosinophilic
granuloma), Hand-­Schüller-­Christian disease, and Letterer-­Siwe
disease. The normal Langerhans cell is an antigen-­presenting cell
(APC) of the skin. The hallmark of LCH in all forms is the presence
of a clonal proliferation of cells of the monocyte–dendritic cell lineage containing the characteristic electron microscopic findings of a
Langerhans cell, the Birbeck granule. This tennis racket–shaped bilamellar granule, when seen in the cytoplasm of lesional cells in LCH,
is diagnostic of the disease. The Birbeck granule expresses a newly
characterized antigen, langerin (CD207), which itself is involved in
antigen presentation to T lymphocytes. CD207 expression has been
established to be uniformly present in LCH lesions and thus becomes
an additional reliable diagnostic marker. However, it is now clear
that the LCH cell is not actually a (differentiated) Langerhans cell
but rather an immature cell of myeloid origin, possibly in an arrested
state of development. The definitive diagnosis of LCH is established
by demonstrating CD1a positivity of lesional cells, which can be done
using fixed tissue (Fig. 556.1). Lesional cells must be distinguished
from normal Langerhans cells of the skin, which are also CD1a positive but are only sparsely distributed and are not diagnostic of LCH.
The peripheral lesions usually leading to the diagnosis of LCH (e.g.,
skin, lymph node, bone) contain various proportions of Birbeck
granule–containing CD1a-­positive cells, lymphocytes, granulocytes,
monocytes, and eosinophils.
Clonality of individual lesions exists in some cases of LCH.
Importantly, an activating somatic pathogenic variant of the BRAF
gene (V600E) (part of the mitogen-­activated protein kinase [MAPK]
cell signaling pathway: Fig. 556.2) has been identified in many
patients with LCH. Studies in patients negative for BRAFV600E
have revealed pathogenic variants in other genes of the MAPK
pathway, including MAP2K1 and ARAF. With the majority of LCH
patients having one or another of these activating variants in the
MAPK pathway (see Fig. 556.2), it has been suggested that LCH is
driven by a disorder in MAPK signaling affecting cell migration and
resulting in an accumulation of LCH cells in the lesions.
In contrast to the prominence of an APC in LCH, the other
common form of histiocytosis is characterized by accumulation of activated macrophages and lymphocytes and is known as
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). This diagnosis
is the result of uncontrolled hemophagocytosis and uncontrolled
activation (upregulation) of inflammatory cytokines driven by an
abnormality of T cells. It has some similarities to the macrophage
activation syndrome. Tissue infiltration by activated CD8 T lymphocytes, activated macrophages, and hypercytokinemia are classic
features (Fig. 556.3). With the characteristic morphology of normal macrophages by light microscopy, these phagocytic cells (see
Fig. 556.1) are CD163 positive but negative for the markers that are
characteristic of LCH cells (Birbeck granules, CD1a, CD207).
The two major forms of HLH, primary and secondary, have indistinguishable pathologic findings but are important to differentiate
because of implications for treatment and prognosis. Primary HLH,
originally named familial erythrophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis,
is now known as familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
(FHLH). This disease is an autosomal recessive disorder and represents approximately 25% of patients with HLH (see Table 556.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
Table 556.1

Main Types of Histiocytosis Disease
HISTIOCYTOSIS
CLASSIFICATION GROUP

DISEASE
LANGERHANS CELL HISTIOCYTOSIS
Single system
Pulmonary
Multisystem with no risk organ
involvement
Multisystem with risk organ involvement

L
L
L
L
L

ERDHEIM-­CHESTER DISEASE
Mixed H
Indeterminate H
Extracutaneous/disseminated JXG
with MAPK pathogenic variant
­(including LALK + H. and other
genetic alterations)

L
L
L
L
L

ROSAI-­DORFMAN-­DESTOMBES
DISEASE
Familial
Sporadic classical with or without IgG4
infiltration
Sporadic extranodal with or without
IgG4 infiltration

R
R
R
R

MALIGNANCY HISTIOCYTOSES
Primary, phenotypic subtypes
Secondary, phenotypic subtypes
Histiocytoses with cutaneous or
mucosal involvement

M
M
M
C

LYMPHOHISTIOCYTOSES
Primary
Sporadic
Unknown

M
M
M
M

L, Langerhans; R, Rosai-­Dorfman-­Destombes; M, Malignant, C, cutaneous; H, hemophagocytic; JXG, juvenile xanthogranuloma; MAPK: mitogen-­activated kinase.
From Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168.
Supplementary Appendix, Table 1.

Genes are known for four of five familial HLH syndromes and other
hereditary causes of HLH; these pathogenic variants affect the ability of T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells to synthesize and
release perforin and granzymes, thus reducing cytotoxic granule
formation (Fig. 556.4). Secondary HLH includes other forms of
the syndrome triggered by a separate pathologic process, such as
infection (infection-­
associated hemophagocytic syndrome), tumor
(malignancy-­associated HLH), or primary immunodeficiency
diseases and metabolic disorders (Tables 556.4 and 556.5). Both
primary and secondary HLH affect multiple organs and are characterized by massive infiltrates of hyperactivated lymphocytes and
activated phagocytic macrophages in the involved organs, with the
lymphocytes serving as the driver of the resulting disease process.
In primary HLH, genetic pathogenic variants in multiple different steps in granule formation and release by cytotoxic T cells
have been identified (Fig. 556.5, bottom). Pathogenic variants in the
PRF1 perforin gene or the MUNC13-­4 gene are the most common
causes of defective function of the cytotoxic lymphocytes whose
activity is inhibited in primary HLH. In an analogous way, a trigger
can result in secondary HLH (see Fig. 556.5, top). A myriad of both
infectious and noninfectious processes can trigger secondary HLH
(Fig. 556.6; see Table 556.4 and Fig. 556.11). Examples of noninfectious triggers include drugs (e.g., phenytoin, Lamictal, highly active
antiretroviral therapy), hematopoietic stem cell transplantation,
chemotherapy, autoimmune diseases, inflammatory bowel disease,
cancer, and immunodeficiency states (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome,
Bruton agammaglobulinemia, severe combined immunodeficiency

3169

syndrome, chronic granulomatous disease). A complicating factor
in diagnosis is the realization that there are also both mixed genetic
variants causing primary HLH and heterozygotic variants (therefore not strictly primary HLH) also causing disease, particularly
triggered by infection.
In addition to these two most common forms of childhood histiocytosis (LCH and HLH), rarer diseases are included under this
rubric (see Table 556.2). Juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG) is characterized by vacuolated histiocytes with foamy cytoplasm in lesions
that evolve into mixed granulomas also containing eosinophils,
lymphocytes, and other cells. Erdheim-­C hester disease (ECD)
predominantly affects adults. Surface markers suggest a link among
LCH, JXG, and ECD; all three are dendritic cell diseases, and represent a spectrum, or continuum, of differentiation stages of the
abnormal dendritic cell precursors, frequently with BRAFV600E
pathogenic variants in the affected cells. Another rare form of histiocytosis is Rosai-­Dorfman disease, also known as sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy. Rosai-­
Dorfman disease
is characterized by packing of sinusoids of the lymph nodes with
hemophagocytic histiocytes, although extranodal involvement may
also be present. Last, there is a group of unequivocal malignancies
of cells of monocyte–macrophage lineage. By this definition, acute
monocytic leukemia and true malignant histiocytosis are included
among the class III histiocytoses (see Chapter 544). True neoplasms
of Langerhans cells have been reported but are extremely rare.

556.1 Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
Stephan Ladisch

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

LCH has an extremely variable presentation. The skeleton is
involved in 80% of patients and may be the only affected site, especially in children >5 years old. Bone lesions (eosinophilic granuloma) may be single or multiple and are seen most often in the
skull (Fig. 556.7). Other sites include the pelvis, femur, vertebra,
maxilla, and mandible. Lesions may be asymptomatic or associated
with pain and local swelling. Involvement of the spine may result in
collapse of the vertebral body, which can be seen radiographically
and may cause secondary compression of the spinal cord. In flat
and long bones, osteolytic lesions with sharp borders occur, and
no evidence exists of reactive new bone formation until the lesions
begin to heal. Lesions that involve weight-­bearing long bones may
result in pathologic fractures. Chronically draining, infected ears
are usually associated with destruction in the mastoid area. Bone
destruction in the mandible and maxilla may result in teeth that
appear to be free floating on radiographs. With response to therapy,
healing of bone lesions is usually complete.
Approximately 50% of patients experience skin involvement
(isolated or part of multisystem disease) at some time during the
course of disease. This is a frequently difficult-­to-­treat scaly, papular, seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp, diaper, axillary, or posterior
auricular regions (see Fig. 556.7; Figs. 556.8 and 556.9). The lesions
may spread to involve the back, palms, and soles. The exanthem
may be petechial or hemorrhagic, even in the absence of thrombocytopenia. Localized or disseminated lymphadenopathy is present
in approximately 33% of patients. Hepatosplenomegaly occurs in
approximately 20% of patients. Various degrees of hepatic malfunction may occur, including jaundice and ascites.
Gastrointestinal involvement, more common than previously
appreciated, can present as vomiting, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea,
and/or failure to thrive.
Exophthalmos, when present, may be bilateral and is caused by retroorbital accumulation of granulomatous tissue. Gingival mucous membranes
may be involved with infiltrative lesions that appear superficially like candidiasis. Otitis media is present in 30–40% of patients; deafness may follow

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3170 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 556.2  Clinical Features, Investigations, and Treatment of Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis, Erdheim-­Chester Disease, and
Rosai-­Dorfman-­Destombes Disease
MOST FREQUENT
FIRST-­LINE SYSTEMIC
THERAPIES FOR
MULTIORGAN OR
DISSEMINATED FORMS

MOST FREQUENT
SYSTEMIC SECOND-­LINE
AND SALVAGE
THERAPIES

MOST FREQUENT
REVEALING CLINICAL
FEATURES

INITIAL INVESTIGATIONS*
WHEN DIAGNOSIS IS
CONFIRMED BY BIOPSY

Childhood
Langerhans cell
histiocytosis

Bone pain or fracture;
vertebra plana†; skin
papules; lymph-­
adenomegaly; palpable
tumor; diabetes
insipidus†; exophthalmos†;
deafness or chronic
otorrhea; systemic
symptoms with fever,
hepatosplenomegaly,
or hematologic
cytopenia (risk organs);
pneumothorax

For all patients: blood tests
(full blood count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate or CRP,
albumin, renal function
tests, liver function tests,
coagulation tests); chest and
skeletal radiographs
According to initial
investigations: CT scan or MRI
focused on involved area;
brain MRI when diabetes
insipidus or any sign of CNS
involvement or visual or
hearing dysfunction; chest
high-­resolution CT scan when
signs of lung involvement

Vinblastine combined with
corticosteroids

Should be decided
according to initial
extension and risk-­organ
involvement status, as
assessed by a trained team
With risk organ
involvement: BRAF or
MEK inhibitors‡
Without risk organ
involvement:
monotherapy
or combined
chemotherapies with
cladribine, and, in less
documented approaches,
cytarabine or clofarabine

Adult Langerhans
cell histiocytosis

Bone pain or fracture;
skin papules; lymphadenopathy; palpable tumor;
diabetes insipidus†;
exophthalmos†; repeated
dental loss; pneumothorax;
dyspnea, dry cough

18F-­FDG-­PET (full body); chest,

Cytarabine, alone
or combined with
methotrexate;
­vinblastine combined
with ­corticosteroids;
­cladribine

BRAF or MEK inhibitors

Erdheim-­Chester
disease

Lower limb pain; general
symptoms (fatigue, weight
loss, fever); xanthelasma;
diabetes insipidus†;
exophthalmos†; ­dyspnea,
dry cough; signs of
cardiac involvement (e.g.,
tamponade); signs of CNS
involvement (degenerative
or tumoral)

18F-­FDG-­PET (full body); chest,

Interferon alfa-­2a or
pegylated interferon
alfa-­2a; other potential
options are anakinra,
infliximab, or sirolimus
plus corticosteroids;
BRAF or MEK inhibitors for life-­threatening
cases (e.g., CNS or heart
involvement)

BRAF or MEK inhibitors

Rosai-­Dorfman-­
Destombes
disease

Lymphadenopathy; skin
nodules; nasal ­obstruction,
epistaxis, nasal dorsum
deformity; dyspnea, dry
cough; signs of CNS or
nerve root involvement;
testicular enlargement

Children: chest x-­ray with neck
and abdominal ultrasound
scans
Adults: neck, chest, abdomen,
and pelvis CT scan; 18F-­FDG-­
PET is recommended by some
experts
All patients: brain MRI when
signs of orbital or CNS
involvement; blood tests (full
blood count, CRP, albumin,
renal function tests, liver
function tests)

Corticosteroids; sirolimus;
methotrexate; azathioprine

Several drugs or combined
chemotherapies or MEK
inhibitors reported to be
active in case reports or
small case series

abdomen, and pelvis CT scan;
brain MRI; blood tests (full
blood count, CRP, albumin,
renal function tests, liver
f­ unction tests)

abdomen, and pelvis CT scan;
brain MRI; cardiac MRI; blood
tests (full blood count, CRP,
albumin, renal function tests,
liver function tests)

18F-­FDG-­PET, 18F-­fluorodeoxyglucose PET; CNS, central nervous system..

*Aimed to determine the extent of the disease; thus each clinical feature drives specific investigation of the potentially involved organ(s), including for any signs of endocrine dysfunction or autoimmunity.
†Features that are suggestive of the disease.
‡BRAF inhibitors: vemurafenib, dabrafenib, encorafenib. MEK inhibitors: cobimetinib, trametinib, binimetinib, selumetinib.
From Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168. Fig. 1, p. 158.

destructive lesions of the middle ear. In 10–15% of patients, pulmonary
infiltrates are found on radiography. The lesions may range from diffuse
fibrosis and disseminated nodular infiltrates to diffuse cystic changes (Fig.
556.10). Rarely, pneumothorax is a complication. If the lungs are severely
involved, tachypnea and progressive respiratory failure may result.
Pituitary dysfunction or hypothalamic involvement in patients
often presents as diabetes insipidus and may also cause growth retardation. Patients suspected of having LCH should demonstrate the ability

to concentrate their urine before going to the operating room for a
biopsy. Rarely, panhypopituitarism may occur, as may primary hypothyroidism as a result of thyroid gland infiltration.
Patients with multisystem disease who are affected more severely are
those who have systemic manifestations, including fever, weight loss, malaise, irritability, and failure to thrive. These systemic manifestations will distinguish patients at high risk of mortality (i.e., risk organ–positive, or RO+,
patients) from patients at low risk of mortality (i.e., without systemic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood

3171

Table 556.3  Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
DISEASE

GENE

PROTEIN

PERCENTAGE OF
FHLH

IMMUNE
IMPAIRMENT
Cytotoxicity
Cytotoxicity; forms
pores in APCs

FHLH-­1
FHLH-­2

Unknown
PRF1

Perforin

FHLH-­3

UNC13D

Munc13–4

Rare
∼20–37, 50delT mainly
in African American/
African descent
20–33

FHLH-­4

STX11

Syntaxin

<5

FHLH-­5

STXBP2

Syntaxin-­binding
protein 2

5–20

SYNDROMES WITH PARTIAL OCULOCUTANEOUS ALBINISM
Griscelli syndrome
RAB27A
Rab27A

∼5

Cytotoxicity; vesicle
priming
Cytotoxicity; vesicle
fusion
Cytotoxicity; vesicle
fusion

Increased incidence
of CNS HLH
Mild recurrent HLH,
colitis
Colitis, hypogammaglobulinemia

Cytotoxicity; vesicle
docking
Cytotoxicity; heterogeneous defects in
NK cells
Cytotoxicity; vesicle
trafficking

Partial albinism,
silver-gray hair
Partial albinism,
bleeding tendency,
recurrent infections
Partial albinism,
bleeding tendency

Signaling in cytotoxic
NK and T cells
NK T-­cell survival and
NF-­κB signaling
IL-­2 signaling in T
cells

Hypogammaglobulinemia, lymphoma
Mild recurrent HLH,
colitis
Hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity, Hodgkin
lymphoma
Combined
­immunodeficiency,
lymphoma
Lymphoma, recurrent
infections, CD4 T-­
cell lymphopenia
Responds to recombinant IL-­18BP
Neonatal cytopenias,
hepatosplenomegaly, fevers, urticaria-­
like rashes, facial
dysmorphisms
EBV susceptibility to
HLH
EBV susceptibility

Chédiak-­Higashi
syndrome

LYST

Lyst

∼2

Hermansky-­Pudlak
syndrome type II

AP3B1

AP-­3 complex subunit
β1

Rare

EBV-­DRIVEN AND RARE CAUSES
XLP1
SH2D1A

SAP

∼7

XLP2

BIRC4

XIAP

∼2

ITK deficiency

ITK

ITK

Rare

CD27 deficiency

CD27

CD27

Rare

Signal transduction in
lymphocytes

XMEN syndrome

MAGT1

MAGT1

Rare

NLRC4
GOF
CDC42

NLRC4 Somatic or
germline variants
CDC42

NLRC4 inflammasome

Rare

Magnesium transporter, induced by
TCR stimulation
↑ IL-­18

CDC42

Rare

↑ IL-­18, variants interfere with binding
and localization of
CDC42

CD70

CD70

Rare

CTPS1

CTPS1

↓ expression and
↓ cytotoxicity of T cells
Impaired proliferation
of NKT cells

RASGRP1

RASGRP1

CD70 interaction with
CD27
Cytidine nucleotide
triphosphate
synthesis
RASGRP1

Rare
Rare

UNIQUE CLINICAL
CHARACTERISTICS

Activates RAS; defects
in T-­cell activation,
migration, proliferation
↓ cytotoxicity
↓ NKT cells

EBV susceptibility to
HLH

APCs, Antigen-­presenting cells; CNS, central nervous system; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; FHLH, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; GOF, gain of function; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; ITK, interleukin (IL)-­2–inducible T-­cell kinase; NF-­κB, nuclear factor–kappa B; NK, natural killer; TCR, T-­cell receptor; XLP-­1, 2-­X-­linked lymphoproliferative
diseases.
Adapted from Erker C, Harker-­Murray, Talano JA. Usual and unusual manifestations of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Pediatr Clin
North Am. 2017;64:91–109. Table 1.

manifestations; risk organ–negative patients). The risk organs are liver,
spleen, and the hematopoietic (bone marrow) system. The lung is not considered a risk organ. The distinction of risk-­organ involvement is important
for deciding the intensity of the treatment approach and has been addressed
in standard treatment approaches for LCH, as delineated in the Histiocyte Society protocols. Bone marrow involvement may cause anemia and

thrombocytopenia. Two uncommon but serious manifestations of LCH
are hepatic involvement (leading to fibrosis and cirrhosis) and a peculiar central nervous system (CNS) involvement characterized by ataxia,
dysarthria, and other neurologic symptoms. Hepatic involvement is associated with multi­system disease that is often already present at diagnosis.
In contrast, neurodegenerative CNS involvement, which is progressive and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fig. 556.3 Bone marrow aspirate of a child with familial (genetically

A

confirmed) hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Numerous characteristic hemophagocytic cells (which are CD163-­positive macrophages)
are seen ingesting various blood elements.

XIAP (XLP2)
4; 2%
SH2D1A (XLP1)
13; 7%

LYST
(CHS)
3; 2%

FHL, no
mutations
identified
15; 8%

RAB27A (GS2)
10; 5%

PRF1 (FHL2)
69; 37%

STX11
(FHL4)
1; 0%
STXBP2
(FHL5)
9; 5%

B
Fig. 556.1 A, Histopathology of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH)

shows eosinophilic granuloma of a lytic bone lesion of the femoral
head. Multiple LCH cells with characteristic grooved nuclei, as well as
numerous eosinophils, are visible in this mixed infiltrate. B, CD1a staining, characteristic and diagnostic of lesions with LCH cells.
ALK
CSF1R
TKR inhibitors:
CBL

NTRK1
RET

crizotinib
alectinib
selpercatinib

PTPN11

PIK3CA
PIK3CD

KRAS
NRAS
HRAS

BRAF
BRAF
ARAF
ARAF

mTOR inhibitor:
sirolimus

mTOR

MEK1
MEK2

BRAF inhibitors:
vemurafenib
dabrafenib

MEK inhibitors:
cobimetinib
trametinib

UNC13D (FHL3)
62; 33%

N = 186

Fig. 556.4 Different genetic subtypes in 171 patients with familial

hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) or FHL-­
related disease.
For each subtype, the name of the gene, the abbreviation of the disease subtype, the absolute number, and the percentage are shown.
Furthermore, we include as FHL one subgroup of 15 patients with either familial recurrence or refractory/recurrent disease despite specific
therapy and/or repeatedly documented severe functional defect in degranulation or cytotoxicity assays. (From Cetica V, Sieni E, Pende D,
et al. Genetic predisposition to hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis:
Report on 500 patients from the Italian registry. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2016;137:188–196. Fig. 2, p. 191.)

histopathologically characterized by gliosis and has no definitive treatment,
may be observed only many years after the initial diagnosis of LCH. These
manifestations are not known to be associated with LCH cells, Birbeck granules, CD1a positivity, or any other indication of LCH cell infiltration, raising questions about their pathogenesis and the suggestion that they may be
cytokine-­mediated.
After tissue biopsy, which is diagnostic of LCH and is easiest to perform on skin or bone lesions, a comprehensive clinical and laboratory
evaluation is essential and should be undertaken. This should include
a series of studies in all patients: CBC, liver function tests, coagulation
studies, skeletal survey, chest radiograph, and measurement of urine
osmolality. In addition, detailed evaluation of any organ system shown
to be involved by physical examination or by these studies should be performed to establish the extent of disease before initiation of treatment.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS
Proliferation survival

Fig. 556.2 Proteins of the MAP kinase cell-­signaling pathway involved
by activating pathogenic variants, and inhibitors already reported to
benefit patients with histiocytosis. (From Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168. Fig. 1.)

The clinical course of single-­system disease (usually bone, lymph node,
or skin) generally is benign, with a high chance of spontaneous remission.
Therefore treatment should be minimal and should be directed at arresting the progression of a bone lesion that could result in permanent damage before it resolves spontaneously. Curettage or, less often but especially

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
Table 556.4  Infections Associated with Hemophagocytic
Syndrome
VIRAL
Adenovirus
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Dengue virus
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV)
Enteroviruses
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV1, HSV2)
Human herpesviruses (HHV6, HHV8)
HIV
Influenza viruses
Parvovirus B19
Varicella-­zoster virus (VZV)
Hepatitis viruses
Measles
Parechovirus
BACTERIAL
Babesia microti
Brucella abortus
Enteric gram-­negative rods
Haemophilus influenzae
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
FUNGAL
Candida albicans
Cryptococcus neoformans
Histoplasma capsulatum
Fusarium

Table 556.5  Other Primary Immunodeficiency and
Inherited Metabolic Diseases That May Be
Complicated (Rarely) by Hemophagocytic
Lymphohistiocytosis
PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICENCY DISEASES
SCID
CIDs
DiGeorge syndrome
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Ataxia telangiectasia
Dyskeratosis congenita
ORAI-­1 deficiency
Chronic granulomatous disease
Other PIDs
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
STAT1 gain of function
CTLA4
GATA2
TRAPS
FMF
NEMO
TIM3
DOCK8
STAT2
STAT3
PIK3CD

PARASITIC
Leishmania donovani
Plasmodium

INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Multiple sulfatase deficiency
Biotinidase deficiency
Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency/Wolman disease
Methylmalonic acidemia
Galactosemia
Gaucher disease
Pearson syndrome
Galactosialidosis
Propionic acidemia
Cobalamin C disease
Niemann-­Pick disease
LCHAD deficiency

From Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of
Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003, p. 1381.

CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION
COG6

MYCOBACTERIAL
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
RICKETTSIAL
Coxiella burnetii
Other rickettsial diseases

3173

From Canna SW, March RA. Pediatric hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Blood.
2020;135(16):1332–1343. Table 5.

when a weight-­bearing bone is involved, corticosteroid injection or low-­
dose local radiation therapy (5-­6 Gy) may accomplish this goal.
In contrast, multisystem disease requires treatment with systemic multiagent chemotherapy. Several different regimens have been proposed,
but central elements are the inclusion of vinblastine and corticosteroids,
both of which have been found to be very effective in treating LCH. Etoposide has been excluded from the standard treatment of multisystem
LCH, which is treated with multiple agents, designed to reduce mortality,
reactivation of disease, and long-­term consequences. The response rate to
therapy is quite high, and mortality in severe LCH has been substantially
reduced by multiagent chemotherapy, especially if the diagnosis is made
accurately and expeditiously. The most recent treatment results associated
with lengthened continuation therapy (HS LCH-III) show a greater than
85% survival rate in severe (RO+) multisystem disease and a reduced rate
of reactivation.
Experimental therapies are suggested only for unresponsive disease
(often in very young children with multisystem disease and organ dysfunction who have not responded to multiagent initial treatment) and reactivation of RO+ disease in risk organs but not in reactivation of mild disease
(any risk organ–negative reactivations) (see Fig. 556.2). The approaches

include immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporine/antithymocyte
globulin and possibly imatinib, 2-­chlorodeoxyadenosine, and clofarabine.
With the discovery of the BRAFV600E pathogenic variant causing hyperactivation of the MAPK pathway in LCH cells, pharmacologic inhibition
of BRAF and pharmacologic inhibition of MEK are currently the subject of
clinical trials as therapeutic approaches for resistant disease.
Late (fibrotic) complications, whether hepatic or pulmonary, are irreversible and require organ transplantation to be definitively treated. Current treatment approaches and experimental protocols for both LCH and
HLH can be obtained at the Histiocyte Society website (http://www.his
tiocytesociety.org). An unresolved problem is treatment of the (usually
late-­onset) severe, progressive, and intractable LCH-­associated neurodegenerative syndrome. This is also under investigation for response to
experimental therapies, including the pharmacologic inhibitors of the
MAPK pathway. Regarding current treatment recommendations for
LCH as well as HLH, the continuing rapid advances in understanding
of their pathogeneses is likely to result in further rapid development and
validation of new therapeutic approaches.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3174 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Viral
infection

T lymphocytes
CD8+

TCD8+ activated
+++++

Macrophages
Hemophagocytosis
activation
+++++
TNF++
IFN
+++
IL6 ++

Tissues infiltration,
destruction

Cytoxic granule

Activation

Perforin/FHL2

Rab27a/Griscelli Syndrome
Docking

Munc18-2/FHL5
Syntaxin 11/FHL4

Priming

Fusion

Munc13-4/FHL3

Cytotoxic T
Lymphocyte

TCR

Target cell

MHC-Ag

Fig. 556.5 Inborn errors in the cytotoxic activity of lymphocytes. Top, Immune mechanisms leading to the occurrence of a hemophagocytic syn-

drome. Following a viral infection, antigen-­specific CD8+ T lymphocytes undergo massive expansion and activation and secrete high levels of interferon (IFN)-­γ. The overwhelming activated effector cells induce excessive macrophage activation and proinflammatory cytokine production, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α and interleukin-­6 (IL-­6). Macrophages spontaneously phagocytose blood elements (platelets, red blood cells, and
a polymorphonuclear cell shown here). Activated lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrate various organs, resulting in massive tissue necrosis and
organ failure. Bottom, Genetic variants causing hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytic syndrome (HLH) affect a precise step of the cytotoxic machinery:
granule content, docking, priming, or fusion. Only the defects causing Griscelli syndrome and familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) are
shown. MHC-­Ag, Major histocompatibility complex antigen; TCR, T-­cell receptor. (From Pachlopnik Schmid J, Cote M, Menager MM, et al. Inherited
defects in cytotoxic lymphocyte activity. Immunol Rev. 2010;235:10–23.)

Pathogenic variant
- Perforin
- Munc13-4
- Syntaxin 11
- Rab27a
- Lyst
- Others

Malignancy
- Lymphoma
- Leukemia
- Others

Acquired immune dysregulation
- Immune-modulating drugs
(methotrexate, gold salts,
sulfasalazine, NSAID, ...)
- Cytokine-antagonists
(ani-THF-α, anti-IL-1, anti-IL-6, ...)
- Others

TR

IG

GE
R

HLH

Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
disorders
- Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis
- Systemic lupus erythematosus
- Kawasaki disease
- Inflammatory bowel disease
- Others

CYTOKINE STORM
-

Infection
Viral (Herpesviridae, ...)
Bacterial (Mycobacterium, ...)
Fungal (Candida, ...)
Parasitic (Histoplasma, ...)

Fig. 556.6 Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) comprises a heterogeneous spectrum of disorders that all present with severe cytokine

storm and life-­threatening immunopathology. HLH can be caused by pathogenic variants in genes involved in granule-­mediated cytotoxicity but can
also be acquired on a multitude of underlying autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases or malignancies, with possible facilitation by immunomodulating therapies. Clinical manifestations of HLH are generally precipitated by an infection. IL, Interleukin; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs. (From Brisse E, Wouters CH, Matthys P. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH): a heterogeneous spectrum of cytokine-­driven immune
disorders. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2015;26:263–280. Fig. 2, p. 267.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood

A

3175

B

G

C

F

E

D

H

Fig. 556.7 Langerhans cell histiocytosis. A, Young child with disseminated Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) skin lesions. B, Chest CT scan showing multiple cysts. C, X-­rays showing LCH involvement of the skull. D, X-­rays showing LCH involvement of the mandible, as revealed by so-­called
floating teeth. E, MRI showing a femoral lesion revealed by a fracture. F, CT scan showing the spinal column. G and H, MRI showing degenerative
neuro-­LCH on axial T2 spin echo-­weighted images, which reveal symmetrical hyperintensities within the cerebellar corpus medullare (arrows). (From
Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168. Fig. 2.)

A

C

B

D

E

Fig. 556.8 Variable appearance of Langerhans cell histiocytosis of skin. A, Eczematous dermatitis. B, Hypopigmented, eroded papules. C, Hypo-

pigmented macules. D and E, Crusted papulonodules. Presentation does not reflect presence or absence of multisystem disease. Despite similar
appearance, the patient in D had a single lesion, whereas the patient in E had organ involvement. (From Simko SJ, Garmezy B, Abhyankar H, et al.
Differentiating skin-­limited and multisystem Langerhans cell histiocytosis. J Pediatr. 2014;165:990–996. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3176 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
The HLH syndrome
(All conditions that meet syndrome definition)

HLH
Disease
mimics

Rheumatologic HLH
(R-HLH/MAS)
HLH
disease

Malignancy
associated
HLH
(M-HLH)

A

B

Fig. 556.9 Langerhans cell histiocytosis presenting as “blueberry

muffin” rash in neonate. Multiple firm, nonblanching, purple papules
affecting the head and neck (A) and the body (B). (From Schmitt AR,
Wetter DA, Camilleri MJ, et al. Langerhans cell histiocytosis presenting
as a blueberry muffin rash. Lancet. 2017;390:155.)

Fig. 556.10 High-­resolution coronal CT image (lung window) reveals

diffuse lung cysts with parenchymal destruction in bilateral lung fields.
(From Chauhan L, Aggarwal N. Honey-­comb Langerhans cell histiocytosis. J Pediatr. 2016;168:248. Fig. 2.)

556.2 Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
Stephan Ladisch
See the previous section on “Classification and Pathology,” Table 556.3,
and Chapter 174.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Primary FHLH and secondary HLH have a remarkably similar, clinically
indistinguishable presentation (Fig. 556.11). It consists of a generalized
disease process, most often with fever (90–100%), maculopapular and/or
petechial rash (10–60%), weight loss, and irritability. The initial clinical presentation can vary but is usually severe. In the case of secondary HLH, onset
may be camouflaged by a primary disease process. Acute presentations of
HLH include a hyperferritinemic septic shock–like picture, acute respiratory
distress, seizures, ataxia, focal lesions, or coma (because of CNS infiltration).
Other features that are frequently present result from bone marrow involvement and pancytopenia or hepatic dysfunction.

Other
HLH
(HLH-NOS)

HLH with
immune
compromise
(IC-HLH)

latrogenic
HLH
(Rx-HLH)

Familial HLH
(F-HLH)

Forme fruste HLH
(incompletely meeting
HLH definition)

Fig. 556.11 Spectrum of the hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis

(HLH) syndrome. The HLH syndrome includes all conditions meeting
consensus diagnostic criteria. This syndrome includes conditions that
would benefit from HLH-­directed immunosuppressive therapies, which
are termed “HLH disease,” and those conditions that would not benefit
from such therapy or require entirely different treatments, termed “HLH
disease mimics.” HLH disease includes recognizable subgroups: familial
HLH with clear genetic etiology, HLH associated with malignancy, HLH associated with rheumatologic conditions (also called MAS), HLH observed
after immune-­activating therapies (iatrogenic HLH, also called cytokine
release syndrome), HLH associated with immune compromise (either primary immune deficiency or treatment-­related immune suppression), and
HLH not associated with other specific conditions. Recognition of these
subcategories is valuable as this may alter treatment. (From Jordan MB,
Allen CE, Greenberg J, et al. Challenges in the diagnosis of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: Recommendations from the North American
Consortium (NACHO). Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2019;66:e27929.)

Children with primary HLH are generally <1-­2 years old, and children with secondary HLH typically present at an older age, but both
forms may present at any age. Physical examination often reveals hepatosplenomegaly (70–100%), lymphadenopathy (20–50%), respiratory
distress (40–90%), jaundice, and symptoms of CNS involvement (50%)
that are not unlike those of aseptic meningitis, CNS vasculitis, or acute
demyelinating encephalomyelitis. MRI may demonstrate systemic T2
weighted/fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensities in gray and white matter and in supratentorial and infratentorial regions (Fig. 556.12). The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis
(50–90%) associated with CNS involvement in primary HLH is characterized by cells that are the same phagocytic macrophages found
in the peripheral blood or bone marrow. HLH may initially or only
manifest CNS symptoms. Isolated neuroinflammation may be present in the absence of cytopenias, splenomegaly, or other systemic features. Approximately 35% will eventually develop diagnostic features
of HLH (Table 556.6). The interval from neurologic onset to eventual
diagnosis often exceeds 2 years. In CNS isolated disease, the diagnosis of familial HLH is often made by whole exome sequencing for
other diseases.
The diagnosis of HLH is arrived at in two stages. The first stage is
based on a set of eight clinical and laboratory findings, with the presence of five of the eight being diagnostic of HLH. The eight findings,
formulated by the Histiocyte Society, are fever, splenomegaly, cytopenia of two cell lines (in 90–100%), hypertriglyceridemia (80–100%)
or hypofibrinogenemia (65–85%), hyperferritinemia (≥500 but often
>10,000), extremely elevated soluble CD25 (interleukin-­2 receptor), reduced or absent NK cell activity, and bone marrow, CSF, or
lymph node evidence of hemophagocytosis (see Table 556.6). The
second stage involves genetic analysis and is undertaken as quickly as
possible but generally requires ∼2 weeks to complete and should not
interfere with initiation of treatment (Fig. 556.13). The genetic findings
and family history will determine whether the diagnosis is (autosomal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
A

Frequency of the neurologic
manifestations in isolated CNS-HLH
Gait disturbance
Seizures
Headache
Limb weakness / motor impairment
Visual abnormalities
Speech abnormalities
n=38
Vomiting
Altered mental status
Abnormal tone
Sensory impairment
Tremors / movement disorder
Psychiatric symptoms / mood disorder / personality change
Cognitive impairment / regression
0

20

40
%

60

3177

B

80

Neuroradiologic findings on MRI Imaging
Diffuse/multifocal white matter lesions
Cerebellar involvement
Periventricular changes
Brainstem involvement
Edema / swelling
Volume loss / atrophy
Spinal cord involvement
Grey matter involvement
Leptomeningeal enhancement
Hemorrhagic lesions

n=38

0

20

40

60

80 100

%
CNS biopsy results
Lymphohistiocytic infiltrations
Necrosis / destructive inflammation
Granulomas
Hemorrhage
Microinfarcts
0

5

10
n

15

20

Fig. 556.12 A, Frequencies of neurologic manifestations, neuroradiologic findings, and histopathologic central nervous system (CNS) biopsy

results in 38 patients with isolated CNS hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). B, Examples of CNS MRI imaging in patients with isolated CNS-­
HLH. Upper panels, T2 images in one patient from 2016 (left) and 2017 (right) demonstrate cerebral atrophy with diffuse white matter involvement.
Neuroradiologic findings on MRI show imaging abnormalities. Lower panels, T2 images from another patient reveal multiple nodular lesions in the
pons, cerebellum, and white matter. (From Blincoe A, Heeg M, Campbell PK, et al. Neuroinflammatory disease as an isolated manifestation of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. J Clin Immunol. 2020;40:901–916. Fig. 1.)

recessive) primary HLH, secondary HLH, or a genetic hybrid form of
HLH.
Hemophagocytosis is not specific for HLH and should be considered
only in the context of the diagnostic criteria. No absolute clinical or
laboratory distinction can be made between primary HLH and secondary HLH. In some subgroups of HLH, perforin assays may be normal.
Similarly, some patients with primary FHLH have no known identifiable pathogenic variant, while new genetic variants associated with
HLH continue to be discovered.
In the absence of either (1) a documented genetic defect coupled with
defective NK cell cytotoxicity or (2) frank hemophagocytosis, care should
be taken in making the diagnosis of secondary HLH, given the implication to use cytotoxic chemotherapy. The nonspecific criteria (indicative
of inflammation) used to diagnose HLH can also be seen in diseases
that are not always associated with hemophagocytosis (e.g., overwhelming acute viral infection with appropriate T-­cell activation), in which the
cytotoxic and immunosuppressive therapy used in treating HLH might be
contraindicated.
Macrophage activation syndrome, particularly in the context of
systemic-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) or infection, has many
similarities to HLH (see Chapter 196). Indeed, whole exome sequencing of patients with systemic-­onset JIA or those with fatal influenza has
revealed a higher than expected incidence of HLH genes.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Therapy for primary HLH (autosomal recessive genetic disease or
familial occurrence) consists of a combination of etoposide, dexamethasone, cyclosporine, and intrathecal methotrexate. It should be
stressed that pancytopenia and the presence of an infection are not
contraindications to cytotoxic or immunosuppressive therapy (etoposide and steroid, cyclosporine or antithymocyte globulin for maintenance therapy). Paradoxically they ameliorate the HLH. Emapalumab,
a monoclonal antibody against interferon-­γ, is approved for recurrent,
refractory, or progressive familial HLH or for patients who cannot
tolerate chemotherapy. The goal for all therapies is to reach the point
of initiating stem cell transplantation, to date the only known potentially curative treatment for primary HLH, effective in achieving cure
in >60% of patients. Chemotherapy is inadequate for sustained cure of
primary HLH, which is ultimately fatal without transplantation.
In secondary HLH, it is critical that the underlying disease (e.g., infection, malignancy) be identified and successfully treated. The diagnostic
distinction between primary HLH and secondary HLH sometimes can be
based on the acute onset of secondary HLH in the presence of an already
documented infection or cancer, including leukemia, and certain autoimmune or immunodeficiency disorders. In this case, treatment of the
underlying infection is coupled with supportive care. If the diagnosis is
made in the setting of iatrogenic immunodeficiency, immunosuppressive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3178 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 556.6  Diagnostic Criteria for the HLH-2004 Trial and Their Relevance for Clinical Diagnosis
HLH2004 ENTRY CRITERIA

COMMENT
In a patient with known variants, treatment before full development of HLH
may be appropriate, but genetic studies usually just help to define HLH
recurrence risk, not the presence of an active disease state.

A. Molecular diagnosis consistent with HLH: Pathogenic variants
of PRF1, UNC13D, STXBP2, Rab27a, STX11, SH2D1A, or XIAP or
B. Five of the eight criteria listed below are fulfilled
1. Fever ≥38.3°C
2. Splenomegaly

Nearly universal in untreated HLH.
Although splenomegaly and hepatomegaly are very common in HLH,
­adenopathy is not.
Cytopenias are ubiquitous in HLH. Lack of cytopenias should make one
doubt a diagnosis of HLH, except in the special case of isolated, CNS-­only
disease.

3.	Cytopenias (affecting at least two of three lineages in the
peripheral blood): Hemoglobin <9 g/dL (in infants <4 wk:
hemoglobin <10 g/dL), platelets <100 × 103/mL, neutrophils < 1
× 103/mL
4.	Hypertriglyceridemia (>265 mg/dL) and/or hypofibrinogenemia
(<150 mg/dL)
5.	Hemophagocytosis in bone marrow or spleen or lymph nodes
or liver
6.	Low or absent NK-­cell activity

Low fibrinogen in the context of inflammation is paradoxical and one of the
more distinctive features of HLH.
Not specific to HLH, or essential for the diagnosis, but helpful as a disease
marker. Of note, it is often not evident early after disease onset.
More modern and robust assays measuring perforin levels and its degranulation should replace this assay for reliable diagnosis of HLH. This assay is
not specific for primary HLH.
Most patients have much higher levels than this threshold suggests.
As HLH is a T-­cell driven disease, this assay is extremely informative for
­diagnosis and response to therapy.

7.	Ferritin >500 ng/mL
8.	Elevated soluble CD25 (soluble IL-­2 receptor α)

HLH, Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; NK, natural killer; IL, interleukin; CNS, central nervous system.
From Jordan MB, Allen CE, Greenberg J, et al. Challenges in the diagnosis of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: Recommendations from the North American Consortium (NACHO). Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2019;66(11):e27929. Table 1.

Male

Suspected HLH

Albinism
Microscopic analysis of
hair and blood smear

Flow cytometric assays

XLP1:
SAP deficiency
Lymphoma
EBV infection

XLP2:
XIAP deficiency
Splenomegaly
Colitis

SAP/XIAP

Perforin

Granule release
assay on resting
NK cells

Defective

Defective

Defective

PRF1 gene mutation
studies

Granule release
assay on IL-2activated NK cells

Chediak-Higashi
syndrome:
Giant lysosomes in
leukocytes.
Evenly distributed,
regular melanin
granules larger than
those in normal hair.
Primary neurologic
disease.

FHL2
Defective

Restoration

Western blotting
for Munc13-4
protein/UNC13D
gene variant
studies

Western blotting
for Syntaxin11
protein/STX11 or
STXBP2 gene
variant studies

FHL3

Griscelli syndrome
type 2:
Hair with bigger and
irregular melanin
granules mainly near
medulla.
Under polarized light
microscopy, hair
appears
monotonously white.

FHL4
No variants

FHL1 likely

FHL5: Colitis
and
hypogammaglobulinemia

Hermansky-Pudlak
syndrome type 2:
Characteristic eye
findings.
Increased bleeding.
Neutropenia.

Fig. 556.13 Algorithm for identification of genetic causes of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). The HLH algorithm is based on flow

cytometry assays: all the patients fitting into HLH criteria, irrespective of age and clinical presentations, should be screened for perforin expression
and granule release assay. All male patients should be screened for signaling lymphocyte activation molecule–associated protein (SAP) and X-­linked
inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) expression. For patients clinically presenting with albinism, microscopic analysis of hair and blood smear is essential for differential diagnosis of Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome, Griscelli syndrome, and Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome. Based on the defect in expression of a particular protein identified, molecular characterization for the respective gene should be performed for confirmation of diagnosis. EBV,
Epstein-­Barr virus; FHL, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IL, interleukin; NK, natural killer. (Adapted from Madkaikar M, Shabrish S, Desai M. Current updates on classification, diagnosis and treatment of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Indian J Pediatr. 2016;83:434–443.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
treatment should be withdrawn and supportive care instituted along
with specific therapy for the underlying infection. In many patients the
prognosis is excellent without additional specific treatment other than
treating the triggering infection. However, when a treatable infection or
other cause cannot be documented, and when the clinical presentation is
severe, the prognosis for secondary HLH is as poor as for primary HLH.
These patients should receive the identical initial 8-­week chemotherapeutic approach, including etoposide, even in the face of cytopenias. In both
primary and secondary HLH, the cytotoxic effect of etoposide on macrophages interrupts cytokine production and the consequent cytokine storm,
the hemophagocytic process, and the accumulation of macrophages, all of
which may contribute to the pathogenesis of infection-­associated hemophagocytic syndrome. A broad spectrum of infectious agents, including
viruses (e.g., cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, human herpesvirus 6),
fungi, protozoa, and bacteria, may trigger secondary HLH, often in the
setting of immunodeficiency (see Table 556.3). A thorough evaluation for
infection should be undertaken in immunodeficient patients with hemophagocytosis. The same syndrome may be identified in conjunction with a
rheumatologic disorder (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, Kawasaki disease) or a neoplasm (e.g., leukemia). In these patients, effective treatment
of the underlying disease (e.g., infection, cancer) is critical and may itself
lead to ultimate resolution of the hemophagocytosis. In addition anakinra
or ruxolitinib (JAK inhibitors) has been used in patients with secondary
HLH.

3179

556.3 Other Histiocytoses
Stephan Ladisch
Other rare histiocytoses that have been named for their clinical presentation include xanthogranuloma in JXG, ECD, and striking lymphadenopathy in Rosai-­
Dorfman disease (sinus histiocytosis with massive
lymphadenopathy). JXG and ECD may require systemic treatment with
cytotoxic chemotherapy or potentially MAPK pathway inhibitors, reflecting the presence of a BRAF pathogenic variant. Rosai-­Dorfman disease
usually is not treated, although the massive lymphadenopathy may require
intervention because of its tendency to cause physical obstruction.
Rare histiocytic malignancies include acute monocytic leukemia, true
malignant histiocytosis, and histiocytic sarcoma. Also included is the more
recently identified histiocytic malignancy, ALK+ histiocytosis, which is a
systemic histiocytic proliferation presenting as disseminated disease in
infants. The cells bear histiocytic markers (CD68, CD163) but not those of
LCH (CD1a, BRAF V600E). Whereas all these rare histiocytic malignancies are referred to as histiocytoses because of their monocyte-­macrophage
lineage, they are better considered under the rubric of true proliferative
malignancies of the monocyte–macrophage lineage.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Nephrology

PART

XXI

557.1 Anatomy of the Glomerulus
Edward J. Nehus
The kidneys lie in the retroperitoneal space slightly above the level
of the umbilicus. They range in length and weight, respectively, from
approximately 6 cm and 24 g in a full-­term newborn to ≥12 cm and
150 g in an adult. The kidney (Fig. 557.1) has an outer layer, the cortex,
which contains the glomeruli, proximal and distal convoluted tubules,
and collecting ducts, and an inner layer, the medulla, which contains
the straight portions of the tubules, the loops of Henle, the vasa recta,
and the terminal collecting ducts (Fig. 557.2).
The blood supply to each kidney usually consists of a main renal
artery that arises from the aorta, although multiple renal arteries
can occur. The main artery divides into segmental branches within
the medulla, becoming the interlobar arteries that pass through the
medulla to the corticomedullary junction. At this point, the interlobar arteries branch to form the arcuate arteries, which run parallel
to the surface of the kidney. Interlobular arteries originate from the
arcuate arteries and give rise to the afferent arterioles of the glomeruli. Specialized muscle cells in the wall of the afferent arteriole and
specialized distal tubular cells adjacent to the glomerulus (macula
densa) form the juxtaglomerular apparatus that controls the secretion of renin. The afferent arteriole divides into the glomerular

Cortical nephron
Efferent
arteriole

Arcuate
artery

Renal vein

Glomeruli
Arcuate vein
Cortex

Renal
artery
Ureter

Juxtamedullary
nephron

Interlobular
Artery
Vein

Interlobar
Artery
Vein

Vasa
recta

Thick
loop
Henle

Collecting
duct
Inner zone

Interlobular
Artery
Vein

Medulla

Interlobar
Artery
Vein

Afferent
arteriole

Outer
stripe

Introduction to
Glomerular Diseases

Outer zone

Chapter 557

Inner
stripe

Glomerular Disease

capillary network, which then recombines into the efferent arteriole
(see Fig. 557.2). The juxtamedullary efferent arterioles are larger
than those in the outer cortex and provide the blood supply, as the
vasa recta, to the tubules and medulla.
Each kidney contains approximately one million nephrons (each
consisting of a glomerulus and associated tubules). There is a large
distribution of normal nephron numbers in humans, ranging from
200,000 to 1.8 million nephrons per kidney. This variation can
have major pathophysiologic significance as a risk factor for the
later development of hypertension and progressive renal dysfunction. In humans, the formation of nephrons is complete at 34-­36
weeks of gestation, but functional maturation with tubular growth
and elongation continues during the first decade of life. Because
new nephrons cannot be formed after birth, any disease that results
in progressive loss of nephrons can lead to renal insufficiency. A
decreased number of nephrons secondary to low birthweight, prematurity, and/or unknown genetic or environmental factors has
been implicated as a significant risk factor for the development of
primary hypertension and progressive renal dysfunction in adulthood. A low nephron number presumably results in hyperfiltration
and eventual sclerosis of overworked nephron units.
The glomerular network of specialized capillaries serves as the filtering mechanism of the kidney. The glomerular capillaries are lined
by endothelial cells (Fig. 557.3) and have very thin cytoplasm that
contains many holes (fenestrations). The glomerular basement membrane (GBM) forms a continuous layer between the endothelial and
mesangial cells on one side and the epithelial cells on the other. The
membrane has three layers: a central electron-­dense lamina densa;
the lamina rara interna, which lies between the lamina densa and the
endothelial cells; and the lamina rara externa, which lies between the

Cortex

Section 1

Thin
loop
Henle

Medulla
Ducts of
Bellini

Fig. 557.1 Gross morphology of the renal circulation. (From Pitts RF.
Physiology of the Kidney and Body Fluids, 3rd ed. Chicago: Year Book
Medical Publishers; 1974.)

Fig. 557.2 Comparison of the blood supplies of cortical and

juxtamedullary nephrons. (From Pitts RF. Physiology of the Kidney and
Body Fluids, 3rd ed. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1974.)

3180
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 557 u Introduction to Glomerular Diseases

3181

557.2 Glomerular Filtration
US

Edward J. Nehus
fp

LRE
LD
LRI

c

B
En

f

j

Cap

Fig. 557.3 Electron micrograph of the normal glomerular capillary

(Cap) wall demonstrating the endothelium (En) with its fenestrations (f);
the glomerular basement membrane (B) with its central dense layer, the
lamina densa (LD), and adjoining lamina rara interna (LRI) and externa
(LRE) (white arrow); and the epithelial cell foot processes (fp) with their
thick cell coat (c). The glomerular filtrate passes through the endothelial
fenestrae, crosses the basement membrane, and passes through the
filtration slits (black arrow) between the epithelial cell foot processes
to reach the urinary space (US) (×60,000). j, Junction between two endothelial cells. (From Farquhar MG, Kanwar YS. Functional organization
of the glomerulus: state of the science in 1979. In: Cummings NB, Michael AF, Wilson CB, eds. Immune Mechanisms in Renal Disease. New
York: Plenum; 1982.)

Afferent arteriole
Bowman
capsule

Efferent arteriole
Distal tubule
Endothelial cell
fenestration
Endothelial
cell

Bowman
space
Parietal
epithelial
cell

Mesangial
cell

Lamina rara interna
Lamina densa
Lamina rara externa

Mesangial
channel
Mesangial
matrix
Epithelial cell
foot process
Visceral epithelial
cell

Kidney function is best measured as the glomerular filtration rate
(GFR). As the blood passes through the glomerular capillaries,
the plasma is filtered through the glomerular capillary walls. Small
plasma molecules filter freely (e.g., electrolytes, glucose, phosphate,
urea, creatinine, peptides, low molecular weight proteins), whereas
larger molecules are retained in the circulation (such as albumin and
globulins). The filtrate is collected in Bowman’s space and enters the
tubules. There its composition is modified by tightly regulated secretion and absorption of solute and fluid by the multiple tubular segments of the nephron and the ductal system, until it exits the kidney,
via the ureter, as urine.
Glomerular filtration is the net result of opposing forces applied
across the capillary wall. The force for ultrafiltration (glomerular
capillary hydrostatic pressure) is a result of systemic arterial pressure, modified by the tone of the afferent and efferent arterioles.
The major force opposing ultrafiltration is glomerular capillary
oncotic pressure, created by the gradient between the high concentration of plasma proteins within the capillary and the almost
protein-­free ultrafiltrate in Bowman’s space. Filtration may be modified by the rate of glomerular plasma flow, the hydrostatic pressure
within Bowman’s space, and/or the permeability of the glomerular
capillary wall.
Although glomerular filtration begins at approximately the sixth
week of fetal life, kidney function is not necessary for normal intrauterine homeostasis because the placenta serves as the major fetal
excretory organ. After birth, the GFR increases until renal growth
ceases (by age ∼18-­20 years in most people). To compare GFRs of
children and adults, the GFR is standardized to the body surface
area (1.73 m2) of an “ideal” 70-­kg adult. Even after correction for
surface area, the GFR of a child does not approximate adult values
until the second to third year of life (Fig. 557.5). The GFR may be
estimated by measurement of the serum creatinine level. Creatinine
is derived from muscle metabolism. Its production is typically constant, and its excretion is primarily through glomerular filtration,
although tubular secretion can become important as the serum
creatinine rises in renal insufficiency. In contrast to the concentration of blood urea nitrogen, which is affected by the state of hydration and nitrogen balance, the serum creatinine level is primarily
influenced by muscle mass and the level of glomerular function.

Proximal tubule
structures.

160

CCR (mL/min/1.73 m2 surface area)

Fig. 557.4 Schematic depiction of the glomerulus and surrounding

2 SD

120

lamina densa and the epithelial cells. The visceral epithelial cells cover
the capillary and project cytoplasmic foot processes, which attach to
the lamina rara externa. Between the foot processes are spaces or filtration slits. The mesangium (mesangial cells and matrix) lies between
the glomerular capillaries on the endothelial cell side of the GBM and
forms the medial part of the capillary wall. The mesangium may serve
as a supporting, stalk-­like structure for the glomerular capillaries and
probably has a role in the regulation of glomerular blood flow, filtration, and the removal of macromolecules (such as immune complexes)
from the glomerulus. The Bowman’s capsule, which surrounds the
glomerulus, is composed of a basement membrane, which is continuous with the basement membranes of the glomerular capillaries and
the proximal tubules, and the parietal epithelial cells, which are adjacent to the visceral epithelium (Fig. 557.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

80

2 SD

40

0
0

1

2

3
Age (yr)

4

Normal adult

Fig. 557.5 Changes in the normal value of the glomerular filtration
rate, as measured by the creatinine clearance (Ccr), when standardized to mL/min/1.73 m2 of body surface area. The solid line depicts the
mean, and the shaded area includes 2 standard deviations (SDs). (From
McCrory W. Developmental Nephrology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 1972.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3182 Part XXI u Nephrology
The serum creatinine is of value only in estimating the GFR under
steady-­state conditions. A patient can have a normal serum creatinine level with decreased renal function very shortly after the onset
of acute kidney injury. In this clinical setting, serum creatinine may
take days to reach the steady state. Furthermore, kidney function
may fall significantly before a noticeable rise in serum creatinine
occurs.
The precise measurement of the GFR is accomplished by quantitating the clearance of a substance that is freely filtered across the
capillary wall and is neither reabsorbed nor secreted by the tubules.
The clearance (Cs) of such a substance is the volume of plasma that,
when completely cleared of the contained substance, would yield an
equal quantity of that substance excreted in the urine over a specified time. Renal clearance is calculated by the following formula:



C
U s  mg/mL   V  mL /min  / Ps  mg/mL 
s  mL/min 



where Cs equals the clearance of substance s, Us reflects the urinary
concentration of s, V represents the urinary flow rate, and Ps equals the
plasma concentration of s. To correct the clearance for individual body
surface area, the formula is:
Corrected clearance (mL/min/1.73m2 )
 C s (mL/min) 

1.73

Surface area (m2 )
The GFR is optimally measured by the clearance of inulin, a fructose polymer having a molecular weight of approximately 5.7 kDa.
Because the inulin clearance technique is cumbersome, radioisotopes are commonly used to measure GFR in clinical practice. GFR
can be accurately determined by a single intravenous injection of
a radioisotope, most commonly 99mTC-­DTPA, followed by timed
monitoring of serum samples.
Because true measurement of the GFR is expensive and time-­
consuming, the GFR is commonly estimated (eGFR) by the clearance
of endogenous creatinine. Formulas that estimate creatinine clearance
accurately in clinical settings have been useful tools in patient care. The
“bedside” Schwartz formula is the most widely used pediatric formula and
is based on the serum creatinine (Scr), patient height, and an empirical
constant:
eGFR  0.413 height  cm  /Scr  mg/dL 

The accuracy of GFR-­estimating equations can be further improved
utilizing an additional endogenous marker, cystatin C, in addition to
serum creatinine. Cystatin C is a 13.6-­kDa protease inhibitor produced by nucleated cells that is freely filtered by the kidney. It continues to gain popularity as a clinical tool to provide an alternative to
creatinine-­based formulas because it has distinct advantages in estimating the GFR. Unlike creatinine, cystatin C is not secreted by the
renal tubules under any conditions. Furthermore, it is less affected
by sex, age, and muscle mass than serum creatinine. Several cystatin
C-­based formulas have been developed, including a multivariable
eGFR equation that combines both cystatin C and creatinine in addition to height, BUN, and gender:
eGFR  39.8  height  m  /Scr  mg/dl  
 30/BUN  mg/dl 

0.079

0.456

 1.076 

 1.8/cystatin C  mg/L  

male

 ht  m  /1.4 

0.418

0.179

However, cystatin C assays are not available in many laboratories
and lack standardization. Therefore the creatinine-­
based bedside
Schwartz equation remains the most widely used assessment of kidney
function in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for a Bibliography.

557.3 Glomerular Diseases
Edward J. Nehus

PATHOGENESIS

Glomerular injury may be the result of a genetic, immunologic, perfusion, or coagulation disorder. Genetic disorders of the glomerulus
may result from pathogenic variants in genes encoding proteins located
within the glomerulus, interstitium, or tubular epithelium; pathogenic
variants in regulatory genes controlling DNA transcription; abnormal posttranscriptional modification of RNA transcripts; or abnormal
posttranslational modification of proteins. Immunologic injury to the
glomerulus results in glomerulonephritis, which is a generic term for
several diseases but more precisely is a histopathologic term defining
inflammation of the glomerular capillaries. Evidence that glomerulonephritis is caused by immunologic injury includes morphologic and
immunopathologic similarities to experimental immune-­
mediated
glomerulonephritis, the demonstration of immune reactants (immunoglobulin, complement) in glomeruli, abnormalities in serum complement, and the finding of autoantibodies (anti-­GBM) in some of
these diseases (Fig. 557.6). There appear to be two major mechanisms
of immunologic injury: glomerular deposition of circulating antigen-­
antibody immune complexes and direct interaction of antibody with
specific glomerular antigens in situ. In the former, antibody is produced
against and combines with a circulating antigen that is usually unrelated to the kidney (see Fig. 557.6). The immune complexes accumulate in GBMs and activate the complement system, leading to immune
injury. Immunofluorescence microscopy often demonstrates granular
or irregular deposits containing immunoglobulin and complement in
the glomerular capillary wall. Electron microscopic studies may show
these deposits in the GBM and in the mesangium. Examples of circulating immune complex–mediated glomerulonephritis include postinfectious glomerulonephritis, IgA nephropathy, membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis, and lupus nephritis. In situ immune complex formation occurs when an antibody reacts with antigen(s) of the GBM.
Immunopathologic studies reveal linear deposition of immunoglobulin
and complement along the GBM. This type of immune complex injury
occurs in Goodpasture syndrome and membranous nephropathy.
The inflammatory reaction that follows immunologic injury results
from activation of one or more mediator pathways. The most important of these is the complement system, which has two initiating
sequences: the classic pathway, which is activated by antigen-­antibody
immune complexes, and the alternative or properdin pathway, which
occurs by autoactivation of C3 by a process known as C3 tick over.
These pathways converge at C3; from that point on, the same sequence
leads to lysis of cell membranes (see Chapter 173). The major noxious
products of complement activation are produced after activation of
C3 and include anaphylatoxin (which stimulates contractile proteins
within vascular walls and increases vascular permeability) and chemotactic factors (C5a) that recruit neutrophils and perhaps macrophages
to the site of complement activation, leading to consequent damage to
vascular cells and basement membranes.

PATHOLOGY

The glomerulus may be injured by several mechanisms, but it has only
a limited number of histopathologic responses; different disease states
can produce similar microscopic changes.
Proliferation of glomerular cells occurs in most forms of glomerulonephritis and may be generalized (involving all glomeruli) or focal
(involving only some glomeruli and sparing others). Within a single
glomerulus, proliferation may be diffuse (involving all parts of the
glomerulus) or segmental (involving only one or more tufts, but not
others). Proliferation commonly involves the endothelial and mesangial
cells and is often associated with an increase in the mesangial matrix
(see Fig. 557.6). Mesangial proliferation can result from deposition of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 557 u Introduction to Glomerular Diseases
Mesangial cell disease
IgA nephropathy, IgM nephropathy,
mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis,
class II lupus nephritis, diabetic nephropathy

3183

Mesangial cell
Basement membrane
Endothelial cell
Epithelial cell

Epithelial cell injury
Membranous nephropathy,
minimal change disease,
focal and segmental
glomerulosclerosis,
class V lupus nephritis,
diabetic nephropathy

Lumen

Endothelial cell injury
Infection-associated glomerulonephritis,
mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis,
class III and IV lupus nephritis,
anti–glomerular basement membrane
disease, vasculitis and cryoglobulinemia,
hemolytic-uremic syndrome

In health, solutes are filtered into the urinary space. The presence of abnormal
amounts of protein or cells suggests glomerular pathology.

Fig. 557.6 Cellular location of injury during glomerulonephritis. Mesangial cells are directly exposed to the circulation. Deposition of immune

complexes within these cells is typically seen in disorders such as immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy; it results in proliferation and expansion of
the cells, leading to hematuria, proteinuria, and renal impairment. Epithelial cells, in conjunction with basement membrane, allow filtration of plasma
solutes but retard passage of cells and plasma proteins. Disease related to these cells is typified by the presence of subepithelial deposits and flattening of the foot processes that engage the basement membrane, resulting in disruption of the filtration barrier and proteinuria. Endothelial cell
disease can result from deposition of immune complex (as occurs in mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis), attachment of antibody to the basement
membrane (Goodpasture disease), or trauma and activation of coagulation (hemolytic-­uremic syndrome). Endothelial cell proliferation and necrosis
are accompanied by leukocyte accumulation; rupture of the basement membrane, crescent formation, and disruption of glomerular architecture can
develop. A nephritic or rapidly progressive presentation ensues. (From Chadban SJ, Atkins RC. Glomerulonephritis. Lancet. 2005;365:1797–1806.)

immune complex within the mesangium. The resultant increase in cell
size and number, and production of mesangial matrix, can increase the
glomerular size and narrow the lumens of glomerular capillaries, leading to renal insufficiency.
Crescent formation in Bowman’s space (capsule) is a result of proliferation of parietal epithelial cells and is often associated with clinical
signs of renal dysfunction. Crescents develop in several forms of glomerulonephritis (termed rapidly progressive or crescentic; see Chapter 559.7) and are a characteristic response to deposition of fibrin in
Bowman’s space. Newly formed crescents contain fibrin, the proliferating epithelial cells of Bowman’s space, basement membrane–like material produced by these cells, and macrophages that might have a role in
the genesis of glomerular injury. Over subsequent days to weeks, the
crescent is invaded by connective tissue and becomes a fibroepithelial
crescent. This process generally results in glomerular obsolescence and
the clinical development of chronic renal failure. Crescent formation
is often associated with glomerular cell death. The necrotic glomerulus has a characteristic eosinophilic appearance and usually contains
nuclear remnants. Crescent formation is usually associated with generalized proliferation of the mesangial cells and with either immune
complex or anti-­GBM antibody deposition in the glomerular capillary
wall.
Certain forms of acute glomerulonephritis show glomerular exudation of blood cells, including neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and
mononuclear cells. The thickened appearance of GBM can result from
a true increase in the width of the membrane (as seen in membranous

glomerulopathy; see Chapter 559.5), from massive deposition of
immune complexes that have staining characteristics similar to the
membrane (as seen in systemic lupus erythematosus; see Chapter
560.2), or from the interposition of mesangial cells and matrix into the
subendothelial space between the endothelial cells and the GBM. The
last can give the basement membrane a split appearance, as seen in
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (see Chapter 559.6) and
other diseases.
Sclerosis refers to obliteration of capillary loops within the glomerulus caused by increased mesangial matrix. Glomerulosclerosis
may be caused by a putative circulating factor, as occurs in primary
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), or it may be secondary to
a variety of conditions including pathogenic variants, obesity, infection, certain medications, or any condition that results in reduced
renal mass.
Tubulointerstitial fibrosis is present in all patients who have
glomerular disease and who develop progressive renal injury. This
fibrosis is initiated by injury to either the glomeruli, which, if severe,
may secondarily involve the tubules, or direct injury to the tubules
themselves. Tubular injury recruits mononuclear cell infiltrate, which
releases a variety of soluble factors that have fibrosis-­promoting
effects. Matrix proteins of the renal interstitium begin to accumulate, leading to eventual destruction of renal tubules and peritubular
capillaries.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3184 Part XXI u Nephrology

Section 2

Conditions Particularly
Associated with
Hematuria
Chapter 558

Clinical Evaluation of the
Child with Hematuria
Francisco X. Flores
Hematuria, defined as the persistent presence of more than five red
blood cells (RBCs)/high-­power field (hpf) in uncentrifuged urine,
occurs in 4–6% of urine samples from school-­aged children. Quantitative studies demonstrate that normal children can excrete more
than 500,000 RBCs per 12-­hour period; this increases with fever
and/or exercise. In the clinical setting, qualitative estimates are
provided by a urinary dipstick that uses a very sensitive peroxidase
chemical reaction between hemoglobin (or myoglobin) and a colorimetric chemical indicator impregnated on the dipstick. Chemstrip (Boehringer Mannheim), a common commercially available
dipstick, is very sensitive and capable of detecting 3-­5 RBCs/hpf of
unspun urine. The presence of 10-­50 RBCs/μL may suggest underlying pathology, but significant hematuria is generally considered
as >50 RBCs/hpf. False-­negative results can occur in the presence of
formalin (used as a urine preservative) or high urinary concentrations of ascorbic acid (i.e., in patients with vitamin C intake >2,000
mg/day). False-­positive results may be seen in a child with an alkaline urine (pH >8), or more commonly following contamination
with oxidizing agents such as hydrogen peroxide used to clean the
perineum before obtaining a specimen. Microscopic analysis of 10-­
15 mL of freshly voided and centrifuged urine is essential in confirming the presence of RBCs suggested by >10 RBCs/hpf, or a 1+
positive urinary dipstick reading.
Red urine without RBCs is seen in a number of conditions (Table
558.1). Clinically significant heme-­positive urine without RBCs
may be caused by the presence of either hemoglobin or myoglobin. Hemoglobinuria without hematuria can occur in the presence
of acute or chronic hemolysis. Myoglobinuria without hematuria
occurs in the presence of rhabdomyolysis resulting from skeletal
muscle injury and is generally associated with a fivefold increase in
the plasma concentration of creatine kinase. Clinically innocuous
heme-­negative urine can appear red, cola colored, or burgundy, due
to ingestion of various drugs, foods (blackberries, beets), or dyes
used in food and candy, whereas dark brown (or black) urine can
result from various urinary metabolites.
Evaluation of the child with hematuria begins with a careful history, physical examination, and microscopic urinalysis. This information is used to determine the level of hematuria (upper vs lower
urinary tract) and to determine the urgency of the evaluation based
on symptomatology. Special consideration needs to be given to the
family history, identification of anatomic abnormalities and malformation syndromes, presence of gross hematuria, and manifestations of hypertension, edema, or heart failure.
Table 558.2 lists causes of hematuria. Upper urinary tract sources
of hematuria originate within the nephron (glomerulus, tubular

system, or interstitium). Lower urinary tract sources of hematuria
originate from the pelvicalyceal system, ureter, bladder, or urethra.
Hematuria from within the glomerulus is often associated with
brown, cola-­or tea-­colored, or burgundy urine, proteinuria >100
mg/dL via dipstick, urinary microscopic findings of RBC casts,
and deformed urinary RBCs (particularly acanthocytes). Hematuria originating within the tubular system may be associated with
the presence of leukocytes or renal tubular casts. Lower urinary
tract sources of hematuria may be associated with gross hematuria that is bright red or pink, terminal hematuria (gross hematuria
occurring at the end of the urine stream), blood clots, normal urinary RBC morphology, and minimal proteinuria on dipstick (<100
mg/dL).
Patients with hematuria can present with a number of symptoms suggesting specific disorders. Tea-­or cola-­
colored urine,
facial or body edema, hypertension, and oliguria are classic symptoms of glomerulonephritis. Diseases commonly manifesting as
glomerulonephritis include postinfectious glomerulonephritis,
immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis (MPGN), IgA vasculitis nephritis (formerly
Henoch-­S chönlein purpura nephritis), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) nephritis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly
Wegener granulomatosis), microscopic polyangiitis, Goodpasture
syndrome, and hemolytic-­uremic syndrome. A history of recent
upper respiratory, skin, or gastrointestinal infection suggests
postinfectious glomerulonephritis, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, or
IgA vasculitis nephritis. Rash and joint complaints suggest IgA vasculitis or SLE nephritis.
Hematuria associated with glomerulonephritis is typically painless
but can be associated with flank pain when acute or unusually severe.
Frequency, dysuria, and unexplained fevers suggest a urinary tract
infection, whereas renal colic suggests nephrolithiasis. A flank mass
can suggest hydronephrosis, renal cystic diseases, renal vein thrombosis, or tumor. Hematuria associated with headache, mental status
changes, visual changes (diplopia), epistaxis, or heart failure suggests
associated severe hypertension. Patients with hematuria and a history
of trauma require immediate evaluation (see Chapter 80). Child abuse
must always be suspected in the child presenting with unexplained
perineal bruising and hematuria.
A careful family history is critical in the initial assessment of
the child with hematuria given the numerous genetic causes of
renal disorders. Hereditary glomerular diseases include hereditary nephritis (isolated Alport syndrome or with leiomyomatosis
or macrothrombocytopenia); thin glomerular basement membrane
disease; SLE nephritis; hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy,
aneurysms, and muscle cramps (HANAC); and IgA nephropathy
(Berger disease). Other hematuric renal disorders with a hereditary component include both autosomal recessive and autosomal
dominant polycystic kidney diseases, atypical hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome, urolithiasis, and sickle cell disease/trait.
Physical examination may also suggest possible causes of hematuria. The presence of hypertension, edema, or signs of heart
failure suggests acute glomerulonephritis. Several malformation
syndromes are associated with renal disease, including VATER
(vertebral body anomalies, anal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula,
and renal dysplasia) syndrome. Abdominal masses may be caused
by bladder distention in posterior urethral valves, hydronephrosis
in ureteropelvic or ureterovesical junction obstruction, polycystic
kidney disease, or Wilms tumor. Hematuria seen in patients with
neurologic or cutaneous abnormalities may be the result of a number of syndromic renal disorders, including tuberous sclerosis, von
Hippel-­Lindau syndrome, and Zellweger (cerebrohepatorenal) syndrome. Anatomic abnormalities of the external genitalia may be
associated with hematuria and/or renal disease.
Patients with gross hematuria present additional challenges because
of the associated parental anxiety. The most common cause of gross
hematuria is bacterial or viral urinary tract infection. Urethrorrhagia,
which is urethral bleeding in the absence of urine, is associated with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 558 u Clinical Evaluation of the Child with Hematuria 3185
Table 558.1  Other Causes of Red Urine

Table 558.2  Causes of Hematuria in Children

HEME POSITIVE
Hemoglobin
Myoglobin

UPPER URINARY TRACT DISEASE
Isolated Renal Disease
Immunoglobulin (Ig) A nephropathy (Berger disease)
Alport syndrome (hereditary nephritis)
Thin glomerular basement membrane nephropathy
Postinfectious GN (poststreptococcal GN)*
Membranous nephropathy
Membranoproliferative GN*
Rapidly progressive GN
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Anti–glomerular basement membrane disease
Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, muscle cramps
(HANAC)

HEME NEGATIVE
Drugs
Adriamycin
Chloroquine
Deferoxamine
Hydroxocobalamin
Ibuprofen
Iron sorbitol
Levodopa
Metronidazole
Nitrofurantoin
Phenazopyridine (Pyridium)
Phenolphthalein
Phenothiazines
Phenytoin
Quinine
Rifampin
Salicylates
Sulfasalazine
Dyes (Vegetable/Fruit)
Beets
Blackberries
Blueberries
Food and candy coloring
Paprika
Rhubarb
Metabolites
Homogentisic acid
Melanin
Methemoglobin
Porphyrin
Tyrosinosis
Urates

dysuria and blood spots on underwear after voiding. This condition,
which often occurs in prepubertal boys at intervals several months
apart, has a benign self-­limited course. Less than 10% of patients have
evidence of glomerulonephritis. Recurrent episodes of gross hematuria suggest IgA nephropathy, Alport syndrome, or thin glomerular
basement membrane disease. Dysuria and abdominal or flank pain
are symptoms of idiopathic hypercalciuria, or urolithiasis. Table 558.3
lists common causes of gross hematuria; Figure 558.1 outlines a general approach to the laboratory and radiologic evaluation of the patient
with glomerular or nonglomerular hematuria. Asymptomatic patients
with isolated microscopic hematuria should not undergo extensive
diagnostic evaluation, because such hematuria is often transient and
benign.
The child with completely asymptomatic isolated microscopic
hematuria that persists on at least three urinalyses observed over
a minimum of a 2-­week period poses a dilemma in regard to the
degree of further diagnostic testing that should be performed. Significant disease of the urinary tract is uncommon with this clinical
presentation. The initial evaluation of these children should include
a urine culture followed by a spot urine for hypercalciuria with a
calcium:creatinine ratio in culture-­
negative patients. In Black
patients, a sickle cell screen should be included. If these studies are
normal, urinalysis of all first-­degree relatives is indicated. Renal
and bladder ultrasonography should be considered to rule out
structural lesions such as tumor, cystic disease, hydronephrosis, or

Multisystem Disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus nephritis*
IgA vasculitis nephritis†
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis‡
Microscopic polyangiitis
Goodpasture syndrome
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Sickle cell glomerulopathy
HIV nephropathy
Tubulointerstitial Disease
Pyelonephritis
Interstitial nephritis
Papillary necrosis
Acute tubular necrosis
Vascular Disorders
Arterial or venous thrombosis
Malformations (aneurysms, hemangiomas)
Nutcracker syndrome
Hemoglobinopathy (sickle cell trait/disease)
Crystalluria
Anatomic Disorders
Hydronephrosis
Cystic-­syndromic kidney disease
Polycystic kidney disease
Multicystic dysplasia
Tumor (Wilms tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma, angiomyolipoma,
medullary carcinoma)
Trauma
LOWER URINARY TRACT DISEASE
Inflammation (infectious and noninfectious)
Cystitis
Urethritis
Urolithiasis
Trauma
Coagulopathy
Heavy exercise
Bladder tumor
Factitious syndrome, factitious syndrome by proxy§
*Denotes glomerulonephritides presenting with hypocomplementemia.
†Formerly Henoch-­Schönlein purpura.
‡Formerly Wegener granulomatosis.
§Formerly Munchausen syndrome and Munchausen syndrome by proxy.
GN, Glomerulonephritis.

urolithiasis. Ultrasonography of the urinary tract is most informative in patients presenting with gross hematuria, abdominal pain,
flank pain, or trauma. If these initial studies are normal, assessment
of serum creatinine and electrolytes is recommended.
The finding of certain hematologic abnormalities can narrow
the differential diagnosis. Anemia in this setting may be caused by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3186 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 558.3  Common Causes of Gross Hematuria
Urinary tract infection
Meatal stenosis with ulcer
Perineal irritation
Trauma
Urolithiasis
Hypercalciuria
Obstruction
Coagulopathy
Tumor
Glomerular disease
Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
IgA vasculitis nephritis*
IgA nephropathy
Alport syndrome (hereditary nephritis)
Thin glomerular basement membrane disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus nephritis
*Formerly Henoch-­Schönlein purpura.

hypervolemia with dilution associated with acute kidney injury;
decreased RBC production in chronic kidney disease; hemolysis from
hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, a chronic hemolytic anemia, or SLE;
blood loss from pulmonary hemorrhage, as seen in Goodpasture syndrome; or melena in patients with IgA vasculitis or hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome. Inspection of the peripheral blood smear might reveal a
microangiopathic process consistent with the hemolytic-­uremic syndrome. The presence of autoantibodies in SLE can result in a positive
Coombs test, the presence of antinuclear antibody, leukopenia, and
multisystem disease. Thrombocytopenia can result from decreased
platelet production (malignancies) or increased platelet consumption (SLE, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome, renal vein thrombosis, or congenital hepatic fibrosis with
portal hypertension secondary to autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease). Although urinary RBC morphology may be normal with
lower tract bleeding and dysmorphic from glomerular bleeding, it is
not sensitive enough to unequivocally delineate the site of hematuria.
A bleeding diathesis is an unusual cause of hematuria, and coagulation
studies are not routinely obtained unless a personal or family history
suggests a bleeding tendency.
A voiding cystourethrogram is only required in patients with a
urinary tract infection, renal scarring, hydroureter, or pyelocaliectasis. Cystoscopy is an unnecessary and costly procedure in most
pediatric patients with hematuria and carries the associated risks
of anesthesia. This procedure should be reserved for evaluating the
rare child with a bladder mass noted on ultrasound, urethral abnormalities caused by trauma, posterior urethral valves, or tumor. The
finding of unilateral gross hematuria localized by cystoscopy is rare,
but it can indicate a vascular malformation or another anatomic
abnormality.
Children with persistent asymptomatic isolated hematuria and a
completely normal evaluation should have their blood pressure and
urine checked every 3 months until the hematuria resolves. Referral
to a pediatric nephrologist should be considered for patients with
persistent asymptomatic hematuria greater than 1 year in duration
and is recommended for patients with nephritis (glomerulonephritis, tubulointerstitial nephritis), hypertension, renal dysfunction, urolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis, or a family history of renal
disease such as polycystic kidney disease or hereditary nephritis.
Renal biopsy is indicated for some children with persistent microscopic hematuria and for most children with recurrent gross hematuria associated with decreased renal function, proteinuria, or
hypertension.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Cola/brown urine?
Proteinuria (30 mg/dL)?
RBC casts?
Acute nephritic syndrome?
YES

Glomerular hematuria
• CBC with differential
• Electrolytes, Ca
• BUN/Cr
• Serum protein/albumin
• Cholesterol
• C3/C4
• ASO/anti-DNase B
• ANA
• Antineutrophil antibody
• Throat/skin culture
(if indicated)
• 24-hr urine
total protein
creatinine clearance

NO

Extraglomerular hematuria
Step 1
• Urine culture
Step 2
• Urine calcium/creatinine
• Sickle prep (Black patients)
• Renal/bladder ultrasound
Step 3
• Urinalysis: siblings, parents
• Serum electrolytes, Cr, Ca
• If crystalluria, urolithiasis, or
nephrocalcinosis:
*24-hr urine for Ca, creatinine,
uric acid, oxalate
• If hydronephrosis/pyelocaliectasis:
*Cystogram,  renal scan

Fig. 558.1 Diagnostic algorithm of the general approach to the labo-

ratory and radiologic evaluation of the patient with glomerular or extraglomerular hematuria. ANA, Antinuclear antibody; ASO, antistreptolysin O; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; C3/C4, complement; CBC, complete
blood cell count; Cr, creatinine; RBC, red blood cell.

Chapter 559

Isolated Glomerular
Diseases Associated
with Recurrent Gross
Hematuria
Francisco X. Flores
INTRODUCTION

Approximately 10% of children with gross hematuria have an acute or
a chronic form of glomerulonephritis that may be associated with a
systemic illness. The gross hematuria, which is usually characterized
by brown or cola-­colored urine, may be painless or associated with
vague flank or abdominal pain. A presentation with gross hematuria
is common within 1-­2 days after the onset of an apparent viral upper
respiratory tract infection in immunoglobulin (Ig) A nephropathy
and typically resolves within 5 days. This relatively short period contrasts with a latency period of 7-­21 days occurring between the onset
of a streptococcal pharyngitis or impetiginous skin infection and
the development of postinfectious acute glomerulonephritis. Gross
hematuria in these circumstances can last as long as 4-­6 weeks. Gross
hematuria can also be seen in children with glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) disorders such as hereditary nephritis (Alport
syndrome [AS]) and thin GBM disease. These glomerular diseases
can also manifest as microscopic hematuria and/or proteinuria without gross hematuria.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 559 u Isolated Glomerular Diseases Associated with Recurrent Gross Hematuria

559.1 Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy
(Berger Nephropathy)
Francisco X. Flores
IgA nephropathy is the most common chronic glomerular disease
in children. It is characterized by a predominance of IgA within
mesangial glomerular deposits in the absence of systemic disease.
Its diagnosis requires a renal biopsy, which is performed when
clinical features warrant confirmation of the diagnosis or characterization of the histologic severity, which might affect therapeutic
decisions.

A

B

*

3187

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOLOGIC DIAGNOSIS

Focal and segmental mesangial proliferation and an increased mesangial matrix are seen in the glomerulus (Fig. 559.1). Renal histology
demonstrates mesangial proliferation that may be associated with epithelial cell crescent formation and sclerosis. IgA deposits in the mesangium are often accompanied by C3 complement (Fig. 559.2).
IgA nephropathy is an immune complex disease initiated by
excessive amounts of poorly galactosylated IgA1 in the serum, causing the production of IgG and IgA autoantibodies. The abnormalities identified in the IgA system have also been observed in patients
with IgA vasculitis (formerly known as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura),
and this finding lends support to the hypothesis that these two diseases are part of the same disease spectrum. Familial clustering of
IgA nephropathy cases suggests the importance of genetic factors.
Genome-­wide linkage analysis suggests the linkage of IgA nephropathy to 6q22-­23 in multiplex IgA nephropathy kindreds. Additional
genomic studies demonstrate a high predisposition to IgA nephropathy in Southeast Asia.

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MANIFESTATIONS

C

Fig. 559.1 IgA nephropathy. A, In IgA nephropathy, segmental ar-

eas (arrows) of mesangial hypercellularity and matrix expansion occur,
characteristic of mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis. Part of the
glomerular tuft adheres to Bowman’s capsule (white dashed oval), constituting the starting point of a secondary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis lesion. Tubulointerstitial damage with leukocyte infiltrates,
tubular atrophy and fibrosis (arrowhead), and tubular protein casts
(asterisk) is also present. Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stain. B, Other glomeruli in the same patient exhibit few pathologic abnormalities on light
microscopy (PAS stain), but the characteristic mesangial granular IgA
deposition (C) can be found in these glomeruli as well. (From Floege J,
Amann K. Primary glomerulonephritides. Lancet. 2016;387:2036–2046.
Fig. 2.)

IgA nephropathy is seen more often in male than in female patients.
Although there are rare cases of rapidly progressive forms of the disease, the clinical presentation of childhood IgA nephropathy is often
benign compared with that of adults. IgA nephropathy is an uncommon cause of end-­stage renal failure during childhood. A majority of
children with IgA nephropathy in the United States and Europe present with gross hematuria, whereas microscopic hematuria and/or proteinuria is a more common presentation in Japan. Other presentations
include acute nephritic syndrome, nephrotic syndrome, or a combined
nephritic-­nephrotic picture. Gross hematuria often occurs within 1-­2
days of onset of an upper respiratory or gastrointestinal infection,
in contrast with the longer latency period observed in acute post­
infectious glomerulonephritis and may be associated with loin pain.
Proteinuria is often <1,000 mg/24 hr in patients with asymptomatic
microscopic hematuria. Mild to moderate hypertension is most often
seen in patients with nephritic or nephrotic syndrome but is rarely
severe enough to result in hypertensive emergencies. Normal serum
levels of C3 in IgA nephropathy help to distinguish this disorder from
postinfectious glomerulonephritis. Serum IgA levels have limited diagnostic value because they are elevated in only 50% of pediatric patients.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Although IgA nephropathy does not lead to significant kidney damage in most children, progressive disease develops in 20–30% of adult
patients 15-­20 years after disease onset. Therefore most children with
IgA nephropathy do not display progressive renal dysfunction until
adulthood, prompting the need for careful long-­term follow-­up. Poor

Fig. 559.3 Electron micrograph of a biopsy specimen from a child
Fig. 559.2 Immunofluorescence microscopy of the biopsy specimen
from a child with episodes of gross hematuria demonstrating mesangial
deposition of IgA (×150).

with Alport syndrome depicting thickening, thinning, splitting, and
layering of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM; ×1,650). (From
Yum M, Bergstein JM. Basement membrane nephropathy. Hum Pathol.
1983;14:996–1003.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3188 Part XXI u Nephrology
prognostic indicators at presentation or follow-­up include persistent
hypertension, diminished renal function, and significant, increasing,
or persistent proteinuria. A more severe prognosis is correlated with
histologic evidence of diffuse mesangial proliferation, extensive glomerular crescents, glomerulosclerosis, and diffuse tubulointerstitial
changes, including inflammation and fibrosis.
The primary treatment of IgA nephropathy is appropriate blood pressure control and management of significant proteinuria. Angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists
are effective in reducing proteinuria and slowing the rate of disease
progression when used individually or in combination. Fish oil, which
contains antiinflammatory omega-­3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, may
decrease the rate of disease progression in adults. If a renin-­angiotensin
system (RAS) blockade proves ineffective and significant proteinuria
persists, then addition of immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids is recommended. Corticosteroids reduce proteinuria and improve
renal function in those patients with a glomerular filtration rate >60
mL/min/m2. It remains unclear if the effects of glucocorticoids deter
progression to end-­stage renal failure to a degree to offset their significant side effects. Additional immunosuppression with cyclophosphamide or azathioprine has not appeared to be effective. Tonsillectomy
has been used as a treatment for IgA nephropathy in many countries,
including Japan. Performing a tonsillectomy in the absence of significant tonsillitis in association with IgA nephropathy is currently not
recommended. Targeted-­release oral budesonide is approved by the
FDA to reduce proteinuria in adult patients with IgA nephropathy.
Patients with IgA nephropathy may undergo successful kidney transplantation. Although recurrent disease is frequent, allograft loss caused
by IgA nephropathy occurs in only 15–30% of patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

559.2 Alport Syndrome
Francisco X. Flores
Alport syndrome (AS), or hereditary nephritis, is a genetically
heterogeneous disease caused by pathogenic variants in the genes
coding for type IV collagen, a major component of basement membranes. These genetic alterations are associated with marked variability in the clinical presentation, natural history, and histologic
abnormalities.

GENETICS

Approximately 70–80% of patients have X-­linked inheritance caused by
a mutation in the COL4A5 gene encoding the α5 chain of type IV collagen. Patients with a subtype of X-­linked AS and diffuse leiomyomatosis demonstrate a contiguous pathogenic variant within the COL4A5
and COL4A6 genes that encodes the α5 and α6 chains, respectively, of
type IV collagen. Autosomal recessive forms of AS in approximately
5% of patients are caused by pathogenic variants in the COL4A3 and
COL4A4 genes on chromosome 2 encoding the α3 and α4 chains,
respectively, of type IV collagen. An autosomal dominant form of AS
linked to the COL4A3-­COL4A4 gene locus occurs in 19–31% of cases.
Fechtner syndrome (AS with macrothrombocytopenia) and
Epstein syndrome are autosomal dominant disorders due to pathogenic variants in MYH9. Hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy,
aneurysms, and muscle cramps (HANAC) may initially resemble AS.
HANAC is due to pathogenic variants in the COL4A1 gene.

foam cells, develop as the disease progresses. Immunopathologic studies are usually nondiagnostic.
In most patients, electron microscopy reveals diffuse thickening,
thinning, splitting, and layering of the glomerular and tubular basement membranes (Fig. 559.3). To confound the diagnosis, the ultrastructural analysis of the GBM in all genetic forms of AS may be
completely normal, display nonspecific alterations, or demonstrate
only uniform thinning.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

All patients with AS have asymptomatic microscopic hematuria, which
may be intermittent in females and younger males. Single or recurrent
episodes of gross hematuria commonly occurring 1-­2 days after an
upper respiratory infection are seen in approximately 50% of patients.
Proteinuria is often seen in males but may be absent, mild, or intermittent in females. Progressive proteinuria, often exceeding 1 g/24 hours,
is common by the second decade of life and can be severe enough to
cause nephrotic syndrome.
Bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, which is never congenital,
develops in 90% of hemizygous males with X-­linked AS, 20% of heterozygous females with X-­linked AS, and 67% of patients with autosomal
recessive AS. This deficit begins in the high-­frequency range but progresses to involve the hearing associated with normal speech, prompting the need for hearing aids. This progression of hearing loss seems to
run parallel to the loss of renal function. Ocular abnormalities, which
occur in 30–40% of patients with X-­linked AS, include anterior lenticonus (extrusion of the central portion of the lens into the anterior
chamber), macular flecks, and corneal erosions. Leiomyomatosis of
the esophagus, tracheobronchial tree, and female genitals has been
reported but is rare.

DIAGNOSIS

A combination of a thorough family history, a screening urinalysis of first-­degree relatives, an audiogram, and an ophthalmologic
examination are critical in making the diagnosis of AS. The presence of anterior lenticonus is pathognomonic. AS is highly likely
in the patient who has hematuria and at least two of the following
characteristic clinical features: macular flecks, recurrent corneal erosions, GBM thickening and thinning, or sensorineural deafness. The
absence of epidermal basement membrane staining for the α5 chain
of type IV collagen in male hemizygotes and discontinuous epidermal basement membrane staining in female heterozygotes on skin
biopsy is pathognomonic for X-­linked AS and can preclude a diagnostic renal biopsy. Genetic testing is clinically available for X-­linked
AS and COL4A5 pathogenic variants. Prenatal diagnosis is available
for families with members who have X-­linked AS and who carry an
identified pathogenic variant.

PATHOLOGY

Kidney biopsy specimens during the first decade of life will show only
a few changes on light microscopy. Later, the glomeruli may develop
mesangial proliferation and capillary wall thickening, leading to progressive glomerular sclerosis. Tubular atrophy, interstitial inflammation and fibrosis, and lipid-­containing tubular or interstitial cells, called

Fig. 559.4 Glomerulus from a patient with poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis appears enlarged and relatively bloodless and shows
mesangial proliferation and exudation of neutrophils (×400).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 559 u Isolated Glomerular Diseases Associated with Recurrent Gross Hematuria

D
BS

Ep

M

L
D
P

Fig. 559.5 Electron micrograph in poststreptococcal glomerulo­
nephritis demonstrating electron-­dense deposits (D) on the epithelial
cell (Ep) side of the glomerular basement membrane. A polymorphonuclear leukocyte (P) is present within the lumen (L) of the capillary. BS,
Bowman’s space; M, mesangium.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

The risk of progressive renal dysfunction leading to end-­stage
kidney disease (ESKD) is highest among hemizygotes and autosomal recessive homozygotes. ESKD occurs before age 30 years in
approximately 75% of hemizygotes with X-­linked AS. The risk of
ESKD in X-­linked heterozygotes is 12% by age 40 years and 30% by
age 60 years. Risk factors for progression are gross hematuria during childhood, nephrotic syndrome, and prominent GBM thickening. An intrafamilial variation in phenotypic expression results in
significant differences in the age of ESKD among family members.
No specific therapy is available to treat AS, although angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors (and possibly angiotensin II receptor
inhibitors) can slow the rate of progression. Careful management of
renal failure complications, such as hypertension, anemia, and electrolyte imbalance, is critical. Patients with ESKD are treated with
dialysis and kidney transplantation (see Chapter 573). Approximately 5% of kidney transplantation recipients develop anti-­GBM
nephritis, which occurs primarily in males with X-­linked AS who
develop ESKD before age 30 years.
Pharmacologic treatment of proteinuria with angiotensin-­converting
enzyme inhibition or angiotensin II receptor blockade has proven
effective in other glomerular diseases and has also shown promise in
AS. Screening of heterozygote carriers for significant renal disease in
later adulthood and possible treatment of significant proteinuria is also
recommended.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

559.3 Thin Basement Membrane Disease
Francisco X. Flores
Thin basement membrane disease (TBMD) is defined by the presence of persistent microscopic hematuria and isolated thinning of the
GBM (and, occasionally, tubular basement membranes) on electron
microscopy. Microscopic hematuria is often initially observed during
childhood and may be intermittent. Episodic gross hematuria can also
be present, particularly after a respiratory illness. Isolated hematuria

3189

in multiple family members without renal dysfunction is referred to
as benign familial hematuria. Although most of these patients will
not undergo renal biopsy, it is often presumed that the underlying
pathology is TBMD. TBMD may be sporadic or transmitted as an
autosomal dominant trait. Heterozygous pathogenic variants in the
COL4A3 and COL4A4 genes, which encode the α3 and α4 chains of
type IV collagen present in the GBM, result in TBMD. Rare cases of
TBMD progress, and such patients develop significant proteinuria,
hypertension, or renal insufficiency. Homozygous pathogenic variants in these same genes result in autosomal recessive AS. Therefore
in these rare cases, the absence of a positive family history for renal
insufficiency or deafness would not necessarily predict a benign outcome. Consequently, monitoring patients with benign familial hematuria for progressive proteinuria, hypertension, or renal dysfunction
is important throughout childhood and young adulthood.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

559.4 Acute Poststreptococcal
Glomerulonephritis
Francisco X. Flores
Group A β-­hemolytic streptococcal infections are common in children
and can lead to the postinfectious complication of acute GN. Acute
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (APSGN) is a classic example of
the acute nephritic syndrome characterized by the sudden onset of
gross hematuria, edema, hypertension, and renal dysfunction. It is one
of the most common glomerular causes of gross hematuria in children
and is a major cause of morbidity in group A β-­hemolytic streptococcal
infections.

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

APSGN follows infection of the throat or skin by certain nephritogenic
strains of group A β-­hemolytic streptococci. Epidemics and clusters
of household (camps, military) cases occur throughout the world,
and 97% of cases occur in less-­developed countries. The overall incidence has decreased in industrialized nations, presumably as a result of
improved hygienic conditions and the near eradication of streptococcal pyoderma. Poststreptococcal GN commonly follows streptococcal
pharyngitis during cold-­weather months and streptococcal skin infections or pyoderma during warm-­weather months. Although epidemics
of nephritis have been described in association with throat (serotypes
M1, M4, M25, and some strains of M12) and skin (serotype M49)
infections, this disease is most commonly sporadic.

PATHOLOGY

Glomeruli appear enlarged and relatively bloodless and show a diffuse mesangial cell proliferation, with an increase in mesangial matrix
(Fig. 559.4). Polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration is common in
glomeruli during the early stage of the disease. Crescents and interstitial inflammation may be seen in severe cases, but these changes are
not specific for poststreptococcal GN. Immunofluorescence microscopy reveals a pattern of “lumpy-­bumpy” deposits of immunoglobulin and complement on the glomerular basement membrane and in
the mesangium. On electron microscopy, electron-­dense deposits, or
“humps,” are observed on the epithelial side of the glomerular basement membrane (Fig. 559.5).

PATHOGENESIS

Morphologic studies and a depression in the serum complement (C3)
level provide strong evidence that ASPGN is mediated by immune
complexes. Circulating immune complex formation with streptococcal
antigens and subsequent glomerular deposition is thought less likely to
be a pathogenic mechanism. Molecular mimicry, whereby circulating
antibodies elicited by streptococcal antigens react with normal glomerular antigens, in situ immune complex formation of antistreptococcal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3190 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 559.1  Summary of Primary Renal Diseases that Manifest as Acute Glomerulonephritis

IGA NEPHROPATHY

GOODPASTURE
SYNDROME

IDIOPATHIC RAPIDLY
PROGRESSIVE
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Age and sex
All ages, mean 7 yr, 2:1
male

10-­35 yr, 2:1 male

15-­30 yr, 6:1 male

Adults, 2:1 male

Acute nephritic syndrome

90%

50%

90%

90%

Asymptomatic hematuria

Occasionally

50%

Rare

Rare

Nephrotic syndrome

5–10%

Rare

Rare

10–20%

Hypertension

60%

30–50%

Rare

25%

Acute renal failure

50% (transient)

Very rare

50%

60%

Other

Latent period of 1-­3 wk

Follows viral syndromes

Pulmonary hemorrhage;
iron deficiency anemia

None

Laboratory findings

↑ ASO titers (70%)
Positive Streptozyme (95%)
↓ C3-­C9; normal C1, C4

↑ Serum IgA (50%)
IgA in dermal capillaries

Positive anti-­GBM
antibody

Positive ANCA in some

Immunogenetics

HLA-­B12, D “EN” (9)*

HLA-­Bw 35, DR4 (4)*

HLA-­DR2 (16)*

None established

RENAL PATHOLOGY
Light microscopy

Diffuse proliferation

Focal proliferation

Focal → diffuse
proliferation with
crescents

Crescentic GN

Immunofluorescence

Granular IgG, C3

Diffuse mesangial IgA

Linear IgG, C3

No immune deposits

Electron microscopy

Subepithelial humps

Mesangial deposits

No deposits

No deposits

Prognosis

95% resolve spontaneously
5% RPGN or slowly
progressive

Slow progression in
25–50%

75% stabilize or improve if
treated early

75% stabilize or improve if
treated early

Treatment

Monitor for oliguria,
hypertension; treat
appropriately

Uncertain (options include
steroids, and ACE
inhibitors); sparsentan
(adults)

Plasma exchange, steroids,
cyclophosphamide

Steroid pulse therapy

POSTSTREPTOCOCCAL
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS

DISEASES

*Relative risk.
ACE, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ASO, antistreptolysin O; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; GN, glomerulonephritis; HLA,
human leukocyte antigen; Ig, immunoglobulin; RPGN, idiopathic rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004.

antibodies with glomerular deposited antigen, and complement activation by directly deposited streptococcal antigens, continues to be considered as a probable mechanism of immunologic injury.
Group A streptococci possesses M proteins, and nephritogenic
strains are related to the M protein serotype. The search for the
precise nephritogenic antigen(s) that cause disease suggests that
streptococcal pyogenic exotoxin (SPE) B and nephritis-­associated
streptococcal plasmin receptor are promising candidates. Both
have been identified in glomeruli of affected patients, and in one
study, circulating antibodies to SPE B were found in all patients.
Cross reactivity of SPE B and other M proteins with various components of the glomerular basement membrane also give evidence for
molecular mimicry.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Poststreptococcal GN is most common in children ages 5-­12 years and
uncommon before the age of 3 years. The typical patient develops an
acute nephritic syndrome 1-­2 weeks after an antecedent streptococcal
pharyngitis or 3-­6 weeks after a streptococcal pyoderma. The history
of a specific infection may be absent because symptoms may have been
mild or have resolved without patients receiving specific treatment or
seeking the care of a medical provider.
The severity of kidney involvement varies from asymptomatic
microscopic hematuria with normal renal function to gross hematuria
with acute renal failure. Depending on the severity of renal involvement, patients can develop various degrees of edema, hypertension,

and oliguria. Patients are at risk for developing encephalopathy and/
or heart failure secondary to hypertension or hypervolemia. Hypertensive encephalopathy must be considered in patients with blurred
vision, severe headaches, altered mental status, or new seizures. The
effects of acute hypertension not only depend on the severity of hypertension but also the absolute change in comparison with the patient’s
baseline blood pressure and the rate at which it has risen. Respiratory
distress, orthopnea, and cough may be symptoms of pulmonary edema
and heart failure. Peripheral edema typically results from salt and water
retention and is common; nephrotic syndrome develops in a minority
(<5%) of childhood cases. Atypical presentations of APSGN include
those with subclinical disease and those with severe symptoms but an
absence of initial urinary abnormalities; in individuals who present
with a purpuric rash, it is difficult to distinguish APSGN from IgA vasculitis without a renal biopsy.
The acute phase generally resolves within 6-­8 weeks. Although
urinary protein excretion and hypertension usually normalize by 4-­6
weeks after onset, persistent microscopic hematuria can persist for 1-­2
years after the initial presentation.

DIAGNOSIS

Urinalysis demonstrates red blood cells, often in association with red
blood cell casts, proteinuria, and polymorphonuclear leukocytes. A
mild normochromic anemia may be present from hemodilution and
low-­grade hemolysis. The serum C3 level is significantly reduced in
>90% of patients in the acute phase and returns to normal 8-­10 weeks

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 559 u Isolated Glomerular Diseases Associated with Recurrent Gross Hematuria
Table 559.2  Secondary Causes of Membranoproliferative
Glomerulonephritis
ASSOCIATED WITH INFECTION
Hepatitis B and C
Visceral abscesses
Infective endocarditis
Shunt nephritis
Quartan malaria
Schistosoma nephropathy
Mycoplasma infection
ASSOCIATED WITH RHEUMATOLOGIC DISEASE
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Scleroderma
Sjögren syndrome
Sarcoidosis
Mixed essential cryoglobulinemia with or without hepatitis C
infection
Anti–smooth muscle syndrome
ASSOCIATED WITH MALIGNANCY
Carcinoma
Lymphoma
Leukemia
ASSOCIATED WITH AN INHERITED DISORDER
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Complement deficiency (C2 or C3), with or without partial
lipodystrophy
From Saha MK, Pendergraft WF III, Jennette JC, et al. Primary glomerular disease. In:
Yu AS, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 11th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Box 31.7.

after the onset. Although serum CH50 is commonly depressed, C4 is
most often normal in APSGN, or only mildly depressed.
Confirmation of the diagnosis requires clear evidence of a prior
streptococcal infection. A positive throat culture report might support
the diagnosis or might represent the carrier state. A rising antibody
titer to streptococcal antigen(s) confirms a recent streptococcal infection. The antistreptolysin O titer is commonly elevated after a pharyngeal infection but rarely increases after streptococcal skin infections.
The best single antibody titer to document cutaneous streptococcal
infection is the antideoxyribonuclease B level. If available, a positive
Streptozyme screen (which measures multiple antibodies to different
streptococcal antigens) is a valuable diagnostic tool. Serologic evidence for streptococcal infections is more sensitive than the history of
recent infections and far more sensitive than positive bacterial cultures
obtained at the time of onset of acute nephritis.
MRI of the brain is indicated in patients with severe neurologic
symptoms and can demonstrate posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome in the parietooccipital areas on T2 weighted images. Chest
x-­ray is indicated in those with signs of heart failure or respiratory
distress, or physical exam findings of a heart gallop, decreased breath
sounds, rales, or hypoxemia.
The clinical diagnosis of poststreptococcal GN is quite likely in a
child presenting with acute nephritic syndrome, evidence of recent
streptococcal infection, and a low C3 level. However, it is important
to consider other diagnoses such as systemic lupus erythematosus,
endocarditis, membranoproliferative GN, and an acute exacerbation
of chronic GN. Renal biopsy should be considered only in the presence of acute renal failure, nephrotic syndrome, absence of evidence
of streptococcal infection, or normal complement levels. In addition, renal biopsy is considered when hematuria and proteinuria,
diminished renal function, and/or a low C3 level persist more than
2 months after onset. Persistent hypocomplementemia can indicate a
chronic form of postinfectious GN or another disease such as membranoproliferative GN.

3191

Clinical features of acute glomerulonephritis

↓↓Serum complement (C3, CH 50)

Normal serum complement

Systemic diseases

Systemic diseases

• Lupus nephritis (focal 75%,
diffuse 90%)
• Subacute bacterial
endocarditis (90%)
• Shunt nephritis (90%)
• Essential mixed
cryoglobulinemia (85%)
• Visceral abscess

• Polyarteritis nodosa
• Hypersensitivity vasculitis
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
• IgA vasculitis
• Goodpasture syndrome

Renal diseases
• Acute postinfectious GN ( 90%)
• Membranoproliferative GN
Type I (50–80%)

Renal diseases
• IgA nephropathy
• Idiopathic rapidly progressive
(crescentic) GN
Type I (anti-GBM disease)
Type II (immune complex CGN)
Type III (pauciimmune CGN)
Postinfectious GN
(nonstreptococcal)

Serologic evidence of an antecedent streptococcal infection
(ASO, anti–DNase B, streptozyme test)

Positive and/or return of low serum
C3 complement to normal
by 6–8 wk

Negative or failure of low serum
C3 complement to return to normal
by 6–8 wk

Acute poststreptococcal GN

Lupus nephritis (anti–nuclear antibodies,
anti–double-stranded DNA antibody)
Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia
(cryoglobulin, hepatitis C virus)
Shunt nephritis (history, clinical
symptoms)
Visceral abscess (blood culture)
Membranoproliferative GN (C3NF)
Bacterial endocarditis
Postinfectious GN (nonstreptococcal)

Fig. 559.6 Differential diagnostic algorithm of acute glomerulonephritis (GN). ASO, Anti–streptolysin O; CGN, crescentic glomerulonephritis;
GBM, glomerular basement membrane; NF, nuclear factor. (Adapted
from Sulyok E. Acute proliferative glomerulonephritis. In: Avner ED,
Harmon WE, Niaudet P, eds. Pediatric Nephrology, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004: Fig. 30-­4.)

The differential diagnosis of poststreptococcal GN includes many
of the causes of hematuria listed in Table 559.1 and Table 558.2, and
algorithms to help with the diagnosis are presented in Figs. 559.6
and 559.7. Acute postinfectious GN can also follow other infections with coagulase-­positive and coagulase-­negative staphylococci,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and gram-­negative bacteria. The clinical course, histopathology, and laboratory features are similar to
those described for APSGN. For some, the terms APSGN and acute
postinfectious GN are used synonymously. Acute GN can occur after
certain fungal, rickettsial, protozoan, parasitic, or viral diseases.
Among the latter, influenza and parvovirus infections are particularly notable.

COMPLICATIONS

Acute complications result from hypertension and acute renal dysfunction. Hypertension is seen in 60% of patients and is associated
with hypertensive encephalopathy in 10% of cases. Although the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3192 Part XXI u Nephrology
Immunoglobulin- and Complement-Mediated Glomerulonephritis

Linear GBM
immunoglobulin
IF staining

Granular IF staining
for immunoglobulin
and C3

Granular IF staining
for C3 and little or
no immunoglobulin

Paucity of IF staining
for immunoglobulin
and complement

Anti-GBM disease

Immune complex GN

C3 glomerulopathy

ANCA disease

No lung
hemorrhage

Lung
hemorrhage

Anti-GBM
GN

Goodpasture’s
syndrome

Dense
deposits
in GBMs

No dense
deposits
in GBMs

No
systemic
vasculitis

DDD

C3 GN

ANCA GN

Vasculitis
Vasculitis
with no Vasculitis with
with
granulomas, granulomas, granulomas
or asthma
no asthma and asthma

MPA

GPA

EGPA

Dominant
IgA and no
vasculitis

Dominant
Systemic
IgA and
lupus
vasculitis erythematosus

Acute strep
or staph
infection

Thick
capillaries and
hypercellularity

Thick
capillaries, no
hypercellularity

~20 nm
fibrils

Other
features

IgA
nephropathy

IgA
vasculitis

Postinfectious
acute GN

Immune
complex MPGN

Membranous
GN

Fibrillary
GN

Other immune
complex GN

Lupus
nephritis

Fig. 559.7 Algorithm for diagnostic classification of glomerulonephritis (GN) that is known or suspected of being mediated by antibodies and

complement. Note that the integration of light microscopy, immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy, electron microscopy, laboratory data, and clinical
manifestations is required to precisely diagnose GN. ANCA, Anti–neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody; DDD, dense deposit disease; EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; GPA, granulomatosis with polyangiitis; IgA, immunoglobulin A;
MPA, microscopic polyangiitis; MPGN, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. (From Saha MK, Pendergraft WF III, Jennette JC, et al. Primary
glomerular disease. In Yu AS, BChir GM, Chertow GM, et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 31-­35.)

neurologic sequelae are often reversible with appropriate management, severe prolonged hypertension can lead to intracranial
bleeding. Other potential complications include heart failure,
hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, acidosis, seizures, and uremia. Acute renal failure can require treatment with
dialysis.

PREVENTION

Early systemic antibiotic therapy for streptococcal throat and skin
infections does not eliminate the risk of GN. Family members of
patients with acute GN, especially young children, should be considered at risk and be cultured for group A β-­hemolytic streptococci
and treated if positive. Family pets, particularly dogs, have also been
reported as carriers.

TREATMENT

angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors are standard therapies
used to treat hypertension.

PROGNOSIS

Complete recovery occurs in >95% of children with APSGN. Recurrences are extremely rare. Mortality in the acute stage can be avoided
by appropriate management of acute renal failure, cardiac failure, and
hypertension. Infrequently, the acute phase is severe and leads to glomerulosclerosis and chronic renal disease in <2% of affected children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

559.5 Membranous Nephropathy
Francisco X. Flores

Management is directed at treating the acute effects of renal dysfunction and hypertension (see Chapter 572.1). Although a 10-­day
course of systemic antibiotic therapy with penicillin is recommended
to limit the spread of the nephritogenic organisms, antibiotic therapy does not affect the natural history of APSGN. This is unlike the
GN seen in the context of ongoing or chronic infections, as noted
in Chapter 560.1. Sodium and fluid restriction, diuretics, and pharmacotherapy with calcium channel antagonists, vasodilators, or

Membranous nephropathy (MN), among the most common causes
of nephrotic syndrome in adults, is a rare cause of nephrotic syndrome in children. MN is classified as the primary, idiopathic form,
where there is isolated renal disease, or secondary MN, where
nephropathy is associated with other identifiable systemic diseases
or medications. In children, secondary MN is far more common than
primary, idiopathic MN. The most common etiologies of secondary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 559 u Isolated Glomerular Diseases Associated with Recurrent Gross Hematuria
MN are systemic lupus erythematosus or chronic infections. Among
the latter, chronic hepatitis B infection and congenital syphilis are
the best characterized and recognized causes of MN. Other chronic
infections have also been associated with MN, including malaria,
which is likely the most common cause of nephrotic syndrome
worldwide. Certain medications, such as penicillamine and gold,
or chronic factor replacement in patients with hemophilia, can also
cause MN. Rare causes associated with MN include tumors, such
as neuroblastoma, or other idiopathic systemic diseases. Identification of secondary causes of MN is critical, because removal of the
offending agent or treatment of the causative disease often leads
to resolution of the associated nephropathy and improves patient
outcome.

PATHOLOGY

Glomeruli have diffuse thickening of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM), without significant cell proliferative changes. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy typically demonstrate granular
deposits of IgG and C3 located on the epithelial side of the GBM.
The GBM thickening presumably results from the production of
membrane-­like material in response to deposition of immune complexes (Fig. 559.8).

PATHOGENESIS

MN is believed to be caused by in situ immune complex formation.
Therefore antigens from the infectious agents or medications associated
with secondary MN directly contribute to the pathogenesis of the renal
disease. The causative antigen in idiopathic MN is not established, but
the podocyte phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R), present on normal
podocytes, may be a target antigen in idiopathic MN. Antigen from
this receptor is found in immune deposits extracted from glomeruli in
patients with idiopathic MN. The majority of idiopathic MN patients

A

B

C

D

3193

have circulating antibody against this podocyte membrane antigen, as
well as against several podocyte cytoplasmic antigens. Childhood MN
may be associated with anticationic bovine serum albumin antibodies. In addition, neutral endopeptidase antigen may be the antigen in
neonatal onset MN.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In children, MN is most common in the second decade of life, but
it can occur at any age, including infancy. The disease usually manifests as nephrotic syndrome and accounts for 2–6% of all cases of
childhood nephrotic syndrome. Most patients also have microscopic
hematuria and only rarely present with gross hematuria. Approximately 20–30% of children have hypertension at presentation. A
subset of patients with MN present with a major venous thrombosis,
commonly renal vein thrombosis. This complication of nephrotic
syndrome (see Chapter 567) is particularly common in patients with
MN. Serum C3 and CH50 levels are normal, except in secondary
forms such as in systemic lupus erythematosus, where levels may be
depressed (see Fig. 559.6).

DIAGNOSIS

MN might be suspected on clinical grounds, particularly in the setting
of known risk factors for secondary forms of the disease. In the past,
the diagnosis could be established only by renal biopsy, but testing for
PLA2R antibodies has allowed a noninvasive way to make the diagnosis,
to differentiate primary vs secondary MN, and to guide treatment decisions. Common indications for renal biopsy leading to the diagnosis of
MN include presentation with nephrotic syndrome in a child >10 years
old or unexplained persistent hematuria with significant proteinuria.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

The clinical course of idiopathic membranous glomerulopathy is
variable. Children presenting with asymptomatic, low-­grade proteinuria can enter remission spontaneously. Retrospective reports
of children 1-­15 years after diagnosis treated with a variety of regimens indicate that 20% progress to chronic renal failure, 40% continue with active disease, and 40% achieve complete remission. Poor
prognostic factors include male gender, high levels of proteinuria,
reduced kidney function, and findings of glomerulosclerosis and
tubular damage in the renal biopsy. Although no controlled trials
have been performed in children, immunosuppressive therapy with
an extended course of prednisone can be effective in promoting
complete resolution of symptoms. The addition of chlorambucil or
cyclophosphamide provides further benefit to those not responding to steroids alone. Rituximab has shown significant promise in
adults and has been proposed by some as the first-­line treatment
but has yet to be studied in a randomized controlled trial in any
age-­group. For those unresponsive to immunosuppression, or with
mild clinical features, proteinuria can be reduced with angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

559.6 Membranoproliferative
Glomerulonephritis
Francisco X. Flores
Fig. 559.8 Membranous glomerulonephritis. The periodic acid–Schiff
(PAS) stain (A) shows slightly thickened glomerular basement membranes and prominent podocytes. On immunohistology, granular deposits of IgG (B) and C3c (C) can be found along the glomerular basement membrane, and pronounced de novo expression of phospholipase
A2 receptor (PLA2R) (D) is present on the podocytes. (From Floege J,
Amann K. Primary glomerulonephritides. Lancet. 2016;387:2036–2046.
Fig. 3.)

Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), also known
as mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis, most commonly occurs
in older children or young adults. MPGN can be classified into
primary (idiopathic) and secondary forms of glomerular disease.
Secondary forms of MPGN are most commonly associated with
subacute and chronic infection, including hepatitis B and C, syphilis, endocarditis, and infected shunts, especially ventriculoatrial

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3194 Part XXI u Nephrology
shunts (shunt nephritis) (Table 559.2). MPGN can also be one of
the glomerular lesions seen in lupus nephritis (see Chapter 560.2).

PATHOLOGY

Primary MPGN is defined by the histologic pattern of glomeruli as
seen by light, immunofluorescence, and electron microscopy. Two
subtypes have been defined on histologic criteria and are associated
with different clinical phenotypes. Type I MPGN is most common.
Glomeruli have an accentuated lobular pattern from diffuse mesangial
expansion, endocapillary proliferation, and an increase in mesangial
cells and matrix. The glomerular capillary walls are thickened, often
with splitting from interposition of the mesangium. Crescents, if
present, indicate a poor prognosis. Immunofluorescence microscopy
reveals C3 and lesser amounts of immunoglobulin in the mesangium
and along the peripheral capillary walls in a lobular pattern. Electron
microscopy confirms numerous deposits in the mesangial and subendothelial regions.
Far less common is type II MPGN, also called dense deposit disease, which has similar light microscopic findings as type I MPGN.
Differentiation from type I disease is by immunofluorescence and
electron microscopy. In type II disease, C3 immunofluorescence
typically is prominent, without concomitant immunoglobulin. By
electron microscopy, the lamina densa in the GBM undergoes a
very dense transformation, without evident immune complex–type
deposits.
C3 glomerulonephritis (C3GN) is a related but separate diagnostic
category. By light and electron microscopy C3GN usually has features
indistinguishable from classic MPGN. Immunofluorescence studies
distinguish between the two, with C3GN having only C3 deposition
and MPGN having both C3 and immunoglobulin fluorescence.

PATHOGENESIS

Although the histology of type I MPGN produced by primary and secondary forms is indistinguishable, it appears that type I disease occurs
when circulating immune complexes become trapped in the glomerular subendothelial space, which then causes injury, resulting in the
characteristic proliferative response and mesangial expansion. Further
evidence confirming this pathway to glomerular injury is the finding of
complement activation through the classic pathway in as many as 50%
of affected patients.
Type II MPGN appears not to be mediated by immune complexes.
The pathogenesis of the disease is not known, but the characteristic
finding of severely depressed serum complement levels suggests that
deranged complement regulation might play a major role in the disease. A typical finding is markedly depressed serum C3 complement
levels, with normal levels of other complement components. In many
patients with type II MPGN, C3 nephritic factor (ant–C3 convertase
antibody) is present. This factor activates the alternative complement
pathway. In unusual cases, patients with type II MPGN demonstrate an
associated systemic disease called partial lipodystrophy, where there
is diffuse loss of adipose tissue and decreased complement in the presence of C3 nephritic factor. The correlation between the presence of C3
nephritic factor, complement levels, and disease presence or severity is
not strong, indicating that the complement abnormalities alone are not
sufficient to cause the disease.
Type II MPGN (dense deposit disease) is considered part of the
broader spectrum of C3GN. The latter, as defined previously pathologically, appears to be caused by primary dysregulation of the alternative
or terminal cascade complement pathways.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

MPGN is most common in the second decade of life, equally affects
males and females, and is more common in White individuals. Systemic features may provide clues to which type of MPGN may be
present, but the two histologic types of idiopathic MPGN are indistinguishable in terms of their renal manifestations. Patients present in

equal proportions with nephrotic syndrome, acute nephritic syndrome
(hematuria, hypertension, and some level of renal dysfunction), or persistent asymptomatic microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. Serum
C3 complement levels are low in the majority of cases (see Fig. 559.6).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis includes all forms of acute and chronic glomerulonephritis, including idiopathic and secondary forms, along with
postinfectious glomerulonephritis. Postinfectious glomerulonephritis,
far more common than MPGN, usually does not have nephrotic features but typically has hematuria, hypertension, renal dysfunction,
and transiently low C3 complement, all features that may be seen with
MPGN or C3GN. In contrast to MPGN and C3GN, where C3 levels
usually remain persistently low, C3 returns to normal within 8-­10
weeks after the onset of postinfectious glomerulonephritis (see Chapter 559.4). The diagnosis of MPGN is made by renal biopsy. Indications
for biopsy include nephrotic syndrome in an older child, significant
proteinuria with microscopic hematuria, and hypocomplementemia
lasting >2 months in a child with acute nephritis. If C3 but no immunoglobulin deposition is found in glomeruli with MPGN, genetic testing and functional assays to define defects of complement cascade
regulation should be pursued.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

It is important to determine whether MPGN is idiopathic or secondary to a systemic disease, particularly lupus or chronic infection, because treatment of the causative disease can result in
resolution of the MPGN. Untreated, idiopathic MPGN, regardless
of type, has a poor prognosis. By 10 years following onset, 50% of
patients with MPGN have progressed to end-­stage renal disease. By
20 years following onset, up to 90% have lost renal function. Those
with nephrotic syndrome and hypertension at the time of presentation progress to renal failure more rapidly. No definitive therapy
exists, but several reports, including a randomized controlled trial,
indicate that extended courses of alternate-­day prednisone (for
years) provide benefit. Some patients treated with steroids enter a
complete clinical remission of their disease, but many have ongoing disease activity. Nevertheless, an extended course of prednisone
is associated with significant preservation of renal function when
compared with patients receiving no such treatment.
The prognosis of C3GN, separate from dense deposit disease (considered a part of C3GN by some) and other forms of classically defined
MPGN, is as yet hard to define because reports of the outcome of such
patients previously had been grouped in studies of all forms of MPGN
(types I and II, and even a poorly characterized type III form not considered earlier). The apparent pathophysiology of C3GN promises that
treatments targeting the interruption of complement activation pathways, such as complement factor H replacement or shutting down the
terminal complement cascade by blocking C5 activation with eculizumab (anti–C5 antibody), could be beneficial in preventing the progression of renal disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

559.7 Rapidly Progressive (Crescentic)
Glomerulonephritis
Francisco X. Flores
Rapidly progressive describes the clinical course of several forms
of glomerulonephritis (GN) that have the unifying feature of a
histopathologic finding of crescents in the majority of glomeruli
(Fig. 559.9). The terms rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
(RPGN) and crescentic glomerulonephritis (CGN) are synonymous.
The natural history of most forms of CGN is the rapid loss of the
renal function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 559 u Isolated Glomerular Diseases Associated with Recurrent Gross Hematuria

3195

Table 559.3  Classification of Rapidly Progressive
(Crescentic) Glomerulonephritis
PRIMARY
Anti–glomerular basement membrane antibody disease
Goodpasture syndrome (with pulmonary disease)
Immune complex mediated
Pauci-­immune (usually antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive)
SECONDARY
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Immunoglobulin A nephropathy, IgA vasculitis
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Light micrograph showing a cellular crescent in Bowman’s space. The underlying
glomerular tuft is delineated by the glomerular basement membranes. (Periodic
acid-Schiff stain, x500.) (From Saha MK, Pendergraft WF, Jennette JC, Falk RJ. Primary
glomerular dsease. In Yu AS, Chertow, G, et al, eds. Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney,
11th edition. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 31.34.)

microscopy typify pauciimmune GN (granulomatosis with polyangiitis
and microscopic polyangiitis) and idiopathic crescentic GN.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Fig. 559.9 Light micrograph showing a cellular crescent in Bowman’s
space. The underlying glomerular tuft is delineated by the glomerular
basement membranes. (Periodic acid-Schiff stain, x500.) (From Saha
MK, Pendergraft WF, Jennette JC, Falk RJ. Primary glomerular dsease.
In Yu AS, Chertow, G, et al, eds. Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney, 11th
edition. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 31.34.)

Most children present with acute nephritis (hematuria, various degrees of
renal dysfunction, and hypertension) and usually have concomitant proteinuria, often with nephrotic syndrome. Occasional patients present late in
the course of disease with oliguric renal failure. Extrarenal manifestations,
such as pulmonary involvement, joint symptoms, or skin lesions, can help
lead to the diagnosis of the underlying systemic disease causing the CGN.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CLASSIFICATION

CGN can be a severe manifestation of essentially every defined primary
and secondary GN, but particular forms of GN are more likely to present
as, or evolve into, RPGN (Table 559.3). If no underlying cause is identified by systemic features, serologic testing, or histologic examination, the
disease is classified as idiopathic CGN. The incidence of specific etiologies of CGN in children varies widely; certain common themes are shared
in all such reports. Patients with systemic vasculitis appear to be particularly prone to develop CGN. Patients with IgA vasculitis, antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-­mediated GN (microscopic polyangiitis
and granulomatosis with polyangiitis), and systemic lupus erythematosus
account for the majority of patients with CGN. Postinfectious GN or endocarditis rarely progresses to CGN, but because it is the most common form
of GN in childhood, it accounts for a significant percentage of patients with
CGN in most reports. MPGN and idiopathic disease make up most of the
remaining cases of CGN. IgA nephropathy, a common GN, only rarely is
rapidly progressive. Goodpasture disease often has rapidly progressive GN
as a component of the syndrome, but its rarity in childhood results in only
a small percentage of children with CGN.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The hallmark of CGN is the histopathologic finding of epithelial crescents
involving 50% or more glomeruli (see Fig. 559.9). Crescent formation,
through proliferation of parietal epithelial cells in Bowman’s space, may
be the final pathway of any severe inflammatory glomerular injury. Podocytes and renal progenitor cells are involved in the pathogenesis of CGN.
Fibrous crescents, in which proliferative cellular crescents are replaced
by collagen, are a late finding. The immunofluorescence findings, as well
as the pattern of any deposits by electron microscopy, can delineate the
underlying glomerulopathy in CGN secondary to lupus, IgA vasculitis
nephritis, MPGN, postinfectious GN, IgA nephropathy, or Goodpasture
disease. Rare or absent findings by immunofluorescence and electron

The diagnosis of CGN is made by obtaining a kidney biopsy. Delineation of the underlying etiology is reached by a combination of additional biopsy findings (described earlier), extrarenal symptoms and
signs, and serologic testing, including the evaluation of antinuclear
and anti-­DS DNA antibodies, serum complement levels, anti-­GBM
antibodies, and ANCA titers. If the patient has no extrarenal manifestations and a negative serologic evaluation, and if the biopsy has no
immune or electron microscopy deposits, the diagnosis is idiopathic,
rapidly progressive CGN.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

The natural course of CGN is far more severe in the setting of other
etiologies, including the idiopathic category, and progression to end-­stage
kidney disease within weeks to months from the onset is common. Having
a majority of fibrous crescents on a renal biopsy portends a poor prognosis, because the disease usually has progressed to irreversible damage.
Although there are few controlled data, the consensus of most nephrologists is that the combination of high-­dose corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide may be effective in preventing progressive renal failure in patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus, IgA vasculitis nephritis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and IgA nephropathy if given early in the course
when acute cellular crescents predominate. Although such therapy can
also be effective in the other diseases causing RPGN, renal outcomes in
those settings are less favorable. Progression to end-­stage kidney disease
often occurs despite aggressive immunosuppressive therapy. In combination with immunosuppression, plasmapheresis has been reported to benefit patients with Goodpasture disease. Plasmapheresis may also benefit
patients with ANCA-­associated CGN, in particular those with the most
severe renal dysfunction and pulmonary hemorrhage at presentation. The
possible benefits of plasmapheresis in other forms of RPGN are unclear.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3196 Part XXI u Nephrology

Chapter 560

Multisystem Disease
Associated with
Hematuria
Prasad Devarajan

infection is common in children (30–50%) and results in remission
of the glomerulopathy. Widespread use of hepatitis B vaccines has
decreased the incidence of HBV-­related renal diseases. Also, with the
new availability of direct-­acting antivirals for hepatitis C virus, a sustained virologic response, successful remission, and even regression of
glomerular lesions can be achieved if treatment is initiated at an early
stage. Similarly, in patients with HIV-­associated nephropathy, several
clinical studies have demonstrated the overall improvement in kidney
function with early initiation of antiretroviral therapy. Particularly in
children, modern antiretroviral therapy has improved the outcome and
decreased the prevalence of childhood HIV-­associated nephropathy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Gross or microscopic hematuria may be associated with several multi­
system disorders, including chronic systemic infections, systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), IgA vasculitis nephritis (formerly known
as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura nephritis), Goodpasture disease, hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), nephrotoxicity, and renal cortical
necrosis. In most of these conditions, the presenting complaints pertain primarily to the underlying systemic illness, and hematuria often
heralds or portends renal involvement (see Chapters 560.1-­560.8).

560.1 Chronic Infections
Prasad Devarajan
Glomerulonephritis (GN) with hematuria is a recognized complication of various chronic infections. Examples include bacterial endocarditis caused by viridans group streptococci and other organisms,
and ventriculoatrial shunts infected with Staphylococcus epidermidis.
Other infections, observed less commonly in children than in adults,
include those due to HIV, hepatitis B virus (HBV), or hepatitis C virus;
syphilis; and renal candidiasis. Parasitic infections associated with
glomerular disease include malaria, schistosomiasis, leishmaniasis,
filariasis, hydatid disease, trypanosomiasis, and toxoplasmosis. In each
condition, the infecting organism has a low virulence, and the host is
chronically infected with a microbial antigen. In the presence of high
levels of circulating antigen, the host’s antibody response leads to the
formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the kidneys and
initiate glomerular inflammation. Foreign antigens can also stimulate
an autoimmune response through the production of antibodies that
cross react with such antigens incorrectly recognized as glomerular
structural components.
The kidney histopathology in GN due to chronic infections can
resemble poststreptococcal GN, membranous GN, or membranoproliferative GN. The clinical manifestations are generally those of an acute
nephritic syndrome (active urinary sediment with hematuria, proteinuria, and granular and/or red blood cell (RBC) casts, edema, hypertension) or nephrotic syndrome (proteinuria, edema, hypoalbuminemia).
The serum C3 and CH50 complement levels are often decreased due to
activation of the classic complement pathway.
In HIV-­associated nephropathy, direct viral infection of nephrons
occurs because renal cells express a variety of lymphocyte chemokine
receptors that are essential for and facilitate viral invasion. The kidney
expression of HIV infection is quite variable and includes an immune
complex injury and a direct cytopathic effect. The classic histopathologic lesion of HIV-­associated nephropathy is focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. In the era of antiretroviral therapy, the decline in mortality
from HIV disease has led to the increased recognition of renal disorders as an important long-­term complication in children who survive
perinatal HIV infection.
HBV infection is a global public health problem. It is estimated that
there are more than 350 million HBV carriers in the world.
Prompt eradication of any infection before severe glomerular
injury occurs usually results in resolution of the GN associated with
chronic infections. Progression to end-­stage kidney disease has been
described but is uncommon. Spontaneous resolution of hepatitis B

560.2 Glomerulonephritis Associated with
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Prasad Devarajan
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease
characterized by fever, weight loss, dermatitis, hematologic abnormalities, arthritis, and involvement of the heart, lungs, central nervous
system (CNS), and kidneys (see Chapter 199). Although SLE is less frequent in children, kidney involvement (lupus nephritis) is more common and is more severe than that seen in adults. Lupus nephritis is the
most important cause of morbidity and mortality in SLE.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

The hallmark of SLE is the abnormal production of pathogenic autoantibodies to self-­antigens such as DNA (anti–double stranded DNA
antibody [anti-­dsDNA]) and nuclear proteins (antinuclear antibodies
[ANA]), driven by immune dysregulation and loss of self-­tolerance.
The antigen-­antibody complexes accumulate in small vessels of many
organs, where they incite a local inflammatory response by activating
complement pathways and by binding to Fc receptors. Lupus nephritis
is a result of the deposition of circulating immune complexes, as well
as the direct binding of autoantibodies to glomerular components with
resultant complement stimulation.
Kidney biopsy and evaluation of kidney histopathology remain the
gold standard for establishing the diagnosis of SLE nephritis and determining specific therapeutic regimens. The World Health Organization
(WHO) classification of lupus nephritis has been employed in clinical
trials and is based on a combination of features, including light microscopy, immunofluorescence, and electron microscopy. In patients with
WHO class I nephritis (minimal mesangial lupus nephritis), no histologic abnormalities are detected on light microscopy, but mesangial
immune deposits are present on immunofluorescence or electron
microscopy. In WHO class II nephritis (mesangial proliferative
nephritis), light microscopy shows both mesangial hypercellularity and
an increased matrix, along with mesangial deposits containing immunoglobulin and complement.
WHO class III nephritis and WHO class IV nephritis are interrelated lesions characterized by both mesangial and endocapillary
lesions. Class III nephritis is defined by <50% glomeruli with involvement, and class IV has ≥50% glomerular involvement. Immune deposits are present in both the mesangium and subendothelial areas. A
subclassification scheme helps grade the severity of the proliferative
lesion based on whether the glomerular lesions are segmental (<50%
glomerular tuft involved) or global (≥50% glomerular tuft involved).
The WHO classification scheme also delineates whether there is a predominance of chronic disease versus active disease. Chronic injury
results in glomerular sclerosis and is felt to be the consequence of significant proliferative disease seen in classes III and IV. Other signs of
active disease include capillary walls that are thickened secondary to
subendothelial deposits (creating the characteristic wire-­loop lesion),
necrosis, and crescent formation. WHO class IV nephritis is associated
with poorer outcomes but can be successfully treated with aggressive
immunosuppressive therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 560 u Multisystem Disease Associated with Hematuria 3197
WHO class V nephritis (membranous lupus nephritis) is less commonly seen as an isolated lesion and resembles idiopathic membranous
nephropathy with subepithelial immune deposits. This lesion is often
seen in combination with class III or IV proliferative nephritis, and
if the membranous lesion is present in >50% glomeruli, both classes
are noted in the designation. This classification scheme also identifies
cases with combinations of mixed classes III, IV, and V lesions, directing appropriate treatment for such patients.
Another classification scheme proposed by both the International
Society of Nephrology and the Renal Pathology Society differs mainly
in its subclassification of class IV into diffuse global and diffuse segmental lesions (Table 560.1). Although this classification is widely preferred, it should be noted that most available results of clinical trials are
based on the WHO classification.
Transformation of the histologic lesions of lupus nephritis from one
class to another is common. This is more likely to occur among inadequately treated patients and usually results in progression to a more
severe histologic lesion.
Immunofluorescence microscopy is an essential component of the
pathologic evaluation. Lupus nephritis is characterized by the granular deposition of all immunoglobulin isotypes (IgG, IgM, and IgA—
also referred to as “full house”), as well as complements (C3, C4, and
C1q) in the glomerular mesangium and capillary walls. This pattern of
extensive glomerular immune deposition is referred to as full-­house
immune staining and is diagnostic of lupus nephritis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most children with SLE are adolescent females (female-­to-­male ratio
of 5:1) and present with extrarenal manifestations. The relative risk
of SLE is three-­to sevenfold higher in Asian, Black, and Hispanic
females compared with White females. Lupus nephritis in Black and
Hispanic populations also typically displays an increased severity and

Table 560.1  Classification of Lupus Nephritis
CLASS

CLINICAL FEATURES

I.	Minimal mesangial LN

No renal findings

II.	Mesangial proliferative LN

Mild clinical renal disease;
minimally active urinary
sediment; mild to moderate
proteinuria (never nephrotic)
but may have active serology

III.	Focal proliferative LN
(<50% glomeruli involved)
A. Active
A/C. Active and chronic
C. Chronic

More active sediment changes;
often active serology; increased
proteinuria (>25% nephrotic);
hypertension may be present;
some evolve into class IV
pattern; active lesions require
treatment; chronic do not

IV.	Diffuse proliferative LN
(>50% glomeruli involved);
all may be with segmental or
global involvement (S or G)
A. Active
A/C. Active and chronic
C. Chronic

Most severe renal involvement
with active sediment,
hypertension, heavy proteinuria
(frequent nephrotic syndrome),
often reduced glomerular
filtration rate; serology very
active; active lesions require
treatment

V.	Membranous LN
glomerulonephritis

Significant proteinuria (often
nephrotic) with less active lupus
serology

VI.	Advanced sclerosing LN

More than 90%
glomerulosclerosis; no
treatment prevents renal failure

LN, Lupus nephritis.
From Radhakrishnan J, Appel GB. Glomerular disorders and nephrotic syndromes. In:
Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman’s Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2020: Table 113.7.

worse prognosis. Lupus nephritis affects 80% of pediatric patients with
SLE, and although it commonly presents within the first year of diagnosis, may occur at any time during the disease. The clinical findings
in patients having milder forms of lupus nephritis (all class I and II,
some class III) include hematuria, normal renal function, and proteinuria <1 g/24 hr. Some patients with class III and all patients with class
IV nephritis have hematuria and proteinuria, active urinary sediment
with cellular casts, hypertension, reduced kidney function, nephrotic
syndrome, or acute kidney injury. The urinalysis may be normal on
rare occasions in patients with proliferative lupus nephritis. Patients
with class V nephritis commonly present with nephrotic syndrome.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of SLE is confirmed by the detection of circulating ANA
and by demonstrating antibodies that react with native anti-­dsDNA.
In most patients with active disease, C3 and C4 levels are depressed. In
view of the lack of a clear correlation between the clinical manifestations and the severity of the kidney involvement, kidney biopsy should
be performed in all patients with SLE who display even minor urinary
abnormalities or other clinical evidence for renal disease. Histopathologic findings are used to determine the classification, severity, prognosis, and selection of specific immunosuppressive therapies.

TREATMENT

Current therapies are largely based on the histology, clinical severity,
and lessons learned from clinical trials of adults with lupus nephritis.
Immunosuppression remains the cornerstone of therapy. The goal of
immunosuppressive therapy in lupus nephritis is to produce both a
clinical remission, defined as normalization of renal function and proteinuria, and a serologic remission, defined as normalization of anti-­
DNA antibody, C3, and C4 levels. Therapy is initiated in all patients
with prednisone at a dose of 1-­2 mg/kg/day in divided doses, followed
by a slow steroid taper over 4-­6 months beginning 4-­6 weeks after
achieving a serologic remission.
For patients with more severe forms of nephritis (WHO classes III
and IV), more aggressive immunosuppressive regimens are required
because corticosteroid therapy alone is insufficient to induce a remission. In general, such regimens are separated into two phases, namely,
induction and maintenance. The most commonly employed induction therapy has been six consecutive monthly intravenous infusions
of cyclophosphamide at a dose of 500-­1,000 mg/m2. Pulse intravenous
methylprednisolone (1,000 mg/m2) is also used in addition to oral corticosteroids. Maintenance therapy previously consisted of additional
cyclophosphamide infusions every 3 months for 18 months, which
reduced the risk of progressive renal dysfunction. Serious side effects
of cyclophosphamide have included infections, hair loss, hemorrhagic
cystitis, and gonadal failure.
As an alternative induction therapy, in adult and pediatric clinical
trials, mycophenolate mofetil was as efficacious as, or even superior to,
cyclophosphamide, and is increasingly considered for use in children
at a dosage of 600 mg/m2 per dose twice daily. Maintenance therapy
using mycophenolate mofetil or azathioprine is also as efficacious as
intravenous cyclophosphamide and results in less serious side effects.
Mycophenolate mofetil is particularly more efficacious than cyclophosphamide in Black patients. Major side effects of mycophenolate mofetil
have included diarrhea, leukopenia, and teratogenicity. Azathioprine,
at a single daily dose of 1.5-­2.0 mg/kg, may be used as a steroid-­sparing
agent in patients with WHO class I or II lupus nephritis.
Rituximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody specific for human
CD20, is an alternative that has been shown to induce a remission
in adults and children with proliferative lupus nephritis refractory to
steroids and other immunosuppressants. Rituximab is used in cases
where resistance to conventional treatment is demonstrated. Plasmapheresis is ineffective in lupus nephritis unless there is accompanying thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) or antineutrophilic
cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-­
associated disease. Other therapies
include belimumab, a fully humanized monoclonal antibody against
a type II transmembrane protein that functions in the normal survival
and differentiation of B cells; it has been approved by the FDA for use

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3198 Part XXI u Nephrology
in SLE. Its role in lupus nephritis, either in combination with current
therapies or to replace them, requires further study.
The optimal treatment for class V lupus nephritis remains unclear.
On the one hand, the low risk of progression to end-­stage kidney disease when compared with proliferative forms of lupus nephritis has
encouraged a less aggressive approach. On the other hand, patients
with uncontrolled nephrotic syndrome due to class V lupus nephritis are at a high risk of morbidity and may require more aggressive
immunosuppression.
Hydroxychloroquine is prescribed for most patients with SLE for
extrarenal manifestations but is thought to have a beneficial effect in
maintaining the remission in lupus nephritis. It is a rational choice
given its low side effect profile. Use of antihypertensive drugs to aggressively treat hypertension, as well as the specific use of drugs that block
the renin-­angiotensin system (angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin-­receptor blockers) to reduce proteinuria, are also
important adjuvant therapies that appear to decrease the long-­term
progression of renal disease.

PROGNOSIS

Overall, kidney survival (defined as chronic kidney disease without progression to end-­stage kidney disease therapy) is seen in 80%
of patients 10 years after the diagnosis of SLE nephritis. Patients with
diffuse proliferative WHO class IV lupus nephritis, poor kidney function at presentation, or persistent nephrotic-­range proteinuria exhibit
the highest risk for progression to end-­stage kidney disease. Concerns
regarding the side effects of chronic immunosuppressive therapy and
the risk of recurrent disease are lifelong. Close monitoring for the
relapse of disease is critical to ensure maximally successful renal outcomes. Special care must be taken to minimize the risks of infection,
osteoporosis, obesity, poor growth, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus
associated with chronic corticosteroid therapy. Patients require counseling regarding the risk of malignancy or infertility, which may be
increased in those receiving a cumulative dose of >20 g of cyclophosphamide or other immunosuppressant therapies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

560.3 IgA Vasculitis Nephritis
Prasad Devarajan
IgA vasculitis (formerly known as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura) is an
idiopathic systemic immune complex–mediated vasculitis associated
with IgA deposition within small-­vessel walls. It is the most common
small-­vessel vasculitis in children, with a peak incidence in early childhood (4-­6 years of age). Ninety percent of cases occur in children,
with about half the cases preceded by an upper respiratory infection.
It is characterized by a purpuric rash and commonly accompanied by
arthritis and abdominal pain (see Chapter 210.1). Approximately 50%
of patients with IgA vasculitis develop kidney manifestations, which
vary from asymptomatic microscopic hematuria to severe, progressive
GN. IgA vasculitis nephritis shares a similar pathogenesis and nearly
identical kidney histology with IgA nephropathy. Although the two are
considered as distinct entities, many consider IgA vasculitis nephritis
and IgA nephropathy as part of the same clinical spectrum and IgA
nephropathy as one of the sequelae of IgA vasculitis nephritis.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

The pathogenesis of IgA vasculitis nephritis appears to be mediated
by the deposition of polymeric IgA in glomeruli. This is analogous to
the same type of IgA deposits seen in systemic small vessels in IgA
vasculitis, primarily those of the skin and intestine. Studies have identified defective glycosylation of the hinge region of IgA1 in patients
with both IgA vasculitis nephritis and IgA nephropathy. Recognition
of the exposed hinge region of IgA1 by naturally occurring autoantibodies leads to formation of immune complexes that are deposited
in the glomerular mesangium. Any mucosal infection or food antigen

may trigger the increased production of pathogenic IgA1. IgA immune
complexes are deposited throughout the body and activate pathways
leading to necrotizing vasculitis. A skin biopsy characteristically shows
leukocytoclastic vasculitis with IgA, C3, and fibrin deposition. The glomerular findings can be indistinguishable from those of IgA nephropathy. Pathognomonic IgA deposits are detected by immunofluorescence
as the dominant immunoglobulin in the glomerular mesangium. Histologically, a broad spectrum of glomerular lesions that can range from
mild mesangial and endocapillary proliferation to necrotic and crescentic changes from extracapillary proliferation can be seen.

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MANIFESTATIONS

The classic tetrad of IgA vasculitis nephritis includes a palpable purpura, arthritis or arthralgia, abdominal pain, and evidence for kidney
disease. These may develop over a period of days to weeks and may vary
in their order of presentation. Notably, not all of the tetrad are present in all patients. The nephritis associated with IgA vasculitis usually
follows the onset of the rash, often presenting weeks or even months
after the initial nonkidney manifestations have resolved. Nephritis can
be manifest at the initial presentation but only rarely before onset of
the rash. Some degree of kidney involvement occurs in approximately
50% of IgA vasculitis cases, more commonly in older children (age >8
years confers a threefold greater risk for kidney involvement). Most
patients (80%) initially display only mild renal involvement, principally isolated microscopic hematuria without significant proteinuria.
About 20% of patients can present with a more severe kidney involvement, including a combined acute nephritic and nephrotic picture
(hematuria, hypertension, renal insufficiency, significant proteinuria,
and nephrotic syndrome). Older children (and adults) have a greater
risk for more severe involvement. Initial mild kidney involvement can
also occasionally progress to more severe nephritis despite resolution of all other features of IgA vasculitis. The severity of the systemic
manifestations is not correlated with the severity of the nephritis. Most
patients who develop nephritis have urinary abnormalities by 1 month,
and nearly all have abnormalities by 3-­6 months after the onset of IgA
vasculitis. Therefore a urinalysis (and blood pressure checks) should
be performed weekly in patients with IgA vasculitis during the period
of active clinical disease (usually during the first 4 weeks). Thereafter,
a urinalysis (and blood pressure checks) should be performed once
a month for up to 6 months. If all urinalyses and blood pressures are
normal during this follow-­up interval, nephritis is unlikely to develop.
If proteinuria, kidney insufficiency, or hypertension develops along
with hematuria, consultation with a pediatric nephrologist is indicated. Indications for a kidney biopsy in children with IgA vasculitis
nephritis include significant proteinuria (urine protein >1 g/day or
urine protein/creatinine ratio >1.0), significant hypertension, or elevated serum creatinine.
Mimics of IgA vasculitis include endocarditis (skin, renal) and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (skin, renal).

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

The prognosis of IgA vasculitis nephritis for most patients is excellent.
Spontaneous and complete resolution of the nephritis typically occurs
in many patients with mild initial manifestations (isolated hematuria
with insignificant proteinuria). However, such patients uncommonly
can progress to severe kidney involvement, including development of
chronic kidney disease. Patients with acute nephritic or nephrotic syndrome at presentation have a guarded kidney prognosis, particularly if
they are found to have concomitant necrosis or substantial crescentic
changes on kidney biopsy. Untreated, the risk of developing chronic
kidney disease, including end-­stage kidney disease, is 2–5% in all
patients with IgA vasculitis, but almost 50% in those with the most
severe early kidney clinical and histologic features.
No controlled studies have demonstrated any efficacy of short
courses (weeks) of oral corticosteroids administered promptly after
the onset of IgA vasculitis in either preventing the development of
nephritis or decreasing the severity of subsequent kidney involvement.
Tonsillectomy has been proposed as an intervention for IgA vasculitis
nephritis, but it also does not appear to have any measurable effect on

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 560 u Multisystem Disease Associated with Hematuria 3199
the renal outcome. Mild IgA vasculitis nephritis does not require treatment because it usually resolves spontaneously.
The efficacy of treatment for moderate or severe IgA vasculitis
nephritis, which is far more likely to progress to chronic kidney disease, is more difficult to assess. Several uncontrolled studies have
reported a significant benefit from aggressive immunosuppression
(high-­dose and extended courses of corticosteroids with azathioprine,
mycophenolate mofetil, or cyclophosphamide) in patients with poor
prognostic features on kidney biopsy; such patients are at high risk
of progressing to chronic kidney disease. Reports of the treatment of
high-­risk patients with either plasmapheresis or rituximab have also
indicated a potential benefit. Balancing the absence of controlled data
with the severe side effects of aggressive therapies in patients with poor
renal prognostic factors is difficult. Aggressive therapy with careful
monitoring may be reasonable in those with the most severe IgA vasculitis nephritis (>50% crescents on biopsy). One common approach
in children with severe clinical kidney involvement (nephrotic range
proteinuria, elevated serum creatinine, hypertension) is the use of
oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day for 3 months), along with angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors, followed by azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil if severe clinical involvement persists. For children with
severe histologic manifestations (>50% glomerular crescents), treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone pulses for 3 days, followed
by a combination of oral prednisone (for 3 months) and azathioprine
or mycophenolate mofetil (extended course) may be considered. For
children with the most severe histology (>75% glomerular crescents)
and progressive kidney disease, intravenous steroids plus plasmapheresis may be considered. If progression to end-­stage kidney disease
occurs, renal transplantation is the treatment of choice. Deposition of
IgA in the transplanted kidney is common, but most cases are subclinical, and the overall graft survival is similar to that for other renal
transplant recipients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

560.4 Goodpasture Disease
Prasad Devarajan
Goodpasture disease is an autoimmune disease characterized by pulmonary hemorrhage, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, and
elevated anti–glomerular basement membrane (anti-­GBM) antibody
titers. The disease results from an attack on these organs by antibodies
directed against certain epitopes of type IV collagen, located within
the alveolar basement membrane in the lung and glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) in the kidney. An acquired conformational change
in the noncollagenous 1 domain of the alpha 3-­chain of type IV collagen leads to the production of pathologic autoantibodies. The high
affinity of these antibodies to the GBM results in the characteristic rapidly progressive kidney disease. Infusion of human anti-­GBM antibodies into animals reproduces the rapidly aggressive glomerulonephritis,
confirming the high pathogenicity of these antibodies.

PATHOLOGY

Kidney biopsy shows proliferative crescentic glomerulonephritis in
most patients. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrates the
pathognomonic continuous linear deposition of immunoglobulin G
along the GBM (Fig. 560.1).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Goodpasture disease is rare in childhood. Patients usually present with
hemoptysis from pulmonary hemorrhage that can be life-­threatening.
Concomitant renal manifestations include acute glomerulonephritis with hematuria, nephritic urinary sediment with cellular casts,
proteinuria, and hypertension, which usually follow a rapidly progressive course. Kidney failure commonly develops within days to
weeks of the clinical presentation. Although fever may be present,
other systemic complaints such as malaise or arthralgia are usually

Fig. 560.1 Immunofluorescence micrograph demonstrating the continuous linear staining of immunoglobulin G along the glomerular basement membrane in Goodpasture disease (×250).

absent; their presence should raise suspicion for a systemic vasculitis. Less commonly, patients can have anti-­GBM nephritis manifesting
as isolated, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis without pulmonary
hemorrhage. In essentially all cases, anti-­GBM antibody is present in
the serum and/or the kidney, and the serum complement C3 level is
normal. Antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) levels can
be found to be elevated in 10–40% of patients, along with the anti-­
GBM antibody; such patients doubly positive for these autoantibodies have more severe disease at presentation. In general, anti-­GBM
antibody titers are correlated with the severity of the renal involvement. However, a kidney biopsy should be performed (unless contraindicated) because the accuracy of anti-­GBM serology is variable,
and renal biopsy provides additional histologic information that can
guide therapy.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is made by a combination of the clinical presentation of
pulmonary hemorrhage with acute glomerulonephritis, the presence
of serum antibodies directed against GBM (anti–type IV collagen in
GBM), and characteristic renal biopsy findings. Other diseases that can
cause a pulmonary-­renal syndrome need to be considered and include
SLE, IgA vasculitis, nephrotic syndrome–associated pulmonary embolism, and ANCA-­associated vasculitis (such as granulomatosis with
polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis). These diseases are ruled out
by the absence of other characteristic clinical features, kidney biopsy
findings, and negative serologic studies for antibodies against nuclear
(ANA), DNA (anti-­dsDNA), and neutrophil cytoplasmic components
(ANCA antibody).

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Untreated, the prognosis of Goodpasture disease is poor. Treatment
must be initiated emergently as soon as the diagnosis is suspected. The
prompt institution of plasmapheresis, high-­dose intravenous methylprednisolone, and cyclophosphamide often induces remission and
improves survival times. Initial therapy with plasmapheresis removes
circulating anti-­GBM antibodies, and initial immunosuppression with
steroids and cyclophosphamide inhibits ongoing antibody production. Rituximab may be used as a substitute in cases where cyclophosphamide toxicity is encountered. Initial treatment is guided by the
clinical response and serial anti-­GBM antibody titers. Retrospective
cohort studies suggest that when this combination of treatments is
started early, most patients will have a good kidney outcome. However, an initial presentation with oligoanuria, a high proportion of glomerular crescents, or kidney failure requiring dialysis predicts worse
kidney and patient survival rates. After the induction of remission,
maintenance therapy with lower doses of prednisone and azathioprine
(or mycophenolate mofetil) is continued for 6-­9 months. However,
patients who survive the acute pulmonary hemorrhage and rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis can still progress to end-­stage kidney
disease despite ongoing immunosuppressive therapy. For patients who

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3200 Part XXI u Nephrology
progress, kidney transplantation is the treatment of choice. Relapse and
recurrent disease after kidney transplantation are both uncommon.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

560.5 Hemolytic-­Uremic Syndrome
Prasad Devarajan
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (HUS) is a common cause of community-­
acquired acute kidney injury in young children. It is the most common
form of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) in children (Fig. 560.2).
Like all TMAs, HUS is characterized by the triad of microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and kidney insufficiency. HUS
has clinical features in common with thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP) (see Chapter 533.5). The etiology and pathophysiology
of the more common forms of HUS clearly delineate typical childhood
HUS as separate from idiopathic TTP.

ETIOLOGY

The various etiologies of HUS and other related thrombotic microangiopathies allow classification into infection-­induced, genetic, drug-­
induced, and HUS associated with systemic diseases characterized
by microvascular injury (Table 560.2; see Fig. 560.2). The most common form of HUS is caused by Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia
coli (STEC), which causes prodromal acute enteritis and is commonly
termed STEC-­HUS or diarrhea-­associated HUS. In the subcontinent of
Asia and in southern Africa, the toxin of Shigella dysenteriae type 1 is
causative, whereas in Western countries, verotoxin or STEC is the usual
cause. STEC-­HUS accounts for about 90% of all HUS cases in childhood.

Several serotypes of E. coli can produce the toxin. O157:H7 is most
common in Europe and the Americas; other serotypes include O26,
O111, O121, O145, O91, O103, O104, and O80. The reservoir of
STEC is the intestinal tract of domestic animals, usually cows. Disease commonly is transmitted by undercooked meat or unpasteurized (raw) milk and apple cider. Local outbreaks have followed the
ingestion of undercooked, contaminated hamburger or other foods
cross-­contaminated on unwashed cutting boards at fast food restaurants; contaminated municipal water supplies; petting farms; and
swimming in contaminated ponds, lakes, or pools. With broad food
distribution, wider epidemics have been traced to lettuce, raw spinach, and bean sprouts contaminated with STEC. Less often, STEC has
been spread by person-­to-­person contact within families or childcare
centers.
A rare but distinct entity of infection-­triggered HUS is related
to neuraminidase-­producing Streptococcus pneumoniae (Sp-­HUS).
Sp-­
HUS, typically severe, develops during acute infection with
this organism, typically manifesting as pneumonia with empyema. Compared with the prevaccine era, Sp-­HUS incidence seems
to be decreasing after the introduction of 7-­serotype valent and
13-­serotype valent pneumococcal vaccines. However, severe Sp-­HUS
cases continue to occur secondary to vaccine failure and emergence
of nonvaccine/replacement serotypes. A TMA, similar to HUS or
TTP, also can occur in patients with untreated HIV infection and
influenza infection.
Genetic forms of HUS (atypical, nondiarrheal) compose the second major category of the disease (see Table 560.2 and Fig. 560.2).
Inherited deficiencies of either von Willebrand factor–cleaving protease (ADAMTS13) or complement factor H, I, or B can cause HUS. A
specific genetic defect has not been identified in approximately 50% of
familial cases transmitted in classic Mendelian autosomal dominant or

Thrombotic microangiopathies
(TMA)

TIP (ADAMTS13 deficiency)
Acquired due to autoantibody to
ADAMTS13
Congenital due to homozygous or
compound heterozygous ADAMTS
pathogenic variants

Hemolytic uremic
syndrome

aHUS with dysregulation of the
alternative complement pathway

Miscellaneous conditions/
Diseases associated with TMA
Bone marrow/solid organ transplantation
Malignancy
Sepsis/DIC
Autoimmune disorders (SLE, APA syndrome)
Drugs (calcineurin inhibitors, gemcitabine, anti-VEGF)
Malignant hypertension
Pregnancy
HELLP syndrome
HIV infection, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Influenza
Cobalamin C defect
DGKE pathogenic variant

Shiga toxin-induced E. coli HUS
(STEC-HUS)

Pathogenic variants in CFH, CFI, MCP, C3, CFB, THBD
Anti-CFH antibodies
CFH/CFHR1 hybrid gene
CFHR1,3 deletion

Fig. 560.2 Classification algorithm for the thrombotic microangiopathies based on etiology. ADAMTS13, A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with
a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13; aHUS, atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome; APA, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome; CFB, complement Factor B; CFH, complement Factor H; CFI, complement Factor I; DGKE, diacylglycerol kinase ε; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation;
HELLP syndrome, hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count syndrome; MCP, membrane cofactor protein (CD46); SLE, systemic lupus
erythematosus; THBD, thrombomodulin gene; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. (From Dixon BP, Gruppo RA. Atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2018;65:509–525. Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 560 u Multisystem Disease Associated with Hematuria 3201
Table 560.2  Current Classification of Hemolytic
Uremic Syndromes and Thrombotic
Microangiopathies
DIARRHEA-­ASSOCIATED HUS
STEC (Escherichia coli O157:H7)
STEC (E .coli 0121 and 0104:H4)
Non-­STEC (Shigella dysenteriae type 1)
HUS SECONDARY TO SYSTEMIC INFECTIONS
Neuraminidase (Streptococcus pneumoniae)
HIV
Influenza
Human herpes virus 6
Parvovirus B19
Malaria
ATYPICAL HUS DUE TO COMPLEMENT DYSREGULATION
Factor H deficiency (pathogenic variants, autoantibodies)
Factor I deficiency (pathogenic variants)
Factor B (gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants)
Membrane cofactor (MCP) deficiency (pathogenic variants)
C3 deficiency (pathogenic variants, autoantibodies)
Thrombomodulin deficiency (pathogenic variants)
Anti–complement factor H antibody
Unknown
THROMBOTIC THROMBOCYTOPENIC PURPURA (TTP)
Inherited ADAMTS13 deficiency (pathogenic variants)
Acquired ADAMTS13 deficiency (antibody-­mediated)
Pregnancy-­associated
Vitamin B12 deficiency
DRUG INDUCED
Cyclosporine
Tacrolimus
Bleomycin
Mithramycin
Cisplatin
Quinine
Cocaine
Anti–vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-­VEGF) drugs
SYSTEMIC DISEASE ASSOCIATED
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Coexisting nephropathies
Malignant hypertension
Malignancies
Cobalamin C defect
Diacylglycerol kinase epsilon pathogenic variant
TRANSPLANT ASSOCIATED
Stem cell transplant
Bone marrow transplant
Renal
Heart
Intestinal

recessive patterns. Some of these may be due to cobalamin C pathogenic
variants. A major feature characteristic of genetic forms of HUS is the
absence of a preceding diarrheal prodrome, although the presence of a
diarrheal prodrome does not rule out atypical HUS. Genetic forms of
HUS can be indolent and unremitting once they become manifest, or
they can have a relapsing pattern precipitated by an infectious illness.
The latter feature likely explains the association of many infectious
agents with HUS, particularly in reports published before the recognition of the unique pathophysiology of STEC and neuraminidase-­
producing pneumococci in causing HUS.
HUS can be superimposed on any disease associated with
microvascular injury, including malignant hypertension, SLE, and
antiphospholipid syndrome. It can also occur after bone marrow or
solid organ transplantation and may be triggered by the use of the
calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus in that setting.
Several other medications also can induce HUS (see Table 560.2 and
Fig. 560.2).

PATHOLOGY

Kidney biopsies are only rarely performed in HUS because the diagnosis is usually established by clinical criteria, and the risks of biopsy
are significant during the active phase of the disease. Early glomerular
changes include thickening of the capillary walls caused by swelling of
endothelial cells and accumulation of fibrillar material between endothelial cells and the underlying basement membrane, causing narrowing of the capillary lumens. Platelet-­fibrin thrombi are often seen in
glomerular capillaries. Thrombi are also seen in afferent arterioles and
small arteries with fibrinoid necrosis of the arterial wall, leading to
kidney cortical necrosis from vascular occlusion. Late findings include
glomerular sclerosis and obsolescence secondary to either severe
direct glomerular involvement or glomerular ischemia from arteriolar
involvement.

PATHOGENESIS

Microvascular injury with endothelial cell damage is characteristic of
all forms of TMA, including HUS. In the diarrhea-­associated form of
HUS, enteropathic organisms produce either Shiga toxin or the highly
homologous Shiga-­like verotoxin. These toxins are easily absorbed
from the colonic mucosa into the systemic circulation, bind to endothelial cells in the glomerulus and elsewhere, and directly cause endothelial cell damage. Shiga toxin can also directly activate platelets to
promote their aggregation. Mechanical injury to RBCs passing through
the thrombotic microvasculature results in a severe nonimmune anemia with a negative direct Coombs test. In pneumococcal-­associated
HUS, neuraminidase cleaves sialic acid on membranes of endothelial
cells, red cells, and platelets to expose the underlying cryptic Thomsen-­
Friedenreich (T) antigen. Endogenous IgM antibodies recognize and
react with the T antigen to trigger hemolysis and anemia with a positive direct Coombs test.
The familial recessive and dominant forms of HUS, including the
inherited deficiencies of ADAMTS13 and regulators of the complement
cascade, probably predispose patients to developing HUS but do not
cause the disease per se because these patients might not develop HUS
until later childhood or even adulthood. In such cases, HUS is often
triggered by an inciting event such as an infectious disease. The absence
of ADAMTS13 impairs cleavage of von Willebrand factor multimers,
which enhances platelet aggregation. Factor H plays a central role in
complement regulation, primarily arresting the amplification and
propagation of complement activation. It is possible that mild endothelial injury that would normally resolve instead evolves to an aggressive
microangiopathy because of the inherited deficiencies of these factors.
In each form of HUS, capillary and arteriolar endothelial injury in
the kidney leads to localized thrombosis, particularly in glomeruli,
causing a direct decrease in glomerular filtration. Progressive platelet
aggregation in the areas of microvascular injury results in consumptive
thrombocytopenia. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia results from
mechanical damage to RBCs as they pass through the damaged and
thrombotic microvasculature.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Typical HUS (diarrhea form) is most common in preschool- and
school-­age children, but it can occur in adolescents and adults. In HUS
caused by toxigenic E. coli, the onset of HUS occurs 5-­7 days after the
onset of gastroenteritis with fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. The prodromal intestinal symptoms may be severe and require
hospitalization, but they can also be relatively mild and considered
trivial. Not all infected patients will develop HUS. The diarrhea is
often bloody but not necessarily so. After the prodromal illness, the
sudden onset of pallor, weakness, and lethargy heralds the onset of
HUS, and it reflects the development of microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia. Oliguria can be present in early stages but may be masked by
ongoing diarrhea because the prodromal enteritis often overlaps the
onset of HUS, particularly with ingestion of large doses of toxin. Thus
patients with HUS can present with either significant dehydration or
volume overload, depending on whether the enteritis or kidney insufficiency from HUS predominates and the amount of fluid that has been
administered.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3202 Part XXI u Nephrology
Patients with pneumococci-­associated HUS usually are quite ill with
pneumonia, empyema, and bacteremia when they develop HUS. The
onset can be insidious in patients with the genetic forms of HUS, with
HUS triggered by a variety of illnesses, including mild, nonspecific gastroenteritis or respiratory tract infections.
HUS can be relatively mild or can progress to a severe and fatal
multisystem disease. Leukocytosis, severe prodromal enteritis, hyponatremia, and antibiotic use portend a severe course, but no presenting features reliably predict the severity of HUS in any given patient.
Patients with HUS who appear mildly affected at presentation can rapidly develop severe, multisystem, life-­threatening complications. Kidney insufficiency can be mild but also can rapidly evolve into severe
oliguric or anuric kidney failure. The combination of rapidly developing kidney failure and severe hemolysis can result in life-­threatening
hyperkalemia. Severe acute kidney injury requiring dialysis develops
in about 50% of patients with STEC-­HUS. The duration of the dialysis requirement is usually about 2 weeks. Volume overload, hypertension, and severe anemia can all develop soon after the onset of HUS
and together can precipitate heart failure. Direct cardiac involvement
is rare, but pericarditis, myocardial dysfunction, or arrhythmias can
occur without predisposing features of hypertension, volume overload,
or electrolyte abnormalities.
The majority of patients with HUS have some CNS involvement.
Most have mild manifestations, with significant irritability, lethargy, or
nonspecific encephalopathic features. Severe CNS involvement occurs
in ≤20% of cases. Seizures and significant encephalopathy are the most
common manifestations in those with severe CNS involvement, resulting from focal ischemia secondary to microvascular CNS thrombosis.
Small infarctions in the basal ganglion and cerebral cortex have also
been reported, but large strokes and intracranial hemorrhage are rare.
Hypertension may produce an encephalopathy and seizures. Intestinal
complications can be protean and include severe inflammatory colitis,
ischemic enteritis, bowel perforation, intussusception, and pancreatitis. Patients can develop petechiae, but significant or severe bleeding is
rare despite very low platelet counts.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is made by the combination of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia with schistocytes, thrombocytopenia, and some degree
of kidney involvement. The anemia can be mild at presentation, but it
rapidly progresses. Thrombocytopenia is an invariable finding in the
acute phase, with platelet counts usually 20,000-­100,000/mm3. Partial thromboplastin and prothrombin times are usually normal. The
Coombs test is negative, except in pneumococci-­induced HUS, where
the Coombs test is usually positive. Leukocytosis is often present and
significant. Urinalysis typically shows microscopic hematuria and low-­
grade proteinuria. The kidney insufficiency can vary from mild elevations in serum BUN and creatinine to acute, anuric kidney failure.
The etiology of HUS is often clear with the presence of a diarrheal
prodrome or pneumococcal infection. The presence or absence of toxigenic organisms on stool culture has little role in making the diagnosis
of diarrhea-­associated STEC-­HUS. Only a minority (∼10%) of patients
infected with those organisms develops HUS, and the organisms that
cause HUS may be rapidly cleared. Therefore the stool culture may be
negative in patients who have diarrhea-­associated HUS. If no history
of diarrheal prodrome or pneumococcal infection is obtained, then
evaluation for genetic forms of HUS should be considered because
those patients are at risk for recurrence, have a severe prognosis, and
can benefit from specific therapy. Other causes of acute kidney injury
associated with a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia should be considered and excluded, such as SLE, malignant
hypertension, and bilateral renal vein thrombosis. A kidney biopsy is
rarely indicated to diagnose HUS.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

With early recognition and intensive supportive care, the mortality rate
for diarrhea-­associated HUS is <5%. Up to half of patients may require
dialysis support during the acute phase of the disease. Recovery of
platelet counts usually occurs first, followed by kidney recovery about

5 days later, and finally by resolution of anemia. Most recover kidney
function completely, but of surviving patients, 5% remain dependent
on dialysis, and up to 30% are left with some degree of chronic kidney
disease. The prognosis for HUS not associated with diarrhea is more
severe. Pneumococci-­associated HUS causes increased patient morbidity (>80% require dialysis), with the mortality rate reported as 20%.
The familial, genetic forms of HUS can be insidiously progressive or
relapsing diseases and have a poor prognosis. Identification of specific
factor deficiencies in some of these genetic forms provides an opportunity for directed therapy to improve the outcome.
The primary approach that has substantially improved an acute
outcome in HUS is early recognition of the disease, monitoring for
potential complications, and meticulous supportive care. Supportive
care includes careful management of fluid and electrolytes, including
prompt correction of a volume deficit, control of hypertension, and
early institution of dialysis if the patient becomes significantly oliguric
or anuric, particularly with hyperkalemia. Early intravenous volume
expansion before the onset of oliguria or anuria may be nephroprotective in diarrhea-­associated HUS. Red cell transfusions are usually
required because hemolysis can be brisk and recurrent until the active
phase of the disease has resolved. In pneumococci-­associated HUS, it
is critical that any administered red cells be washed before transfusion
to remove residual plasma, because endogenous IgM directed against
the revealed T antigen can play a role in accelerating the pathogenesis
of the disease. Platelets should generally not be administered, regardless of the platelet count, to patients with HUS because they are rapidly
consumed by the active coagulation and theoretically can worsen the
clinical course. Despite low platelet counts, serious bleeding is very rare
in patients with HUS.
There is no evidence that any therapy directed at arresting the disease process of the most common, diarrhea-­associated STEC-­HUS
provides benefit, and some can cause harm. Attempts have been made
using anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents, fibrinolytic therapy, plasma
therapy, immune globulin, and antibiotics. Anticoagulation, antiplatelet, and fibrinolytic therapies are specifically contraindicated because
they increase the risk of serious hemorrhage. Antibiotic therapy to
clear enteric toxigenic organisms (STEC) can result in increased toxin
release, potentially exacerbating the disease; therefore it is not recommended. However, prompt treatment of causative pneumococcal infection is important. The European experience with E. coli O104:H4 in
adults who were treated with azithromycin demonstrated more rapid
elimination of the organism. Furthermore, in vitro evidence suggests that meropenem, rifaximin, and azithromycin downregulate
the release and expression of Shiga toxin. Nonetheless, in children
with E. coli O157:H7–associated HUS, antibiotics are still considered
contraindicated.
Plasma infusion or plasmapheresis has been proposed for patients
suffering severe manifestations of HUS with serious CNS involvement. There are no controlled data demonstrating the effectiveness
of this approach, and it is specifically contraindicated in those with
pneumococcal-­associated HUS because it could exacerbate the disease.
The use of plasma therapy in STEC-­HUS was one of many treatment
strategies during one of the largest reported outbreaks of STEC-­HUS.
This outbreak was caused by an uncommon serotype (O104:H4) that
had unique virulence factors. Thought initially to cause more severe
disease, it differed epidemiologically from other STEC-­HUS serotypes
by affecting primarily healthy adults, rather than the usual pattern of
affecting children and the elderly. Treatment in this epidemic included
plasma exchange in most of the adult patients, as well as the use of
eculizumab.
Eculizumab is an anti-­C5 antibody that inhibits complement activation, a pathway that contributes to active disease in some forms of
atypical familial HUS; this pathway may also contribute to the process in STEC-­HUS. Eculizumab is approved by the FDA for the treatment of atypical HUS. Because of the risk of meningococcal disease in
patients with defects in terminal complement components, it is recommended to give the meningococcal vaccine before giving eculizumab
(if the patient has not been primarily immunized). Although initial
reports suggested that eculizumab provided benefit in patients with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 560 u Multisystem Disease Associated with Hematuria 3203
diarrhea-­associated HUS, subsequent systematic analysis showed no
benefit from either plasma exchange or eculizumab.
Plasma therapy can be of substantial benefit to patients with identified deficits of ADAMTS13 or factor H. It may also be considered
in patients with other genetic forms of HUS, such as the undefined
familial (recessive or dominant) form or sporadic but recurrent HUS.
In contrast to its use in STEC-­HUS, eculizumab shows great promise in the treatment of atypical HUS, including HUS occurring following renal transplantation. Whether it should be combined with
plasma therapy or used as a primary treatment of atypical HUS is still
undetermined.
Most patients with diarrhea-­associated HUS recover completely,
with little risk of long-­term sequelae. Patients with hypertension, any
level of kidney insufficiency, or residual urinary abnormalities persisting a year after an episode of diarrhea-­positive HUS (particularly
significant proteinuria) require careful follow-­up. Patients who have
recovered completely with no residual urinary abnormalities after 1
year are less likely but may still manifest long-­term sequelae. In a multi­
center pooled analysis of 3,476 children with hemolytic uremic syndrome followed up for a mean of 4.4 years, the combined average death
and end-­stage kidney disease rate was 12%, and the combined average
kidney sequelae rate (chronic kidney disease, proteinuria, hypertension) was 25%. Because of reports of late sequelae in such patients,
annual examinations with a primary physician are still warranted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

560.6 Toxic Nephropathy
Prasad Devarajan
Aberrant renal function often results from purposeful or accidental
exposure to any number of diagnostic, biologic, or therapeutic agents
that are potential or actual nephrotoxins. Among diagnostic agents,
contrast-­induced nephropathy is a common and generally reversible form of acute kidney injury that results from administration of
radiocontrast media in predisposed individuals. Iodinated radiocontrast agents are generally well tolerated by most patients without significant adverse consequences. In volume-­depleted patients or patients
with underlying chronic kidney disease, their use poses a risk for the
development of acute kidney injury with significant attendant morbidity and mortality. Contrast agents can lead to renal vasoconstriction as
well as direct tubule cell injury. Contrast-­induced nephropathy usually
manifests as an increase in serum creatinine 1-­2 days following exposure; most patients are not oliguric. In most cases, the serum creatinine
normalizes in the next 3-­7 days, and treatment is supportive. The overall risk of radiocontrast agents to cause acute kidney injury remains
controversial but appears to be low in children with normal kidney
function and with the dominant current practice of using low osmolar
contrast agents. Biologic nephrotoxins include venomous exposures
from insects, reptiles, amphibians, and a wide variety of sea-­dwelling
animals. The most common forms of toxic nephropathy unfortunately
relate to the exposure of children to pharmacologic agents, accounting for close to 20% of episodes of acute kidney injury occurring in
children and adolescents. Age, underlying medical condition, genetics,
exposure dose, and the concomitant use of other drugs all influence the
likelihood of developing acute kidney injury. One common scenario is
the use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (NSAIDs) in febrile
children with concomitant dehydration. In this situation, NSAIDs
can inhibit the production of intrarenal vasodilatory prostaglandins,
thereby leading to decreased renal perfusion and acute kidney injury.
Table 560.3 summarizes the agents that commonly cause acute kidney injury and some of their clinical manifestations. A combination of
multiple drugs amplifies the risk. Mechanisms of injury often help to
explain the presentation; however, multiple toxic exposures in patients
with complicated clinical histories often limit the ability to clearly
establish clinical cause and effect. For example, diminished urine
output may be the clinical hallmark of tubular obstruction caused by

Table 560.3  Renal Syndromes Produced by Nephrotoxins
NEPHROTIC SYNDROME
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors
Gold salts
Interferon
Mercury compounds
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs
Penicillamine
NEPHROGENIC DIABETES
INSIPIDUS
Amphotericin B
Cisplatin
Colchicine
Demeclocycline
Lithium
Methoxyflurane
Propoxyphene
Vinblastine
RENAL VASCULITIS
Hydralazine
Isoniazid
Penicillins
Propylthiouracil
Sulfonamides
Numerous other drugs that
can cause a hypersensitivity
reaction
THROMBOTIC
MICROANGIOPATHY
Cyclosporine A
Oral contraceptive agents
Mitomycin C
NEPHROCALCINOSIS OR
NEPHROLITHIASIS
Allopurinol
Bumetanide
Ethylene glycol
Furosemide
Melamine
Methoxyflurane
Topiramate
Vitamin D
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
Acetaminophen
Acyclovir
Aminoglycosides
Amphotericin B
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors
Biologic toxins (snake, spider,
bee, wasp)
Cisplatin
Cyclosporine
Ethylene glycol
Halothane
Heavy metals
Ifosfamide
Lithium
Methoxyflurane
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs
Radiocontrast agents
Tacrolimus
Vancomycin with or without
piperacillin-­tazobactam

OBSTRUCTIVE UROPATHY
Sulfonamides
Acyclovir
Methotrexate
Protease inhibitors
Ethylene glycol
Methoxyflurane
FANCONI SYNDROME
Aminoglycosides
Chinese herbs (aristolochic)
Cisplatin
Heavy metals (cadmium, lead,
mercury, and uranium)
Ifosfamide
Lysol
Outdated tetracycline
RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS
Amphotericin B
Lead
Lithium
Toluene
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS
Amidopyrine
p-­Aminosalicylate
Carbon tetrachloride
Cephalosporins
Cimetidine
Cisplatin
Colistin
Copper
Cyclosporine
Ethylene glycol
Foscarnet
Gentamicin
Gold salts
Indomethacin
Interferon-­α
Iron
Kanamycin
Lithium
Mannitol
Mercury salts
Mitomycin C
Neomycin
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs
Penicillins (especially methicillin)
Pentamidine
Phenacetin
Phenylbutazone
Poisonous mushrooms
Polymyxin B
Radiocontrast agents
Rifampin
Salicylate
Streptomycin
Sulfonamides
Tacrolimus
Tetrachloroethylene
Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole

STEC, Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli.

agents such as methotrexate or agents that cause acute tubular necrosis, such as amphotericin B or pentamidine. Alternatively, nephrogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3204 Part XXI u Nephrology
diabetes insipidus may be the critical clinical manifestation of agents
that cause interstitial nephritis, such as lithium or cisplatin. Acute kidney injury due to nephrotoxins is frequently polyuric. Nephrotoxicity
is often reversible if the noxious agent is promptly removed.
Clinical use of potential nephrotoxins should be judicious. Necessity
of exposure, dosing parameters, and the use of drug levels or pharmacogenomic data, when available, should always be considered. Caution
is particularly mandated for patients with complex medical conditions
that include preexisting renal disease, cardiac disease, diabetes, and/
or complicated surgeries. Alternative approaches to imaging or the use
of different pharmacologic options should be considered when possible. Imaging modalities such as ultrasonography, radionuclide scanning, or MRI may be preferable to contrast studies in some patients.
Alternatively, a judicious volume expansion with or without the
administration of N-­acetylcysteine might offer renoprotection when
radioiodinated contrast studies are critical, especially in children with
chronic kidney disease or those who are already on other nephrotoxic
agents. Pharmacologic agents with no known kidney effects can often
be substituted for known nephrotoxins with equal clinical efficacy. In
all cases, simultaneous use of known nephrotoxins should be avoided
whenever possible. The use of nephrotoxic agents represents one of the
few modifiable risk factors for acute kidney injury, and promising new
biomarkers for the early detection and modification of nephrotoxic
injuries are currently becoming available. Use of the electronic health
record for systematic surveillance for nephrotoxic medication exposure and acute kidney injury can also lead to sustained reductions in
avoidable kidney injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

560.7 Cortical Necrosis
Prasad Devarajan

BACKGROUND

Renal cortical necrosis is a rare cause of severe acute kidney injury
occurring secondary to extensive ischemic damage of the renal cortex.
Ischemic necrosis is due to markedly decreased renal arterial perfusion as a result of vascular spasm, microvascular injury, or intravascular coagulation. Renal cortical necrosis is usually bilateral and
extensive, although focal and patchy forms have also been described.
The medulla, the juxtamedullary cortex, and a thin rim of subcapsular
cortex are usually spared. It occurs most commonly in neonates and in
adolescents of childbearing age.

ETIOLOGY

In newborns, cortical necrosis is most associated with hypoxic or ischemic insults caused by perinatal asphyxia, placental abruption, and
twin–twin or fetal–maternal transfusion. Other causes include renal
vascular thrombosis and severe congenital heart disease. After the neonatal period, cortical necrosis is most commonly seen in children with
septic shock or severe hemolytic-­uremic syndrome. In adolescents and
women, cortical necrosis occurs in association with obstetric complications, including prolonged intrauterine fetal death, placental abruption, septic abortion, or amniotic fluid embolism.
Less common causes of cortical necrosis include malaria, extensive
burns, snakebites, infectious endocarditis, and medications (e.g., nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents). Acute renal cortical necrosis has
also been reported to occur in SLE-­associated antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.

PATHOGENESIS

The presumed initiating factor in many cases is intense vasospasm of the
small vessels. When prolonged, this leads to necrosis and thrombosis

of the distal arterioles and glomeruli, with ensuing cortical necrosis. In
hemolytic-­uremic syndrome and septic abortion, endotoxin-­mediated
endothelial damage contributes to worsening vascular thrombosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cortical necrosis clinically presents as severe acute kidney injury in
patients with predisposing causes. Urine output is diminished and
gross, and/or microscopic hematuria may be present. Hypertension
is common, and thrombocytopenia may be present because of renal
microvascular injury.

LABORATORY AND RADIOLOGIC FINDINGS

Laboratory results are consistent with acute kidney injury: an elevated
BUN and creatinine, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis. Anemia
and thrombocytopenia are common. Urinalysis reveals hematuria with
red cell or granular casts, and proteinuria.
Ultrasound examination with Doppler flow studies demonstrates
decreased perfusion to both kidneys. Kidneys are enlarged in the initial
stages, but cortical tissue becomes shrunken in the later stages. Thin
cortical shells of calcification (tram lines) are a radiologic hallmark, but
they develop only 4-­5 weeks after the initial insult.
CT scanning with contrast is the most sensitive imaging modality
in renal cortical necrosis. Diagnostic features include absent opacification of the renal cortex and enhancement of subcapsular and juxtamedullary regions and of the medulla with absent excretion of contrast
medium.
A radionuclide renal scan shows decreased uptake with significantly
delayed or absent function. Renal scanning is the imaging technique
of choice if contrast-­enhanced CT scanning is not available or is
contraindicated.

TREATMENT

The cornerstones of therapy for renal cortical necrosis are to restore
hemodynamic stability, institute early dialysis, and treat the underlying
cause. Most cases of renal cortical necrosis require initial treatment in
an intensive care setting. It is important to prevent or treat the underlying cause of acute cortical necrosis, when possible. Therapy involves
medical management of acute renal failure, often with the initiation of
dialysis as indicated. Management is otherwise supportive and involves
volume repletion, correction of asphyxia, and treatment of sepsis.

PROGNOSIS

The most important prognostic factors include the extent of necrosis,
duration of oligoanuria, and severity of the overall associated conditions. Untreated, renal cortical necrosis has a high mortality rate,
exceeding 50%. Early initiation of dialysis significantly diminishes the
mortality rate. Most patients require dialysis for variable but extended
periods of time. Twenty to 40% of patients have partial recovery of
renal function, the extent of which depends on the amount of preserved cortical tissue. All patients require long-­term follow-­up for
chronic kidney disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

560.8 Coagulopathies and
Thrombocytopenia
Prasad Devarajan
Gross or microscopic hematuria may be associated with inherited or
acquired disorders of coagulation (hemophilia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, thrombocytopenia). In these cases, however, hematuria is not usually the presenting complaint or a major factor affecting
the clinical management or outcome (see Chapters 524-­533).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 561 u Tubulointerstitial Disease Associated with Hematuria 3205

Chapter 561

Tubulointerstitial
Disease Associated with
Hematuria
Prasad Devarajan
Gross or microscopic hematuria may be associated with several disorders of the renal tubules and the interstitium (pyelonephritis, tubulointerstitial nephritis, papillary necrosis, acute tubular necrosis).
However, except for papillary necrosis, hematuria is not usually the
presenting complaint or a major factor affecting the clinical management or outcome (see Chapters 561.2-­561.4).

561.1 Pyelonephritis

See Chapter 575, Urinary Tract Infections.

561.2 Tubulointerstitial Nephritis
Prasad Devarajan
Tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN, also called interstitial nephritis)
is the term applied to conditions characterized by tubulointerstitial
inflammation and damage with relative sparing of glomeruli and vessels. Both acute and chronic primary forms exist. Acute TIN is characterized by an acute extensive lymphocytic inflammatory response and
a rapid decline in renal function. Chronic TIN usually displays a protracted onset and a chronic patchy lymphocytic infiltrate, interstitial
fibrosis, and a slow deterioration in renal function. Secondary forms
of interstitial nephritis can be associated with primary glomerular diseases, as well as systemic diseases affecting the kidney.

ACUTE TUBULOINTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS

The hallmarks of acute TIN are an extensive lymphocytic infiltration of
the tubulointerstitium, interstitial edema, and varying degrees of tubular necrosis and regeneration. Eosinophils may be present, particularly
in drug-­induced TIN; occasionally, interstitial granulomas with giant
cells occur. Glomeruli are usually normal in primary TIN. The pathogenesis is not fully understood, but a T-­cell–mediated immune mechanism has been postulated. Drugs are the most common cause of acute
TIN in children. Many medications, especially antimicrobials, anticonvulsants, and analgesics, have been implicated as etiologic agents
(Table 561.1). Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), penicillins, and sulfonamides account for most cases. Drug-­induced TIN
is an idiosyncratic reaction that occurs in only a very small subset of
patients who ingest the medication, typically with repeated exposure.
Drugs of abuse (including synthetic cannabinoids, bath salts, ecstasy,
anabolic steroids, inhaled solvents, heroin, and cocaine) are an increasingly common problem in certain populations. Other causes of acute
TIN include infections, primary glomerular diseases, and systemic diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus.

Clinical Manifestations

The classic presentation of acute TIN is fever, rash, and arthralgia in
the setting of a rising serum creatinine. Acute TIN accounts for about
5% of pediatric acute kidney injury cases. Although the full clinical
triad may be noted in drug-­induced TIN, most patients with acute
TIN do not demonstrate all the typical features. The rash can vary
from maculopapular to urticarial and is often transient. Patients often

have nonspecific constitutional symptoms of nausea, vomiting, fatigue,
and weight loss. Flank pain may be present, presumably secondary to
stretching of the renal capsule from acute inflammatory enlargement
of the kidney. If acute TIN is caused by a systemic disease such as systemic lupus erythematosus, the clinical presentation will be consistent
with specific signs and symptoms of the underlying disease. Unlike the
typical presentation of oliguric acute kidney injury (AKI) seen with
glomerular diseases, 30–40% of patients with acute TIN are nonoliguric, and hypertension is less common. Peripheral eosinophilia can
occur, especially with drug-­induced TIN. Microscopic hematuria is
invariably present, but significant hematuria or proteinuria >1.5 g/
day is uncommon. One exception is patients whose TIN is caused by
NSAIDs, who can present with nephrotic syndrome. Urinalysis can
reveal white blood cell, granular, or hyaline casts, but red blood cell
casts (a characteristic of glomerular disease) are absent. The presence
of urine eosinophils is neither sensitive nor specific, being detected in
only 25% of cases. Because of pyuria, the initial diagnosis may be a
urinary tract infection.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis is usually based on the clinical presentation and laboratory findings. A renal biopsy will establish the correct diagnosis in
cases where the etiology or clinical course confounds the diagnosis.
A careful history of the timing of disease onset in relation to drug
exposure is essential in suspected drug-­induced TIN. Because of the
immune-­mediated nature of TIN, signs or symptoms generally appear
within 1-­2 weeks following exposure. In children, antimicrobials are a
common inciting agent. NSAIDs are an important cause of acute TIN
in children, and volume depletion or underlying chronic kidney disease can increase the risk of occurrence. Urinalysis and serial measurements of serum creatinine and electrolytes should be monitored. Renal
ultrasonography, though not diagnostic, can demonstrate enlarged,
echogenic kidneys. Removal of a suspected offending agent followed
by spontaneous improvement in kidney function is highly suggestive
of the diagnosis, and additional testing is generally not performed
in this setting. In more severe cases, in which the cause is unclear,
or the patient’s kidney function deteriorates rapidly, a renal biopsy is
indicated.

Treatment and Prognosis

Treatment of acute TIN starts with eliminating the suspected causative
drug or agent. Most patients with mild ATN recover kidney function
when the inciting agent is discontinued. Other treatment includes
supportive care directed at addressing complications of AKI, such as
hyperkalemia or volume overload (see Chapter 572.1). Corticosteroid administration within 2 weeks of the discontinuation of certain
offending agents (e.g., NSAIDs or antibiotics) can hasten the recovery
and improve the long-­term prognosis in drug-­induced TIN. Current
recommendations favor the use of oral prednisone in children whose
kidney function fails to improve soon after stopping the suspected
agent. IV methylprednisolone is used in severe cases. Mycophenolate
mofetil has been found to be beneficial in steroid-­unresponsive cases.
Whether such therapies are indicated in other causes of TIN is not
clear. For patients with prolonged kidney insufficiency, the prognosis
remains guarded, and severe acute TIN from any cause can progress
to chronic TIN.

CHRONIC TUBULOINTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS

In children, chronic TIN most commonly occurs in the context of (1)
an underlying congenital urologic kidney disease, such as obstructive
uropathy or vesicoureteral reflux, or (2) an underlying metabolic disorder affecting the kidneys (see Table 561.1). Some commonly used
drugs such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus also cause chronic TIN.
Chronic TIN can occur as an idiopathic disease, although this is more
common in adults.
The juvenile nephronophthisis (JN)–medullary cystic kidney
disease complex (MCKD) is a group of inherited, genetically determined cystic renal diseases that share the common histologic finding of
chronic TIN. At least 20 different genes are associated with JN, usually

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3206 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 561.1  Etiology of Interstitial Nephritis
ACUTE INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS
Drugs
• Antimicrobials
• Penicillin derivatives
• Cephalosporins
• Sulfonamides
• Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
• Ciprofloxacin
• Tetracyclines
• Vancomycin
• Erythromycin derivatives
• Rifampin
• Amphotericin B
• Acyclovir
• Anticonvulsants
• Carbamazepine
• Phenobarbital
• Phenytoin
• Sodium valproate
Drugs of Abuse
• Synthetic cannabinoids
• Bath salts
• Ecstasy
• Anabolic steroids
• Inhaled solvents
• Heroin
• Cocaine
Other Drugs
• Allopurinol
• All-­trans-­retinoic acid
• 5-­Aminosalicylic acid
• Cimetidine
• Cyclosporine
• Diuretics
• Escitalopram
• Interferon
• Mesalazine
• Quetiapine
• Olanzapine
• Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
• Protease inhibitors
• Proton pump inhibitors
• Aristolochic acid (traditional Chinese herb)

Disease-­Associated
• Glomerulonephritis (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus)
• Acute allograft rejection
• Tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis (TINU) syndrome
Idiopathic
CHRONIC INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS
Drugs and Toxins
• Analgesics
• Cyclosporine
• Lithium
• Heavy metals (including lead)
Infections (See Acute Interstitial Nephritis)
• Disease-­associated causes
• Metabolic and hereditary
• Cystinosis
• Oxalosis
• Fabry disease
• Wilson disease
• Sickle cell nephropathy
• Alport syndrome
• Juvenile nephronophthisis, medullary cystic disease
Immunologic
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Crohn disease
• Chronic allograft rejection
• Tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis (TINU) syndrome
• Anti-­tubular basement disease
Urologic
• Posterior urethral valves
• Eagle-­Barrett syndrome
• Ureteropelvic junction obstruction
• Vesicoureteral reflux
Miscellaneous
• Balkan nephropathy
• Radiation
• Sarcoidosis
• Neoplasm
Idiopathic

Infections
• Adenovirus
• Bacteria associated with acute pyelonephritis
• BK virus
• Brucella
• Streptococcal species
• Cytomegalovirus
• Epstein-­Barr virus
• Hepatitis B virus
• Histoplasmosis
• Human immunodeficiency virus
• Hantavirus
• Leptospirosis
• Toxoplasma gondii

inherited as an autosomal recessive disease (Table 561.2). These genes
only define 30% of cases, and new genes are being identified at a rapid
pace. Although uncommon in the United States, JN causes 10–20% of
pediatric cases of end-­stage kidney disease (ESKD) in Europe. Patients
with JN typically present with polyuria, growth failure, unexplained
anemia, and chronic kidney disease in late childhood or adolescence.

JN is a ciliopathy and is often associated with extrarenal features
such as retinal degeneration, hepatobiliary disease, cerebellar vermis
hypoplasia, laterality defects, intellectual disability, and shortening
of bones (see Chapter 101.3). These features are represented in several syndromes, such as Senior-­Løken syndrome (retinitis pigmentosa), Joubert syndrome (cerebellar vermis hypoplasia; 22 subtypes),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 561 u Tubulointerstitial Disease Associated with Hematuria 3207
Table 561.2  Juvenile Nephronophthisis: Summary of the NPHP1 to NPHP18, NHPH1L, and NPHP2L Genes, Gene Products,
Chromosomal Localization, Phenotypes, Extrarenal Symptoms, and Interaction Partners
GENE (PROTEIN)

CHROMOSOME

PHENOTYPE (MEDIAN
AGE AT ESRD)

EXTRARENAL
SYMPTOMS

INTERACTION
PARTNERS

NPHP1 (nephrocystin-­1)

2q13

NPHP (13 yr)

RP (10%), OMA (2%), JBTS
(rarely)

Inversin, nephrocystin-­3,
nephrocystin-­4, filamin A
and B, tensin, β-­tubulin,
PTK2B

NPHP2/INVS (inversin)

9q31

Infantile NPHP (<4 yr)

RP (10%), LF, situs inversus,
CHD

Nephrocystin-­1,
calmodulin, catenins,
β-­tubulin, APC2

NPHP3 (nephrocystin-­3)

3q22

Infantile and adolescent
NPHP

LF, RP (10%), situs inversus,
MKS, CHD

Nephrocystin-­1

NPHP4 (nephrocystin-­4)

1p36

NPHP (21 yr)

RP (10%), OMA, LF

Nephrocystin-­1, BCAR1,
PTK2B

NPHP5/IQCB1 (nephrocystin-­5)

3q21

NPHP (13 yr)

Early-­onset RP

Calmodulin, RPGR,
nephrocystin-­6

NPHP6/CEP290
(nephrocystin-­6/CEP290)

12q21

NPHP

JBTS, MKS

ATF4, nephrocystin-­5,
CC2D2A

NPHP7/GLIS2 (nephrocystin-­7/
GLIS2)

16p

NPHP

—

—

NPHP8/RPGRIP1L
(nephrocystin-­8/RPGRIP1L)

16q

NPHP

JBTS, MKS

Nephrocystin-­1

NPHP9/NEK8 (nephrocystin-­9/
NEK8)

17q11

Infantile NPHP

—

—

NPHP10/SDCCAG8
(nephrocystin-­10/SDCCAG8)

1q43

Juvenile NPHP

RP (SLS), BBS-­like

OFD1

TMEM67/MKS3/NPHP11
(nephrocystin-­11/meckelin)

8q22.1

NPHP

JBTS, MKS, LF

MKS1, nephrocystin-­1,
nephrocystin-­4,
nephrocystin-­6,
nesprin-­2, TMEM216

TTC21B//JBTS11/NPHP12
(nephrocystin-­12/IFT139)

2q24.3

Early-­onset NPHP, juvenile
NPHP

JATD, MKS, JBTS, BBS-­like

Ciliopathy modifier

WDR19/NPHP13
(nephrocystin-­13/IFT144)

4p14

NPHP

JATD, SBS, CED, RP,
Caroli, BBS-­like

—

ZNF423/NPHP14
(nephrocystin-­14/ZNF423)

16q12.1

Infantile NPHP, PKD

JBTS, situs inversus

PARP1, nephrocystin-­6,

CEP164/NPHP15
(nephrocystin-­15 centrosomal
protein 164 kDa)

11q23.3

NPHP (8 years)

RP, JBTS, LF, obesity

ATRIP, CCDC92, TTBK2,
nephrocystin-­3,
nephrocystin-­4, Dvl3

ANKS6/NPHP16
(nephrocystin-­16/ANKS6)

9q22.33

NPHP, PKD

LF, situs inversus,
cardiovascular
abnormalities

INVS, nephrocystin-­3,
NEK8, HIF1AN, NEK7,
BICC1

IFT172/NPHP17
(nephrocystin-­17/IFT172)

2p23.3

NPHP

JATD, MZSDS, JBTS

IFT140, IFT80

CEP83/NPHP18
(nephrocystin-­18/centrosomal
protein 83 kDa)

12q22

Early-­onset NPHP (3 yr)

Learning disability,
hydrocephalus, LF

CEP164, IFT20

NPHP1L/XPNPEP3
(nephrocystin-­1L/XPNPEP3)

22q13

NPHP

Cardiomyopathy, seizures

Cleaves LRRC50, ALMS1,
nephrocystin-­6

NPHP2L/SLC41A1
(nephrocystin-­2L/SLC41A1)

1q32.1

NPHP

Bronchiectasis

—

ATF4, Activating transcription factor 4; APC2, anaphase-­promoting complex 2; BBS, Bardet-­Biedl syndrome; BCAR1, breast cancer antiestrogen resistance 1; CC2D2A, coiled-­coil
and C2 domain containing 2A; CED, cranioectodermal dysplasia; CHD, congenital heart disease; JATD, Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia; JBTS, Joubert syndrome; LF, liver
fibrosis; MKS, Meckel-­Gruber syndrome; MZSDS, Mainzer-Saldino syndrome; NPHP, nephronophthisis; OMA, oculomotor apraxia; PKD, polycystic kidney disease; PTK2B, protein
tyrosine kinase 2B; RP, retinitis pigmentosa; RPGR, retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator; SBS, Sensenbrenner syndrome; SLS, Senior-­Løken syndrome.
From Wolf MTF. Nephronophthisis and related syndromes. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2015;27:201–211. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3208 Part XXI u Nephrology
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome (intellectual disability, obesity; 17 subtypes),
Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (shortening of the long bones,
narrow rib cage; 11 subtypes), and many others. MCKD is an autosomal dominant disease that typically manifests in adulthood, characterized by tubulointerstitial sclerosis leading to ESKD. Because at least
four different gene pathogenic variants may give rise to the condition,
the name autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease
(ADTKD) has been proposed for this condition. The two best known
forms of ADTKD include mucin-­1 kidney disease 1 (MKD1) and
mucin-­2 kidney disease/uromodulin kidney disease (MKD2), based
on the pathogenic variant identified. TIN with uveitis (TINU syndrome) is a rare autoimmune syndrome of chronic TIN with bilateral
anterior uveitis and bone marrow granulomas that occurs primarily in
adolescent girls. Clinical manifestations include photophobia, ocular
pain and redness, and visual impairment. Chronic TIN is seen in all
forms of progressive kidney disease, regardless of the underlying cause,
and the severity of interstitial disease is the single most important factor predicting progression to ESKD.

Pathogenesis and Pathology

The pathophysiology of chronic TIN is undefined, but data suggest that,
other than the abnormal cilia structure and function in JN and MCKD,
in other cases it is immune mediated. Cells making up the interstitial
infiltrate appear to be a combination of native interstitial cells, inflammatory cells recruited from the circulation, and resident tubular cells
that undergo epithelial-­mesenchymal transformation. Grossly, kidneys
can appear pale and small for age. Microscopically, tubular atrophy and
“dropout” with interstitial fibrosis and a patchy lymphocytic interstitial
inflammation are seen. Patients with JN often have characteristic small
cysts in the corticomedullary region. In primary chronic TIN, glomeruli
are relatively spared until late in the disease course. Patients with chronic
TIN secondary to a primary glomerular disease have histologic evidence
of the primary disease. Chronic TIN due to cyclosporine or tacrolimus
use is characterized by tubular atrophy, “stripe” interstitial fibrosis, and
vascular sclerosis.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical features of chronic TIN are often nonspecific and can
reflect signs and symptoms of slowly progressive chronic kidney
disease (see Chapter 572). Fatigue, growth failure, polyuria, polydipsia, and enuresis are often present. Anemia that is seemingly disproportionate to the degree of kidney insufficiency is common and
is a particularly prominent feature in JN. Because tubular damage
often leads to salt wasting by the kidney, significant hypertension is
unusual. Fanconi syndrome, proximal renal tubular acidosis, distal
renal tubular acidosis, and hyperkalemic distal renal tubular acidosis can occur.
Extrarenal manifestations of nephronophthisis include ophthalmic,
neurologic, hepatic, and skeletal disorders (Table 561.3).

Diagnosis

The diagnosis is suggested by signs or symptoms of kidney tubular
damage such as polyuria and an elevated serum creatinine value,
coupled with a history suggestive of a chronic disease, such as long-­
standing enuresis or the presence of anemia resistant to iron therapy. Radiographic studies, in particular ultrasonography, can give
additional evidence of chronicity, such as small, echogenic kidneys,
corticomedullary microcysts suggesting JN, or findings of obstructive uropathy. A voiding cystourethrogram can demonstrate the
presence of vesicoureteral reflux or bladder abnormalities. If JN is
suspected, a specific genetic diagnosis is available. In instances in
which the cause is unclear, a kidney biopsy may be performed. In
cases of advanced disease, a kidney biopsy might not be diagnostic.
Many ESKDs display a common histologic appearance of tubular
fibrosis and inflammation.

Treatment and Prognosis

Therapy is directed at maintaining the fluid and electrolyte balance
and avoiding further exposure to nephrotoxic agents. Patients with

Table 561.3  Extrarenal Manifestations Associated with
Nephronophthisis and Resulting Syndromes
Associated with NPHP Pathogenic Variants
DISORDER
OPHTHALMOLOGIC
Retinitis pigmentosa

Oculomotor apraxia
Nystagmus
Coloboma
NEUROLOGIC
Encephalocele
Vermis aplasia
Hypopituitarism
HEPATIC
Liver fibrosis

SKELETAL
Short ribs
Cone-­shaped epiphysis
Postaxial polydactyly

Skeletal abnormalities

SYNDROME
Senior-­Løken syndrome (SLSN)
Arima syndrome (cerebro-­oculo-­
hepato-­renal syndrome)
Alstrom (RP, obesity, DM type 2,
hearing impairment)
RHYNS (RP, hypopituitarism, skeletal
dysplasia)
Cogan syndrome
Joubert syndrome/Joubert
syndrome–related disorders
Joubert syndrome/Joubert
syndrome–related disorders
Meckel-­Gruber syndrome (occipital
encephalocele, NPHP)
Joubert syndrome/Joubert
syndrome–related disorders
RHYNS
Boichis syndrome
Meckel-­Gruber syndrome (occipital
encephalocele, NPHP)
Arima syndrome (cerebro-­oculo-­
hepato-­renal syndrome)
Joubert syndrome/Joubert
syndrome–related disorders
Jeune syndrome/asphyxiating
thoracic dystrophy
Mainzer-­Saldino syndrome
Joubert syndrome/Joubert
syndrome–related disorders
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome (NPHP, RP,
obesity, deafness)
Ellis van Creveld
Sensenbrenner syndrome/
cranioectodermal dysplasia
Ellis van Creveld

OTHERS
Situs inversus
Cardiac malformation
Bronchiectasis
Ulcerative colitis
RP, Retinitis pigmentosa; DM, diabetes mellitus; NPHP, nephronophthisis.
From Wolf MT, Hildebrandt F. Nephronophthisis. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011;26:181–194.

obstructive uropathies can require salt supplementation and treatment
with potassium-­binding resin. Prevention of infection by antibiotic
prophylaxis can slow the progression of renal damage in appropriate
patients. The prognosis in patients with chronic TIN depends in large
part on the nature of the underlying disease. Patients with obstructive
uropathy or vesicoureteral reflux can have a variable degree of kidney
damage and thus a variable course. ESKD can develop over months to
years. Patients with JN uniformly progress to ESKD by adolescence.
Patients with metabolic disorders can benefit from treatment when
available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 561 u Tubulointerstitial Disease Associated with Hematuria 3209

561.3 Papillary Necrosis
Prasad Devarajan
Renal papillary necrosis (RPN) is a descriptive term applied to conditions that result in necrosis of the kidney medullary pyramids and
papillae. The hypoxic and hypertonic environment that normally
prevails in the kidney medullary region renders it especially vulnerable to ischemic necrosis. Common precipitating factors in children
include shock, hypovolemia, hypoxia, pyelonephritis, urinary tract
obstruction, and sickle cell hemoglobinopathies, Analgesic abuse and
diabetes mellitus are additional important causes in adults. RPN can
result in secondary infection, deposition of stones, and sloughing of
papillae with resultant urinary tract obstruction. Both an acute progressive clinical course and a more chronic protracted form have been
described. Patients most commonly present with flank pain and hematuria. Radiologic studies are key to establishing the diagnosis. Management is directed toward treating the underlying cause, ameliorating
kidney ischemia with hydration, and surgical relief of obstruction.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

RPN may be focal (involving only the papillary tips) or diffuse (involving the whole papilla and the innermost areas of the medulla). RPN
may affect a single papilla or multiple papillae. Histologically, the tissue
typically reveals classic coagulative necrosis, surrounded by an inflammatory response.
Under normal conditions, the medullary region of the kidney subsists on a hypoxic precipice due to low blood flow and countercurrent
exchange of oxygen, although paradoxically housing nephron segments
with very high energy requirements. The blood flow decreases even
further as one approaches the innermost regions of the medulla and
becomes marginal toward the apex and tips of the papillae. The already
compromised blood supply is further attenuated in several pathophysiologic states, including the hypoxia from shock and dehydration, the
intraluminal stasis of sickle cell nephropathy, the inflammation of
pyelonephritis, the increased pressure of urinary tract obstruction, the
microvascular changes of diabetes, and the direct damage from analgesics (including NSAIDs). Approximately 15–30% of patients with
sickle cell disease will encounter episodes of RPN during their lifetime.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The classic presentation of acute RPN is flank pain and renal colic,
gross hematuria with clots and tissue debris, and fever with chills. AKI,
an increase in the serum creatinine, and oliguria are not common but
may accompany the rapidly progressive form. Patients with the chronic
indolent form may be asymptomatic and may first present with the
passage of sloughed papillae in the urine.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of RPN is usually based on the history, clinical presentation, laboratory findings, and radiologic investigations. Contrast-­
enhanced CT scanning is the imaging modality of choice. In the acute
phase, this method depicts several typical features, including clefts in
the medulla, pelvic filling defects, nonenhanced lesions surrounded by
rings of excreted material, medullary calcifications, and the presence
of obstruction. If IV contrast is contraindicated, CT scanning without
contrast or renal ultrasonography may be performed. These modalities are now replacing IV urography, which was the imaging method
of choice in the past.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Treatment of acute RPN starts with ameliorating the kidney ischemia
with IV hydration. In addition, it is important to treat the underlying cause, including appropriate medical management of shock, sepsis, pyelonephritis, or sickle cell disease. Cessation of any analgesics
(including NSAIDs) is critical. Patients with acute obstruction may
require surgical intervention for relief.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography

561.4 Acute Tubular Necrosis
Prasad Devarajan
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) is a descriptive term applied to conditions that result in necrosis of the renal tubular epithelial cells. The
hypoxic environment that normally prevails in the kidney medullary
region renders its nephron segments especially vulnerable to necrotic
cell death. ATN frequently coexists with other forms of cell death, as
well as cellular regeneration. Common precipitating factors in children
include prolonged renal ischemia, sepsis, shock, hypovolemia, and
nephrotoxic medications. ATN is the most common cause of intrinsic
acute kidney injury (AKI) (see Chapter 572). ATN is clinically characterized by a rapid (within hours to days) decline in kidney function
that leads to retention of waste products such as BUN and creatinine,
fluid overload, and reduced urine output in many cases. Patients with
hospital-­acquired ATN frequently have no specific symptoms, and the
diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion in predisposed individuals.
Laboratory tests and radiologic studies are the key to establishing the
diagnosis. Management is directed toward treating the underlying or
precipitating cause, correction of imbalances in fluid, electrolyte, and
acid-­base status, avoidance of nephrotoxic medications, and treatment
of complications.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

The pathologic findings are highly variable, depending on the etiology
and the region of the kidney affected. In children with predominantly
ischemic ATN, necrosis is relatively inconspicuous, whereas it is more
widespread in nephrotoxic ATN. Because the medullary region of the
kidney (including the straight segment of the proximal tubule and the
medullary thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle) normally subsists in a hypoxic environment due to low blood flow and countercurrent exchange of oxygen, these nephron segments are usually the most
severely affected. Typical findings include patchy areas of tubule cell
necrosis with resultant loss of tubule epithelial cells and exposure of
denuded basement membrane. Other forms of cell death, including
apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis, occur simultaneously. Surviving proximal tubule cells show diffuse effacement and loss of the brush
border and apical blebs. The distal nephron segments exhibit tubular
dilatation with intraluminal casts. There is concomitant evidence for
cellular regeneration and repair among freshly damaged tubule epithelial cells. Injury is aggravated by several pathophysiologic states,
including the ischemia from sepsis, shock, and dehydration and the
direct damage from nephrotoxic medications.
The significant decline in kidney function is often out of proportion to the observed patchy histologic changes. In addition to tubule
cell necrosis, several other factors contribute to the decline in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). First, a single collecting tubule drains
multiple nephrons, such that obstruction of even a small number of
collecting tubules results in failure of filtration from several nephrons.
Second, obstruction aggravates the backflow of filtered tubular fluid
into the vascular space across the denuded epithelium. Third, loss of
the proximal tubular reabsorptive capacity results in increased delivery
of sodium chloride to the macula densa, with activation of the tubuloglomerular feedback mechanisms that worsens the afferent arteriolar
constriction. Fourth, many additional factors contribute to the pathogenesis of ATN, including changes in the microvascular blood flow,
endothelial damage, and the activation of inflammatory pathways.
The pathophysiology and clinical course of ATN may be divided
into three sequential phases, namely, initiation, maintenance, and
recovery. The initiation phase occurs during the initial exposure to
ischemia or nephrotoxins. Tubule cell damage begins to evolve, and
the sloughed tubular cell debris results in obstruction of the tubular
lumen. The combination of hypoperfusion and obstruction to the
tubular fluid flow results in a fall in the GFR and urine output and a
rise in serum creatinine levels. During the maintenance phase of ATN,
renal tubule injury is established at its highest severity, the GFR and
urine output become stabilized at a very low level, and the BUN and
serum creatinine peak. It should be noted that ATN due to nephrotoxic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3210 Part XXI u Nephrology
medications is typically nonoliguric. This phase typically lasts for 1-­2
weeks but may extend to several weeks. Complications (e.g., metabolic,
fluid, and electrolyte imbalances) typically occur during this phase.
The recovery phase, also called the diuretic phase, is characterized by
regeneration of lost tubule epithelial cells, repair of sub-­lethally injured
cells, and removal of intratubular casts by reestablishment of tubular
fluid flow. It is clinically heralded by polyuria and a slow recovery of
the GFR. Diuresis occurs because the rapidly increasing GFR precedes
the complete recovery of the tubule cell structure and function and can
result in volume depletion if not recognized and treated promptly.
The most prevalent causes of ATN in neonates and older children are
shown in Tables 561.4 and 561.5, respectively.

complete history directed toward the known causes of ATN, physical
examination, laboratory testing, and renal imaging. A detailed history
of all ingested drugs and medications is especially important. Although
ATN is technically a histologic diagnosis, kidney biopsies are only
rarely performed in children with this condition.
Signs of ATN on physical examination include edema, hypertension, and evidence of heart failure. Children with intravascular volume
depletion exhibit tachycardia, hypotension, decreased skin turgor, and
dry mucous membranes.

DIAGNOSIS

MECHANISM

CAUSES

Ischemia

Perinatal asphyxia, respiratory distress
syndrome, hemorrhage, congenital
heart disease, sepsis, shock

Exogenous toxins

Aminoglycosides, maternal ingestion
of angiotensin-­converting
enzyme inhibitors or nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs

The diagnosis of ATN is aided by laboratory findings and radiologic
investigations. A freshly voided urine is typically positive for blood and
protein, and microscopy reveals red blood cells and broad, muddy-­
brown granular casts. Heme-­positive urine in the absence of red blood
cells in the sediment should raise the suspicion for hemolysis or rhabdomyolysis. In ATN, the impaired kidney reabsorptive and concentrating capacity typically results in a low urine specific gravity and a high
urinary sodium and fractional excretion of sodium. The hallmark of
ATN is a progressive increase in the serum creatinine and BUN. Urine
biomarkers, such as neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalm (NGAL)
and cystatin C, usually increase before creatinine levels and are helpful in predicting acute tubular injury. A mild to moderate anemia is
common due to dilution and decreased erythropoiesis. A high anion
gap metabolic acidosis results from impaired renal excretion of acids
and decreased tubular reabsorption of bicarbonate. Several electrolyte
disturbances may be encountered, including hyponatremia (usually
dilutional), hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and
hypomagnesemia. If rhabdomyolysis is suspected, the diagnosis can be
confirmed by the detection of urine myoglobin and elevated levels of
serum creatine kinase. The diagnosis of nephrotoxicity may be aided
by the determination of serum drug levels. Renal ultrasonography in
ATN typically reveals enlarged echogenic kidneys. Prolonged severe
ATN results in renal cortical necrosis and a reduction in kidney size.

Endogenous toxins

Hemoglobin (hemolysis), myoglobin
(seizures)

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Primary kidney disease

Renal vein thrombosis, renal artery
thrombosis, polycystic kidney disease

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

ATN is largely asymptomatic, and the clinical diagnosis depends on
having a high index of suspicion in children with etiologic risk factors.
ATN most frequently manifests with a progressive accumulation of
fluid, a serial elevation in the BUN and serum creatinine, and a reduction in urine output, in a predisposed patient who has been exposed
to either ischemic or nephrotoxic injury. The evaluation requires a

Table 561.4  Prevalent Causes of Acute Tubular Necrosis
in Neonates

Table 561.5  Prevalent Causes of Acute Tubular Necrosis
in Older Children
MECHANISM

CAUSES

Ischemia

Severe dehydration, hemorrhage, shock,
sepsis, burns, major surgery, severe
cardiac disease, prolonged cold
ischemia time in kidney transplant

Exogenous toxins

Aminoglycosides, cisplatin, contrast
agents, cyclosporine, tacrolimus,
angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs

Endogenous toxins

Hemoglobin (hemolysis, extracorporeal
circulation), myoglobin (crush injuries,
seizures, influenza)

Primary kidney disease

Hemolytic uremic syndrome, crescentic
glomerulonephritis

See Chapter 572.1
Treatment of ATN starts with ameliorating the kidney ischemia
by restoring and maintaining the intravascular volume with IV
hydration. In addition, it is important to treat the underlying cause,
including with appropriate medical management of shock, sepsis,
or cardiac disease. Cessation of any potential nephrotoxic agent
(including NSAIDs) is critical. Dosages of all medications should be
chosen based on the estimated GFR. Children with oliguria and volume overload may require fluid restriction and the judicious use of
furosemide. Although furosemide can convert the clinical picture
from an oliguric to a nonoliguric one (which can facilitate medical management), there is little evidence that it changes the clinical
course of ATN. Children with established ATN may not respond to
furosemide and are at higher risk for ototoxicity. Common indications for dialysis in ATN include fluid overload that is unresponsive
to diuretics or is a hindrance to the provision of adequate nutrition,
hyperkalemia unresponsive to medical management, symptomatic
acid-­base imbalances, and refractory hypertension.
In the absence of multiorgan failure, most children with ATN eventually regain renal function to a large extent. In the context of severe
multiorgan dysfunction, renal recovery is limited, and morbidity and
mortality rates remain high. Patients who recover from severe ATN
remain at risk for subsequently developing chronic kidney disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for a Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 562 u Vascular Diseases Associated with Hematuria 3211

Chapter 562

Vascular Diseases
Associated with
Hematuria
562.1 Vascular Abnormalities
Prasad Devarajan
Hemangiomas, hemangiolymphangiomas, angiomyomas, and arteriovenous malformations of the kidneys and lower urinary tract are
rare causes of hematuria. They can present clinically with microscopic
hematuria or gross hematuria with clots. When associated cutaneous vascular malformations are present, they can offer a clue to these
underlying causes of hematuria. Angiomyolipomas, the most common benign solid tumors of the kidney, are composed of vascular,
smooth muscle, and fatty tissue elements. They can rupture on occasion to cause severe hemorrhage. Angiomyolipomas are an important
component of the tuberous sclerosis complex (see Chapter 636.2),
which includes developmental delay, facial angiofibromas, and lung
cysts. Renal colic can develop with any upper tract vascular abnormality that obstructs urinary drainage, induces an inflammatory response,
or distends the renal capsule. The diagnosis may be confirmed by angiography or endoscopy.
Unilateral bleeding of varicose veins of the left ureter, resulting from
compression of the left renal vein between the aorta and superior mesenteric artery (mesoaortic compression), is referred to as the nutcracker
syndrome. Patients with this syndrome typically present with persistent
microscopic hematuria (and, occasionally, recurrent gross hematuria)
that may be accompanied by proteinuria, left lower abdominal pain, left
flank pain, or orthostatic hypotension. The diagnosis requires a high
degree of suspicion and is confirmed by Doppler ultrasonography, CT
scanning, phlebography of the left renal vein, or MRI.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

562.2 Renal Vein Thrombosis
Prasad Devarajan

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Renal vein thrombosis (RVT) occurs in two distinct clinical settings: (1)
In newborns and infants, RVT is commonly associated with asphyxia,
dehydration, shock, sepsis, congenital hypercoagulable states, central
venous catheters, and maternal diabetes or preeclampsia. (2) In older
children, RVT is seen in patients with nephrotic syndrome, cyanotic heart
disease, inherited hypercoagulable states, sepsis, sickle cell nephropathy,
Behcet syndrome, antiphospholipid syndrome following kidney transplantation, and following exposure to angiographic contrast agents.

PATHOGENESIS

RVT begins in the intrarenal venous circulation and can then extend to
the main renal vein and even the inferior vena cava. Thrombus formation
is mediated by endothelial cell injury resulting from hypoxia, endotoxin,
or contrast media. Other contributing factors include hypercoagulability from either nephrotic syndrome or pathogenic variants in genes that
encode clotting factors (e.g., deficiencies of protein C, protein S, antithrombin, and factor V Leiden); hypovolemia and decreased venous
blood flow associated with septic shock, dehydration, or nephrotic syndrome; and intravascular sludging caused by polycythemia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The development of RVT is classically heralded by the sudden onset
of gross hematuria and unilateral or bilateral flank masses. However,
patients can also present with any combination of microscopic hematuria, flank pain, hypertension, or a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia with thrombocytopenia or oliguria. RVT is usually unilateral.
Bilateral RVT results in acute kidney injury.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of RVT is suggested by the development of hematuria
and flank masses in patients seen in the high-­risk clinical settings or
with the predisposing clinical features noted previously. Ultrasonography shows marked renal enlargement, and radionuclide studies reveal
little or no renal function in the affected kidney(s). Doppler flow studies of the inferior vena cava and renal vein are essential to confirm the
diagnosis. Contrast studies should be avoided to minimize the risk of
further vascular damage.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of RVT includes other causes of hematuria
that are associated with rapid development of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia or enlargement of the kidney(s). These include hemolytic
uremic syndrome, hydronephrosis, polycystic kidney disease, Wilms
tumor, and intrarenal abscess or hematoma. All patients with RVT
should be evaluated for congenital and acquired hypercoagulable states.

TREATMENT

The primary treatment of RVT starts with aggressive supportive intensive care, including correction of fluid and electrolyte imbalance and
treatment of renal insufficiency. Recommendations include additional
initial treatment of bilateral RVT with tissue plasminogen activator
and unfractionated heparin followed by continued anticoagulation
with unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin. Treatment recommendations for unilateral RVT with inferior vena cava extension
include either unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin. There
is no consensus as to whether unilateral RVT without extension should
be managed with heparin or with supportive therapy alone. Aggressive
treatment with thrombolytic agents in all these clinical settings, as well
as antithrombotic prevention of patients with documented thrombotic
risk, remains controversial despite such recommendations given the
significant risks of bleeding. Evidence-­based data, particularly in children, do not exist despite such best practice recommendations. Children with severe hypertension secondary to RVT who are refractory to
antihypertensive medications may require nephrectomy.

PROGNOSIS

Perinatal mortality rates from RVT have decreased significantly over
the past 20 years. Partial or complete renal atrophy is a common
sequela of RVT in the neonate, leading to an increased risk of chronic
kidney disease, renal tubular dysfunction, and systemic hypertension.
These complications are also seen in older children. However, recovery of kidney function is not uncommon in older children with RVT
resulting from nephrotic syndrome or cyanotic heart disease with correction of the underlying etiology. Long-­term follow-­up of infants and
children with RVT by pediatric nephrologists is recommended for the
monitoring of kidney function and the early detection of hypertension
and chronic kidney disease
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

562.3 Sickle Cell Nephropathy
Prasad Devarajan
Gross or microscopic hematuria may be seen in children with sickle
cell disease or sickle trait. Hematuria tends to resolve spontaneously
in most children. Clinically apparent kidney involvement occurs more
commonly in patients with sickle cell disease than in those with sickle

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3212 Part XXI u Nephrology
cell trait with the exception of an association with renal cell carcinoma, which is more common in patients with sickle cell trait.

ETIOLOGY

The kidney manifestations of sickle cell nephropathy (SCN) are generally related to microthrombosis secondary to sickling in the relatively
hypoxic, acidic, hypertonic kidney medulla, where vascular stasis is
normally present. Analgesic use, volume depletion with consequent
prerenal acute kidney injury, infection, and iron-­related hepatic disease are independent contributing factors. Glomerular hyperfiltration,
mediated by the intrarenal production of prostaglandins and synthesis
of nitric oxide, is involved in the pathogenesis of proteinuria and kidney injury in SCN.

PATHOLOGY

Ischemia, papillary necrosis, and interstitial fibrosis are common
pathologic findings in SCN. The specific sickle cell glomerular lesion
consists of glomerular hypertrophy, with glomerulomegaly and distended capillaries. In addition, a variety of glomerular lesions are
also found in SCN; most commonly these include focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, and
thrombotic microangiopathy. The pathophysiology of these specific
glomerulonephritic lesions in SCN is poorly understood.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical manifestations of SCN include polyuria caused by a urinary
concentrating defect, renal tubular acidosis, and proteinuria associated
with the glomerular lesions noted previously.
Approximately 20–30% of patients with sickle cell disease develop
proteinuria. Nephrotic-­range proteinuria with or without clinically
apparent nephrotic syndrome occurs in up to 30% of patients with
SCN, and when present, generally heralds progressive kidney disease.

TREATMENT

Tubular manifestations have no specific treatment other than those
recommended generally for patients with sickle cell disease. However, angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors and/or angiotensin II
receptor inhibitors can be used to reduce the urine protein excretion
in patients with daily amounts exceeding 500 mg and may slow the
progression of chronic kidney disease. Gross hematuria secondary
to papillary necrosis may respond to treatment with ε-­aminocaproic
acid or desmopressin acetate. Hydroxyurea and newer treatments for
sickle cell disease (see Chapter 511.1) have decreased the manifestations of SCN in proportion to the other complications of the primary
hemoglobinopathy.

PROGNOSIS

SCN can eventually lead to hypertension, chronic kidney disease,
and progressive kidney failure. Dialysis and eventual kidney transplantation are successful treatment modalities when kidney failure is
irreversible.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

562.4 Idiopathic Hypercalciuria
Prasad Devarajan
Idiopathic hypercalciuria, which may be inherited as an autosomal
dominant disorder, can clinically present as recurrent gross hematuria, persistent microscopic hematuria, dysuria, crystalluria, or
abdominal pain with or without kidney stone formation. Hypercalciuria can also accompany conditions resulting in hypercalcemia, such

as hyperparathyroidism (see Chapter 613), vitamin D intoxication,
immobilization, and sarcoidosis (see Chapter 209). Hypercalciuria
may be associated with Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 619), corticosteroid therapy, tubular dysfunction secondary to Fanconi syndrome
as occurs with Wilson disease (see Chapter 405.2), oculocerebrorenal
(Lowe) syndrome, William syndrome, distal renal tubular acidosis,
or Bartter syndrome (see Chapter 571.1). Hypercalciuria may also
be seen in patients with Dent disease, which is an X-­linked form of
nephrolithiasis associated with hypophosphatemic rickets. Although
microcrystal formation with consequent tissue irritation is believed
to mediate symptoms, the precise mechanism by which hypercalciuria
causes hematuria or dysuria is unknown.

DIAGNOSIS

Hypercalciuria is diagnosed by a 24-­hour urinary calcium excretion
>4 mg/kg. A screening test for hypercalciuria may be performed on a
random urine specimen by measuring the calcium and creatinine concentrations. A spot urine calcium:creatinine ratio (mg/dL:mg/dL) >0.2
suggests hypercalciuria in an older child. Normal ratios may be as high
as 0.8 in infants <7 months of age.

TREATMENT

Left untreated, hypercalciuria leads to nephrolithiasis in approximately 15% of cases. Hypercalciuria has also been associated with an
increased risk for development of low bone mineral density, as well as
an increased incidence of urinary tract infections. Idiopathic hypercalciuria has been identified as a risk factor in 40% of children with
kidney stones, and a low urinary citrate level has been associated as a
risk factor in approximately 38% of this group. Oral thiazide diuretics
can normalize urinary calcium excretion by stimulating calcium reabsorption in the proximal and distal tubules. Such therapy can lead to
the resolution of gross hematuria or dysuria and can prevent nephrolithiasis. The precise indications for thiazide treatment (including its
duration if initiated) remain controversial.
In patients with persistent gross hematuria or dysuria, therapy is initiated with hydrochlorothiazide at a dose of 1-­2 mg/kg/24 hours as a
single morning dose. The dose is titrated upward until the 24-­hour urinary calcium excretion is <4 mg/kg and clinical manifestations resolve.
After 1 year of treatment, hydrochlorothiazide is usually discontinued,
but it may be resumed if gross hematuria, nephrolithiasis, or dysuria
recurs. During hydrochlorothiazide therapy, the serum potassium level
should be monitored periodically to avoid hypokalemia. Potassium
citrate at a dose of 1 mEq/kg/24 hours may also be beneficial, particularly in patients with low urinary citrate excretion, a low urine pH, and
symptomatic dysuria or crystalluria.
Sodium restriction is important because urinary calcium excretion parallels sodium excretion. Importantly, dietary calcium restriction is not recommended (except in children with a massive calcium
intake >250% of the recommended dietary allowance by dietary history) because calcium is a critical requirement for growth, and no evidence supports a relationship between decreased calcium intake and
decreased urinary calcium levels. This is particularly important given
the association of hypercalciuria in some patients with reduced bone
mineral density. A number of uncontrolled, small-­scale studies support a role for bisphosphonate therapy, which leads to a reduction in
urinary calcium excretion and improvement in bone mineral density.
Controlled studies are necessary to establish a clear role for such therapy in children with hypercalciuria.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

562.5 Nephrocalcinosis
See Chapter 584.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 563 u Anatomic Abnormalities Associated with Hematuria 3213

Chapter 563

Anatomic Abnormalities
Associated with
Hematuria
563.1 Congenital Anomalies
Prasad Devarajan
Gross or microscopic hematuria may be associated with many different types of malformations of the urinary tract. The sudden onset of
gross hematuria after minor trauma to the flank is often associated with
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, cystic kidneys, or enlarged kidneys
from any cause (see Chapter 577).

563.2 Autosomal Recessive Polycystic
Kidney Disease
Prasad Devarajan
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) (also known
as ARPKD-­congenital hepatic fibrosis [CHF]) is an autosomal recessive disorder occurring with an incidence of 1:20,000 and a gene carrier
rate in the general population of 1/70. The gene for ARPKD (PKHD1
[polycystic kidney and hepatic disease 1]) encodes fibrocystin, a large
protein (>4,000 amino acids) with multiple isoforms.

PATHOLOGY

Both kidneys are markedly enlarged and grossly show innumerable small cysts throughout the cortex and medulla. Microscopic
studies demonstrate dilated, ectatic collecting ducts radiating from
the medulla to the cortex. The development of progressive interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy during the advanced stages of
the disease eventually leads to end-­stage kidney disease (ESKD).
ARPKD causes dual-­organ disease, hence, the term ARPKD/CHF.
Liver involvement is characterized by a basic ductal plate abnormality that leads to bile duct proliferation and ectasia, as well as
progressive hepatic fibrosis.

PATHOGENESIS

Fibrocystin may form a multimeric complex with proteins of
other primary genetic cystic diseases. Altered intracellular signaling from these complexes, located at epithelial apical cell surfaces,
intercellular junctions, and basolateral cell surfaces in association
with the focal adhesion complex, is a critical feature of the disease
pathophysiology.
Over 300 pathogenic variants in PKHD1 (without identified specific hot spots) cause disease, and the same pathogenic variant can
give variable degrees of disease severity in the same family. This
clinical observation is consistent with preclinical data demonstrating many environmental and unknown genetic factors affecting
disease expression. The false-­negative rate for genetic diagnosis is
approximately 10%. Limited available information suggests only
a gross genotype–phenotype correlation: pathogenic variants that
modify fibrocystin appear to cause less severe disease than those
that truncate fibrocystin.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The diagnosis of ARPKD is often made antenatally by the demonstration of oligohydramnios and bilateral enlarged kidneys on

prenatal ultrasound. The typical infant presents with bilateral flank
masses during the neonatal period or in early infancy. ARPKD may
be associated with respiratory distress and spontaneous pneumothorax in the neonatal period. Perinatal demise (25–30%) appears to
be associated with truncating pathogenic variants. Severe bilateral
cases often result in the oligohydramnios complex (Potter syndrome), which is marked by low-­set ears, micrognathia, flattened
nose, limb-­positioning defects, intrauterine growth restriction, and
pulmonary hypoplasia (see Chapter 574). Respiratory distress may
also be secondary to large kidneys that compromise the diaphragm
function. Hypertension is usually noted within the first few weeks
of life, is often severe, and requires aggressive multidrug therapy for
control. Oliguria and acute kidney injury are uncommon, but transient hyponatremia may be seen, which often responds to diuresis.
Kidney function is usually impaired but may be initially normal in
20–30% of patients. Approximately 50% of patients with a neonatal-­
perinatal presentation develop ESKD by age 10 years.
ARPKD is increasingly recognized in infants (and, rarely, in
adolescents and young adults) with a mixed renal-­hepatic clinical
picture. Such children and young adults often present with predominantly hepatic manifestations in combination with variable degrees
of kidney disease. Hepatic fibrosis manifests as portal hypertension, hepatosplenomegaly, gastroesophageal varices, episodes of
ascending cholangitis, prominent cutaneous periumbilical veins,
reversal of portal vein flow, and thrombocytopenia. CHF may manifest with cholangiodysplastic changes or a frank Caroli type with
marked intrahepatic bile duct dilation, affecting the whole liver or
just one segment; biliary tract disease increases the risk of ascending
cholangitis. Kidney findings in patients with a hepatic presentation
may range from asymptomatic abnormal renal ultrasonography to
systemic hypertension and chronic kidney disease. In the newborn,
clinical evidence of liver disease by radiologic or clinical laboratory assessment is present in approximately 50% of children and
believed to be universal by microscopic evaluation. Natural history
studies of ARPKD patients presenting as infants and young children
have classified this group in terms of the severity of their dual-­organ
phenotype: 40% have the severe kidney/severe liver phenotype, and
20% each have the severe kidney/mild liver, severe liver/mild kidney, and mild kidney/mild liver phenotype.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of ARPKD is strongly suggested by bilateral palpable
flank masses in an infant with pulmonary hypoplasia, oligohydramnios, hypertension, and the absence of renal cysts by sonography of
the parents (Fig. 563.1). Markedly enlarged and uniformly hyperechogenic kidneys with poor corticomedullary differentiation are
commonly seen on ultrasonography (Fig. 563.2). The diagnosis is
supported by clinical and laboratory signs of hepatic fibrosis, pathologic findings of ductal plate abnormalities seen on liver biopsy,
anatomic and pathologic proof of ARPKD in a sibling, or parental
consanguinity. The diagnosis can be confirmed by genetic testing.
The differential diagnosis includes other causes of bilateral renal
enlargement and/or cysts, such as multicystic dysplasia, hydronephrosis, Wilms tumor, and bilateral renal vein thrombosis (Tables
563.1 and 563.2).
Nephronophthisis, an autosomal recessive disorder with kidney
fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and cyst formation, is a common cause
of ESKD in children and adolescents (see Tables 563.1 and 563.2)
(see also Chapter 561). Associated external findings include retinal degeneration (Senior-­Løken syndrome), cerebellar ataxia (Joubert syndrome), and hepatic fibrosis (Boichis disease). Symptoms
include polyuria (salt wasting, poor concentrating ability), failure
to thrive, and anemia. Hypertension and edema are seen later when
ESKD develops. Prenatal diagnostic testing using genetic linkage
analysis or direct pathogenic variant analysis is available in families
with a previously affected child.
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis with in vitro fertilization is available for families with a child affected with ARPKD.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3214 Part XXI u Nephrology
failure or feeding intolerance from enlarged kidneys can require unilateral or, more commonly, bilateral nephrectomies, prompting the need
for renal replacement therapy. For many children approaching ESKD
therapy, significant portal hypertension is present. This in combination
with the dramatic improvement in liver transplantation survival has
led to consideration of dual kidney and liver transplantation in a carefully selected group of patients. Dual transplantation thus avoids the
later development of end-­stage liver disease despite successful kidney
transplantation.

PROGNOSIS

Mortality rates have improved dramatically, although approximately 30% of patients die in the neonatal period from complications of pulmonary hypoplasia. Neonatal respiratory support and
renal replacement therapies have increased the 10-­year survival of
children surviving beyond the first year of life to >80%. The 15-­
year survival rate is currently estimated at 70–80%. Consideration
of dual kidney and liver transplantation and the development of
disease-­
specific therapies for pediatric clinical trials will further positively impact the natural history of ARPKD. An important resource for families of patients is the ARPKD/CHF Alliance
(www.arpkdchf.org).

A

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

563.3 Autosomal Dominant Polycystic
Kidney Disease

B
Fig. 563.1 A, Severe nephromegaly in a 3-­mo-­old infant with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, with x-­rays (B). (From Bakkaloglu SA, Schaefer F. Disease of the kidney and urinary tract in children.
In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s
The Kidney. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 74-­6, p. 2320.)

Prasad Devarajan
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), also known
as adult-­onset polycystic kidney disease, is the most common hereditary human kidney disease, with an incidence of 1/400 to 1/1,000. It
is a systemic disorder with possible cyst formation in multiple organs
(liver, pancreas, spleen, brain) and the possible development of saccular cerebral aneurysms.

PATHOLOGY

Both kidneys are enlarged and show large cortical and medullary cysts
originating from all regions of the nephron.

PATHOGENESIS

Fig. 563.2 Ultrasound examination of a neonate with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease demonstrating renal enlargement (9
cm) and increased diffuse echogenicity with complete loss of corticomedullary differentiation resulting from multiple small cystic interfaces.

TREATMENT

The treatment of ARPKD is supportive. Aggressive ventilatory support
is often necessary in the neonatal period secondary to pulmonary hypoplasia, hypoventilation, and the respiratory illnesses of prematurity.
Careful management of hypertension (angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors, and other antihypertensive medications as needed), fluid
and electrolyte abnormalities, osteopenia, and clinical manifestations
of kidney insufficiency are essential. Children with severe respiratory

Approximately 85% of patients with ADPKD have pathogenic variants that map to the PKD1 gene on the short arm of chromosome
16, which encodes polycystin, a transmembrane glycoprotein.
Another 10–15% of ADPKD pathogenic variants map to the PKD2
gene on the long arm of chromosome 4, which encodes polycystin
2, a proposed nonselective cation channel. The majority of pathogenic variants appear to be unique to a given family. At present,
a pathogenic variant can be found in 85% of patients with well-­
characterized disease.
Approximately 8–10% of patients will have de novo, disease-­causing
pathogenic variants. Pathogenic variants of PKD1 are associated with
more severe renal disease than pathogenic variants of PKD2. The
pathophysiology of the disease appears to be related to the disruption
of normal multimeric cystoprotein complexes, with consequent abnormal intracellular signaling resulting in abnormal proliferation, tubular secretion, and cyst formation. Abnormal growth factor expression,
coupled with low intracellular calcium and elevated cyclic adenosine
monophosphate, appear to be important features leading to formation
of cysts and progressive enlargement. Pathogenic variants in GANAB
have been reported in PKD1-­and PKD2-­negative patients.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

The severity of renal disease and the clinical manifestations of ADPKD
are highly variable. Symptomatic ADPKD most commonly occurs in
the fourth or fifth decade of life. However, symptoms, including gross

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 563 u Anatomic Abnormalities Associated with Hematuria 3215
Table 563.1  Differential Diagnosis in ARPKD and ADPKD Genotypes
ASSOCIATED DISEASE

RENAL PHENOTYPE

EXTRARENAL PHENOTYPE

PKHD1, possibly DZIP1L

Bilateral nephromegaly, heterogenous
parenchymal echogenicity with salt and
pepper pattern
Prenatal onset: bilateral nephromegaly,
oligohydramnios, Potter-­like syndrome

Progressive hepatic fibrosis,
Caroli syndrome, portal
hypertension

ADPKD-­PKD1 with truncating
variant

Innumerable bilateral kidney cysts causing
progressive kidney enlargement and reduction
in eGFR; median age at ESKD about 55 years

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
severe, SAH-­CNS aneurysms*

PKD1

ADPKD-­PKD1 with
nontruncating variant

Innumerable bilateral kidney cysts causing
progressive kidney enlargement and
reduction in eGFR; median age at ESKD
about 67 years

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
severe, SAH-­CNS aneurysms*

PKD2

ADPKD-­PKD2

Innumerable bilateral kidney cysts causing
progressive kidney enlargement and
reduction in eGFR; median age at ESKD
about 79 years

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
severe, SAH-­CNS aneurysms*

ADPKD-­LIKE PHENOTYPE
GANAB

ADPKD-­GANAB

Bilateral renal cysts, preserved kidney function

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
severe

DNAJB11

ADPKD-­DNAJB11

Normal or small-­sized kidneys with multiple
small renal cysts; possible evolution to ESKD
after 60 years

Polycystic liver disease, absent to
moderate

Bilateral renal cysts in about 45% of affected
individuals, occasionally mimics ADPKD
imaging presentation; evolution to ESKD is
highly variable, from childhood-­onset ESKD
to preserved kidney function throughout life

Diabetes, gout, hyperuricemia,
hypomagnesaemia, elevated
liver enzymes, bicornate uterus,
solitary kidney

CLASSIC ARPKD

CLASSIC ADPKD
PKD1

ADTKD-­ASSOCIATED GENES
HNF1B
ADTKD-­HNF1B

MUC1

ADTKD-­MUC1

Normal or small-­sized kidneys, few small renal
cysts in half of patients; evolution to ESKD
highly variable, age 20-­70 years

Gout

SEC61A1

ADTKD-­SEC61A1

Normal or small-­sized kidneys, bilateral small
renal cysts in about 50% of individuals

Congenital anemia, intrauterine
growth retardation, neutropenia

UMOD

ADTKD-­UMOD

Normal or small-­sized kidneys, few small
renal cysts in a third of patients, unilateral or
bilateral; evolution to ESKD highly variable,
age 20-­70 years

Gout

ADPLD-­ASSOCIATED GENES
PRKCSH
ADPLD

Few renal cysts occasionally reported

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
severe

SEC63

ADPLD

Few renal cysts occasionally reported

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
severe

ALG8

ADPLD

Few renal cysts occasionally reported

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
moderate

SEC61B

ADPLD

No renal cysts observed to date in the
two families reported with a pathogenic
variant in this gene

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
moderate

LRP5

ADPLD

Few renal cysts occasionally reported

Polycystic liver disease, mild to
moderate

RECESSIVE INHERITANCE
PKHD1

ARPKD

Antenatally enlarged hyperechogenic kidneys;
multiple bilateral millimeter-­sized cysts;
ESKD in the first decade of life in about 50%
of individuals but milder renal presentation
with diagnosis in adulthood possible

Congenital hepatic fibrosis,
Caroli syndrome, small liver
cysts in heterozygous patients

DZIP1L

ARPKD

Antenatal enlarged hyperechogenic kidneys;
multiple bilateral millimeter-­sized cysts;
progression to ESKD variable (second and
third decade of life)

No obvious extrarenal
manifestations reported in the
seven patients identified to
date
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3216 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 563.1  Differential Diagnosis in ARPKD and ADPKD Genotypes—cont’d
PMM2

ASSOCIATED DISEASE

RENAL PHENOTYPE

EXTRARENAL PHENOTYPE

Hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia with PKD

Antenatal enlarged hyperechogenic kidneys,
enlarged kidneys with multiple cysts;
progression to ESKD variable, from infancy
to early adulthood

Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia;
small liver cysts in some
patients

Multiple and bilateral angiomyolipomas
and renal cysts; kidney function usually
preserved; possible evolution to ESKD,
either by destruction of the renal
parenchyma by multiple angiomyolipomas
or following nephrectomies for hemorrhagic
angiomyolipomas; if there is contiguous
gene deletion of TSC2 and PKD1, severe PKD
with evolution to ESKD occurs before age
30 years

CNS (cortical tubers,
astrocytomas, epilepsy, and
intellectual disabilities); skin
lesions (facial angiofibromas
and hypopigmented
spots); pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis;
cardiac rhabdomyoma and
retinal hamartoma; polycystic
liver disease if contiguous
deletion of both PKD1 and TSC2

SYNDROMIC FORMS OF PKD
TSC1 or TSC2
Tuberous sclerosis

VHL

Von Hippel-­Lindau disease

Bilateral renal cysts, renal cell carcinoma

Hemangioblastomas of the
retina, spine, or brain;
pheochromocytoma;
neuroendocrine tumor of the
pancreas

COL4A1

HANAC syndrome
or COL4A1-­related disease

Bilateral renal cysts occasionally reported;
patients can develop renal insufficiency after
about age 50-­60 years

Microscopic hematuria,
aneurysms, muscle
cramps, elevated creatine
phosphokinase, tortuosity of
the retinal arteries

OFD1

Oro-­facial-­digital syndrome
type 1

X-­linked, embryonically lethal in males, PKD
in females

Cleft palate, facial dysmorphy;
syndactyly, clinodactyly, or
polydactyly; intellectual
disabilities; polycystic liver disease

*Intracranial aneurysms in 9–12% of patients with ADPKD.
ADPKD, Autosomal dominant PKD; ADPLD, autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease; ADTKD, autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease; ARPKD, autosomal
recessive polycystic kidney disease; CNS, central nervous system; eGFR, estimate glomerular filtration rate; ESKD, end-­stage kidney disease; HANAC, hereditary angiopathy with
nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps; PKD, polycystic kidney disease; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage.
From Cornec-­Le Gall E, Alam A, Perrone RD. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Lancet. 2019;393:919–932. Table 1.

Table 563.2  Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease and Hepatorenal Fibrocystic Disease Phenocopies
DISEASE

GENE(S)

RENAL DISEASE

HEPATIC DISEASE

SYSTEMIC FEATURES

ARPKD

PKHD1

Collecting duct dilation

CHF; Caroli disease

No

ADPKD

PKD1; PKD2

Cysts along entire nephron

Biliary cysts; CHF (rare)

Yes: adults

NPHP

NPHP1-­NPHP16

Cysts at the
corticomedullary junction

CHF

+/−

Joubert syndrome and
related disorders

JBTS1-­JBTS20

Cystic dysplasia; NPHP

CHF; Caroli disease

Yes

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

BBS1-­BBS18

Cystic dysplasia; NPHP

CHF

Yes

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

MKS1-­MKS10

Cystic dysplasia

CHF

Yes

Oral-­facial-­digital
syndrome, type I

OFD1

Glomerular cysts

CHF (rare)

Yes

Glomerulocystic disease

PKD1; HNF1B; UMOD

Enlarged; normal or
hypoplastic kidneys

CHF (with PKD1
pathogenic variants)

+/–

Jeune syndrome
(asphyxiating thoracic
dystrophy)

IFT80 (ATD2) DYNC2H1
(ADT3) ADT1, ADT4,
ADT5

Cystic dysplasia

CHF; Caroli disease

Yes

Renal-­hepatic-­pancreatic
dysplasia (Ivemark II)

NPHP3, NEK8

Cystic dysplasia

Intrahepatic biliary
dysgenesis

Yes

Zellweger syndrome

PEX1-­3;5-­
6;10-­11;13;14;16;19;26

Renal cortical microcysts

Intrahepatic biliary
dysgenesis

Yes

ADPKD, Autosomal dominant PKD; ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; CHF, congenital hepatic fibrosis; NPHP, nephronophthisis.
Modified from Guay-­Woodford LM, Bissler JJ, Braun MC, et al. Consensus expert recommendations for the diagnosis and management of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney
disease: report of an international conference. J Pediatr. 2014;165:611–617.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 563 u Anatomic Abnormalities Associated with Hematuria 3217
TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS
RT KID long

Fig. 563.3 Ultrasound examination of an 18-­mo-­old male with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease demonstrating renal enlargement (10 cm) and two large cysts.

or microscopic hematuria, bilateral flank pain, abdominal masses,
hypertension, and urinary tract infection, may be seen in neonates,
children, and adolescents. With the increased utilization of abdominal sonography in the pediatric population, as well as ADPKD families
requesting possible screening in their asymptomatic, at-­risk offspring,
most children with ADPKD are diagnosed by abnormal renal sonography in the absence of symptoms. Renal ultrasonography usually
demonstrates multiple bilateral macrocysts in enlarged kidneys (Fig.
563.3), although normal kidney size and unilateral disease may be seen
in the early phase of the disease in children.
ADPKD is a multiorgan disorder affecting many tissue types. Cysts
may be asymptomatic but present within the liver, pancreas, spleen,
and ovaries and, when present, help confirm the diagnosis in childhood. Intracranial aneurysms, which appear to segregate within certain families, have an overall prevalence of 15% and are an important
cause of mortality in adults but only occasionally occur in children.
Mitral valve prolapse is seen in approximately 12% of children; aortic
and coronary artery aneurysms and aortic valve insufficiency are noted
in affected adults. Hernias, bronchiectasis, and intestinal diverticula
can also occur in these children.

DIAGNOSIS

ADPKD is confirmed by the presence of enlarged kidneys with bilateral
macrocysts in a patient with an affected first-­degree relative. De novo
pathogenic variants occur in 8–10% of patients with newly diagnosed
disease. The diagnosis might be made in children before their affected
parent, making parental renal sonography an important diagnostic test
to be performed in families with no apparent family history. Among
patients with genetically defined ADPKD, screening renal ultrasonography results may be normal in ≤20% by 20 years of age and <5% by
30 years of age.
Prenatal diagnosis is suggested from the presence of enlarged kidneys with or without cysts on ultrasonography in families with known
ADPKD. Prenatal DNA testing is available in families with affected
members whose disease is caused by identified pathogenic variants in
the PKD1 or PKD2 genes.
The differential diagnosis includes renal cysts associated with glomerulocystic kidney disease, tuberous sclerosis, and von Hippel-­
Lindau disease, which may be inherited in an autosomal dominant
pattern (see Table 563.1). The neonatal manifestations of ADPKD and
ARPKD may rarely be indistinguishable.

Treatment of ADPKD is primarily supportive. Control of blood
pressure is critical because the rate of disease progression in
ADPKD correlates with the presence of hypertension. Angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors and/or angiotensin II receptor antagonists are agents of choice. Obesity, dietary salt and protein excess,
caffeine ingestion, smoking, multiple pregnancies, and male gender
appear to accelerate the disease progression. Older patients with a
family history of intracranial aneurysm rupture should be screened
for cerebral aneurysms. Although the approach remains controversial, most nephrologists now recommend initial screening for cerebral aneurysms with an MR angiogram around 18 years of age in
asymptomatic patients with a family history of ADPKD and associated aneurysms.
Although neonatal ADPKD may be fatal, long-­term survival of
the patient and the kidneys is possible for children surviving the
neonatal period. ADPKD that occurs initially in older children has
a favorable prognosis, with normal kidney function during childhood seen in >80% of children. Pain may be a manifestation of
infection, hemorrhage, cyst rupture, stones, or tumors and should
be managed appropriately with pain medications and specifically
based on its etiology.
Although disease-­specific therapy is not yet available, clinical trials
are in progress based on promising preclinical laboratory investigations. These potential therapies include renin-­angiotensin blockade,
vasopressin V2 receptor antagonism (tolvaptan), statins (to reduce
pain), and somatostatin analogues. Tolvaptan has been effective in
adults in slowing the progression of renal impairment. A valuable
resource for patients and their families is the Polycystic Kidney Disease
Foundation (www.pkdcure.org).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

563.4 Trauma
Prasad Devarajan
Infants and children are more susceptible to kidney injury following
blunt or penetrating injury to the back or abdomen because of their
decreased muscle mass “protecting” the kidney. Gross or microscopic hematuria, flank pain, and abdominal rigidity can occur;
associated injuries may be present (see Chapter 80). In the absence
of hemodynamic instability, most kidney trauma can be managed
nonoperatively. Urethral trauma can result from crush injury, often
associated with a fractured pelvis or from direct injury. Such injury
is suspected in the appropriate clinical setting when gross blood
appears at the external urethral meatus. Rhabdomyolysis and consequent acute kidney injury is another complication of crush injury
that can be ameliorated by vigorous fluid resuscitation. There may
be a relationship between microscopic hematuria and recreational
accidents in individuals >16 years of age, none of whom exhibited
hypotension or required surgical intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

563.5 Renal Tumors
See Chapters 547 and 548.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3218 Part XXI u Nephrology

Chapter 564

Lower Urinary Tract
Causes of Hematuria
564.1 Infectious Causes of Cystitis and
Urethritis
Prasad Devarajan

resolves within 48 hours after cessation of exercise. The absence of
red blood cell casts or evidence of renal disease and the presence
of dysuria and blood clots in some patients suggest that the source
of bleeding lies in the lower urinary tract. Rhabdomyolysis with
myoglobinuria or hemoglobinuria must be considered in the differential diagnosis when the condition is associated with symptoms in
the appropriate clinical context. Hydronephrosis or other anatomic
abnormalities must be considered in any child who presents with
hematuria (particularly gross hematuria) after mild exercise or following mild trauma. Appropriate imaging studies are indicated in
this setting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Gross or microscopic hematuria may be associated with bacterial,
mycobacterial, or viral infections of the bladder (see Chapter 575).

564.2 Hemorrhagic Cystitis
Prasad Devarajan
Hemorrhagic cystitis is defined as the presence of sustained hematuria
and lower urinary tract symptoms (e.g., dysuria, frequency, urgency)
in the absence of other bleeding conditions such as vaginal bleeding,
a generalized bleeding condition, or a bacterial urinary tract infection.
Depending on the severity, patients can present with microscopic or
gross hematuria, often with clots. In severe forms, bleeding can lead
to a significant decrease in blood hemoglobin levels and symptoms of
lower urinary tract obstruction.
Hemorrhagic cystitis can occur in response to chemical toxins
(cyclophosphamide, penicillins, busulfan, thiotepa, dyes, insecticides),
viruses (adenovirus types 11 and 21 [see Chapter 309] and influenza
A [see Chapter 305]), radiation, and amyloidosis. The polyoma BK
virus (see Chapter 321), present latently in immunocompetent hosts, is
associated with the development of drug-­induced cystitis in immunosuppressed patients. The pediatric bone marrow transplantation population is particularly susceptible to hemorrhagic cystitis.
For chemical irritation related to the use of cyclophosphamide,
hydration, bladder washes, and the use of mesna disulfide, which
inactivates urinary cyclophosphamide metabolites, helps to protect
the bladder. Administration of oral cyclophosphamide in the morning followed by aggressive oral hydration throughout the remainder of
the day is very effective in minimizing the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis.
Treatment of hemorrhagic cystitis consists of a combination of intensive intravenous hydration, forced diuresis, analgesia, and spasmolytic
drugs. Consultation with a urologist is recommended for more invasive measures if the cystitis does not respond to conservative measures.
Gross hematuria associated with viral hemorrhagic cystitis usually
resolves within 1 week.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

564.3 Vigorous Exercise
Prasad Devarajan
Gross or microscopic hematuria can follow vigorous exercise.
Exercise-­induced hematuria is less common in females and can be
associated with dysuria. Approximately 30–60% of runners completing marathons have dipstick-­positive urine for blood. In limited
follow-­up, none appeared to have any significant kidney or urinary
tract abnormalities. The color of the urine following vigorous exercise can vary from red to black. Blood clots may be rarely present in
the urine. Findings on urine culture, intravenous pyelography, voiding cystourethrography, and cystoscopy are normal in most patients.
This seems to be a benign condition, and the hematuria generally

Section 3

Conditions Particularly
Associated With
Proteinuria
Chapter 565

Clinical Evaluation of the
Child with Proteinuria
Francisco X. Flores
NORMAL PHYSIOLOGY

The charge and size selective properties of the glomerular capillary
wall prevent significant amounts of albumin, globulin, and other large
plasma proteins from entering the urinary space (see Chapter 557).
Smaller proteins (low molecular weight proteins) do cross the capillary
wall but are reabsorbed by the proximal tubule. A very small amount of
protein that normally appears in the urine is the result of normal tubular secretion. The normally excreted protein mostly consists of Tamm-­
Horsfall protein (uromodulin), a protective glycoprotein secreted by
the tubules that inactivates cytokines.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF PROTEINURIA

Abnormal amounts of protein may appear in the urine from three
possible mechanisms: glomerular proteinuria, which occurs as a result
of disruption of the glomerular capillary wall; tubular proteinuria, a
tubular injury or dysfunction that leads to ineffective reabsorption
of mostly low molecular weight proteins; and increased production of
plasma proteins (in multiple myeloma, rhabdomyolysis, or hemolysis),
which may cause the production or release of very large amounts of
protein that are filtered at the glomerulus and overwhelm the absorptive capacity of the proximal tubule.

MEASUREMENT OF URINE PROTEIN

Urine protein can be measured in random collected samples or in
timed (e.g., 24-­hour or overnight) samples. Tests to accurately quantify
the urine protein concentration rely on precipitation with sulfosalicylic
acid and measurement of turbidity (Table 565.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 565 u Clinical Evaluation of the Child with Proteinuria

3219

Table 565.1  Quantification of Proteinuria in Children
METHOD

INDICATIONS

NORMAL RANGE

COMMENTS

Dipstick testing

Routine screening for proteinuria
performed in the office

Negative or trace in a
concentrated urine specimen
(specific gravity: ≥1.020)
Test interpretation:
1+ ∼30 mg/dL
2+ ∼100 mg/dL
3+ ∼300 mg/dL

False-­positive test can occur if urine
is very alkaline (pH >8.0) or very
concentrated (specific gravity: >1.025),
or when there is pus, vaginal secretions,
or semen present

24-­hr urine for protein and
creatinine*excretion

Quantitation of proteinuria (as
well as creatinine clearances)

<150 mg/m2/24 hr

More accurate than spot urine analysis;
inconvenient for patient; the creatinine
content should be measured to
determine whether the specimen is
truly a 24-­hr collection. The amount of
creatinine in a 24-­hr specimen can be
estimated as follows: females, 15-­20 mg/
kg; males, 20-­25 mg/kg

Spot urine for protein/
creatinine ratio, preferably
on first morning urine
specimen

Semiquantitative assessment of
proteinuria

<0.2 mg protein/mg creatinine in
children older than 2 yr old
<0.5 mg protein/mg creatinine in
those 6-­24 mo old

Simplest method to quantitate
proteinuria; less accurate than
measuring 24-­hr proteinuria

Microalbuminuria

Assess risk of progressive
glomerulopathy in patients with
diabetes mellitus

<30 mg urine albumin per gram
of creatinine on first morning
urine

Therapy should be intensified in diabetics
with microalbuminuria

*Note that in a 24-­hr urine specimen, the creatinine content should be measured to determine whether the specimen is truly a 24-­hr collection. The amount of creatinine in a 24-­hr
specimen can be estimated as follows: females, 15-­20 mg/kg and males, 20-­25 mg/kg.
Adapted from Hogg RJ, Portman RJ, Milliner D, et al. Evaluation and management of proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome in children: recommendations from a Pediatric Nephrology
Panel Established at the National Kidney Foundation Conference on Proteinuria, Albuminuria, Risk Assessment, Detection, and Elimination (PARADE). Pediatrics. 2000;105(6):1242–
1249.

Urine Dipstick Measurement of Protein

The total protein concentration in urine can be estimated with chemically impregnated plastic strips that contain a pH-­sensitive colorimetric indicator that changes color when negatively charged proteins, such
as albumin, bind to it. Dipsticks primarily detect albuminuria and are
less sensitive for other forms of proteins (low molecular weight proteins, Bence-­Jones protein, gamma globulins). Visual changes in the
color of the dipstick are a semiquantitative measure of urinary protein
concentration. The dipstick is reported as negative, trace (10-­29 mg/
dL), 1+ (30-­100 mg/dL), 2+ (100-­300 mg/dL), 3+ (300-­1,000 mg/dL),
and 4+ (>1,000 mg/dL). False-­positive results can occur with a very
high urine pH (>7.0), a highly concentrated urine specimen, contamination of the urine with blood, and the presence of pyuria or prolonged
dipstick immersion. False-­negative test results can occur in patients
with a low urine pH (<4.5), dilute urine or a large volume of urine
output, or in disease states in which the predominant urinary protein
is not albumin.
Positive urine dipstick test for protein is considered to be present if
there is more than a trace (10-­29 mg/dL) in a urine sample in which the
specific gravity is <1.010. If the specific gravity is >1.015, the dipstick
must read ≥1+ (>30 mg/dL) to be considered clinically significant.
Because the dipstick reaction offers only a qualitative measurement of urinary protein excretion, children with persistent proteinuria
should have proteinuria quantitated more precisely. Timed (24-­hour)
urine collections offer more precise information regarding urine protein excretion than a randomly performed dipstick test. Urinary protein excretion in the normal child is <100 mg/m2/day or a total of 150
mg/day. In neonates, normal urinary protein excretion is higher, up
to 300 mg/m2, because of reduced reabsorption of filtered proteins. A
reasonable upper limit of normal protein excretion in healthy children
is 150 mg/24 hr. More specifically, normal protein excretion in children
is defined as ≤4 mg/m2/hr, abnormal proteinuria is defined as excretion
of 4-­40 mg/m2/hr, and nephrotic-­range proteinuria is defined as > 40
mg/m2/hr.
Timed urine collections are cumbersome to obtain, and the sensitivity and specificity of the test can be influenced by fluid intake, the
volume of urine output, and the importance of including a complete
collection without missed voids.

Urine Protein-­to-­Creatinine Ratio Measurement

Urine protein-­to-­creatinine ratio measurement of an untimed (spot)
urine specimen has largely replaced timed urine collection. In children,
urine protein-­to-­creatinine ratios have been shown to be significantly
correlated with measurements of 24-­hour urine protein and are useful
to screen for proteinuria and to longitudinally monitor urine protein
levels.
This ratio is calculated by dividing the urine protein concentration
(mg/dL) by the urine creatinine concentration (mg/dL) to provide
a simple measure. It should be ideally performed on a first morning voided urine specimen to eliminate the possibility of orthostatic
(postural) proteinuria (see Chapter 566.2). A ratio of <0.5 in children
<2 years of age and <0.2 in children >2 years of age suggests normal urinary protein excretion. A ratio >2 suggests nephrotic-­range
proteinuria.

CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS

The finding of proteinuria in children and adolescents in a single, non–first
morning urine specimen is common, varying between 5% and 15%. The
prevalence of persistent proteinuria on repeated testing is much less common. The challenge is to differentiate the child with proteinuria related
to renal disease from the otherwise healthy child with transient or other
benign forms of proteinuria. When proteinuria is detected, it is important
to determine whether it is transient, orthostatic, or fixed in nature.
Microalbuminuria is defined as the presence of albumin in the
urine above the normal level but below the detectable range of conventional urine dipstick methods. In adults, persistent microalbuminuria (defined as a urinary albumin excretion of 30-­300 mg/g creatinine
on at least two to three samples) is accepted as evidence of diabetic
nephropathy and also a predictor of cardiovascular and renal disease.
The mean level of urinary albumin excretion falls between 8 and 10
mg/g of creatinine in children >6 years of age. Similar to adults, microalbuminuria in children has been found to be associated with obesity
and to predict, with reasonable specificity, the development of diabetic
nephropathy in type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3220 Part XXI u Nephrology

Chapter 566

Conditions Associated
with Proteinuria
566.1 Transient Proteinuria
Francisco X. Flores
The majority of children found to have positive tests for protein
on urinary dipsticks will have negative evaluations on repeated
dipsticks and normal urinary protein if formally quantitated.
Approximately 10% of children who undergo random urinalysis have proteinuria by a single dipstick measurement. Across the
school-­age spectrum, this finding occurs more commonly in adolescents than in younger children. In most cases, serial testing of
the patient’s urine demonstrates resolution of the abnormality. This
phenomenon defines transient proteinuria, and its cause remains
elusive. Defined contributing factors include a temperature >38.3°C
(101°F), exercise, dehydration, cold exposure, heart failure, recent
use of epinephrine, seizures, or stress. Transient proteinuria usually does not exceed 1-­2+ on the dipstick. No evaluation or therapy
is needed for children with this benign condition, and it resolves
spontaneously or as the cause resolves. Persistence of proteinuria,
even if low grade, is not consistent with the diagnosis and suggests
the need for additional evaluation (Fig. 566.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

566.2 Orthostatic (Postural) Proteinuria
Francisco X. Flores
Orthostatic proteinuria is the most common cause of persistent proteinuria in school-­age children and adolescents, occurring in up to
60% of children with persistent proteinuria. Children with this condition are usually asymptomatic, and the condition is discovered
by routine urinalysis. Patients with orthostatic proteinuria excrete
normal or minimally increased amounts of protein in the supine
position. In the upright position, urinary protein excretion may
be increased 10-­fold, up to 1,000 mg/24 hr (1 g/24 hr). Hematuria,
hypertension, hypoalbuminemia, edema, and renal dysfunction are
absent.
In a child with persistent asymptomatic proteinuria, the initial
evaluation should include an assessment for orthostatic proteinuria. It begins with the collection of a first morning urine sample,
with subsequent testing of any urinary abnormalities by a complete
urinalysis and determination of a spot urine protein-­to-­creatinine
ratio (see Fig. 566.1). The correct collection of the first morning
urine sample is critical. The child must fully empty the bladder
before going to bed and then collect the first voided urine sample
immediately upon arising in the morning. The absence of proteinuria (dipstick negative or trace for protein; and a normal ratio of
urinary protein [uPr; mg/dL] to urinary creatinine [uCr; mg/dL] =
[uPr/uCr] <0.2) on the first morning urine sample for 3 consecutive days confirms the diagnosis of orthostatic proteinuria. No further evaluation is necessary, and the patient and family should be
reassured of the benign nature of this condition. However, if there
are other abnormalities of the urinalysis (e.g., hematuria), or if the

urine uPr:uCr ratio is >0.2, the patient should be referred to a pediatric nephrologist for a complete evaluation.
The cause of orthostatic proteinuria is unknown, although altered
renal hemodynamics and partial left renal vein obstruction in the
upright, lordotic position have been proposed as possible causes. An
increased body mass index is recognized as a strong correlate of orthostatic proteinuria. Long-­term follow-­up studies in young adults suggest that orthostatic proteinuria is a benign process, but similar data
are not available for children. Therefore long-­term follow-­up of children is prudent. Patients should be monitored for the development of
nonorthostatic proteinuria, particularly in the presence of hematuria,
hypertension, or edema. Such findings may herald underlying kidney
disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

566.3 Fixed Proteinuria
Francisco X. Flores
Children found to have fixed proteinuria on a first morning urine
sample on three separate occasions should be further investigated.
Fixed proteinuria is defined as a first morning urine sample that
is ≥1+ on dipstick testing with a urine specific gravity >1.015 or
with a urine protein-­to-­creatinine ratio of ≥0.2. Fixed proteinuria
indicates a potential kidney disease caused by either glomerular or
tubular disorders.

GLOMERULAR PROTEINURIA

The glomerular capillary wall consists of three layers: the fenestrated capillary endothelium, the glomerular basement membrane,
and the podocytes (with foot processes and intercalated slit diaphragms) (Fig. 566.2). Glomerular proteinuria results from alterations in the permeability of any of the layers of the glomerular
capillary wall to normally filtered proteins and occurs in a variety
of renal diseases (Table 566.1). Glomerular proteinuria can range
widely from <1 g to >30 g of protein in a 24-­hour period. The podocyte is the predominant cell of injury in most glomerular diseases
characterized by heavy proteinuria.
Glomerular proteinuria should be suspected in any patient with
a first morning urine protein-­to-­creatinine ratio >1.0, or significant
proteinuria of any degree, accompanied by hypertension, hematuria with active urine sediment, edema, or renal dysfunction. Disorders characterized primarily by proteinuria include idiopathic
(minimal change disease) nephrotic syndrome, secondary causes
of nephrotic syndrome, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis, membranous nephropathy,
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, diabetic nephropathy,
and obesity-­related glomerulopathy. Other renal disorders that can
include proteinuria as a prominent feature include acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis, immunoglobulin A nephropathy,
systemic lupus erythematosus nephritis, IgA vasculitis (formerly
Henoch-­S chönlein purpura) nephritis, and Alport syndrome.
The initial evaluation of a child with fixed proteinuria should include
the measurement of serum creatinine and an electrolyte panel, first
morning urine protein-­to-­creatinine ratio, serum albumin level, complement levels, and antinuclear antibodies (ANA). The child should be
referred to a pediatric nephrologist for further evaluation and management. Renal biopsy is often necessary to establish a diagnosis and guide
therapy.
In asymptomatic patients with low-­grade proteinuria (urine protein-­
to-­creatinine ratio between 0.2 and 1.0) in whom all other findings are
normal, renal biopsy might not be indicated, because the underlying
process may be transient or resolving or because specific pathologic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 566 u Conditions Associated with Proteinuria
Urine dipstick protein

Trace

1+

3221

Repeat urine
dipstick protein

1+

Negative or
trace

Obtain 1st morning urine for
protein/creatinine ratio and
urinalysis with microscopic
examination

Repeat urine dipstick
6 mo to 1 yr later
Consider discharge if
urine dipstick protein
negative or trace

Urine protein/creatinine ratio 0.02 g/mmol
(0.2 mg/mg) and no microscopic hematuria

Urine protein/creatinine ratio >0.02 g/mmol
(0.2 mg/mg) ± microscopic hematuria

Possibilities
1.
Urine dipstick
false positive
24-hr urinary total protein
0.3 g/1.73 m2/day

2.

Transient proteinuria

3.
Repeat urine tests
6 mo later

>0.3 g/1.73 m2/day

Further evaluation
History (drugs, family history)
Physical examination (including BP)
Investigations:
• Serum urea, creatinine,
electrolytes
• Serum total cholesterol
• Serum albumin
• Serum complements C3 and C4
• ANA or anti-dsDNA antibodies,
ANCA (if indicated)
• Hepatitis B and C, HIV serology
(if indicated)
• Renal ultrasound
• Consider renal biopsy (see
section on indications for renal
biopsy)

Postural/orthostatic proteinuria
Consider:
• 24-hr urinary total
protein
• Renal Doppler ultrasound
(if nutcracker syndrome is
suspected)

Fig 566.1 Algorithm for investigating proteinuria. ANA, Antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antinuclear cytoplasmic antibody; anti-­dsDNA, anti–double-­
stranded DNA; BP, blood pressure. (From Yap HK, Lau PYW. Hematuria and proteinuria. In: Geary DF, Scharfer F, eds. Comprehensive Pediatric
Nephrology. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008: p. 190.)

features of a chronic kidney disease might not yet be apparent. Such
patients should have periodic reevaluation (ideally every 4-­6 months
unless the patient is or becomes symptomatic). The evaluation should
consist of a physical examination with accurate blood pressure measurement, urinalysis, measurement of serum creatinine, and a repeat
first morning urine protein-­to-­creatinine ratio. Indications for renal
biopsy include increasing proteinuria (urine protein-­
to-­
creatinine
ratio >1.0) or the development of hematuria with active urine sediment, hypertension, or reduced renal function.

TUBULAR PROTEINURIA

A variety of renal disorders that primarily involve the tubulointerstitial compartment of the kidney can cause low-­grade fixed proteinuria (urine protein-­to-­creatinine ratio 0.2:1.0). In the healthy state,
large amounts of proteins of lower molecular weight than albumin
are filtered by the glomerulus and reabsorbed in the proximal tubule.
Injury to the proximal tubules can result in diminished reabsorptive
capacity and the loss of these low molecular weight proteins in the
urine.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3222 Part XXI u Nephrology
Parietal
epithelial cell

Table 566.1  Causes of Proteinuria
Urinary Space
Podocyte
cell body

Slit
Filtration slit
diaphragm (40 nm)

Subpodocyte
space

Podocyte
foot processes

GBM

Glycocalyx
Endothelial
cell
Fenestrae
Glomerular Capillary Lumen

Fig. 566.2 Glomerular capillary wall. The three layers of the capil-

TRANSIENT PROTEINURIA
Fever
Exercise
Dehydration
Cold exposure
Congestive heart failure
Seizure
Stress
Recent use of epinephrine
ORTHOSTATIC (POSTURAL) PROTEINURIA
GLOMERULAR DISEASES CHARACTERIZED BY ISOLATED
PROTEINURIA
Idiopathic (minimal change) nephrotic syndrome
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Secondary causes of nephrotic syndrome (see Chapter 567)
Mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
Membranous nephropathy
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Amyloidosis
Diabetic nephropathy
Sickle cell nephropathy

lary wall (glomerular endothelial cell, glomerular basement membrane
[GBM], and podocyte) act as the glomerular filtration barrier (GFB), preventing proteins and large molecules from passing from the capillary
lumen into the urinary space. The podocyte cell body lies within the urinary space, and the cell is attached to the GBM through foot processes.
Adjacent foot processes are separated by the filtration slit, bridged by
the slit diaphragm. Disruption of the GFB leads the passage of protein
across the capillary wall, leading to proteinuria. (From Jefferson JA, Nelson PJ, Najafian B, et al. Podocyte disorders: core curriculum 2011. Am
J Kidney Dis. 2011;58:666–677. Fig. 1.)

GLOMERULAR DISEASES WITH PROTEINURIA AS A PROMINENT
FEATURE
Acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis (streptococcal, endocarditis,
hepatitis B or C virus, HIV)
Immunoglobulin A nephropathy
IgA vasculitis nephritis
Lupus nephritis
Serum sickness
Alport syndrome
Vasculitic disorders
Reflux nephropathy

Tubular proteinuria (see Table 566.1) may be seen in acquired and
inherited disorders and may be associated with other defects of proximal tubular function, such as Fanconi syndrome (glycosuria, phosphaturia, bicarbonate wasting, and aminoaciduria). Tubular proteinuria
is a consistent finding among patients with the X-­linked tubular syndrome, Dent disease, caused by pathogenic variants of the renal chloride channel.
Asymptomatic patients having persistent proteinuria generally have
glomerular rather than tubular proteinuria. In occult cases, glomerular
and tubular proteinuria can be distinguished by protein electrophoresis
of the urine. In tubular proteinuria, little or no albumin is detected,
whereas in glomerular proteinuria, the major protein is albumin.

TUBULAR DISEASES
Cystinosis
Fanconi syndrome
Wilson disease
Lowe syndrome
Dent disease (X-­linked recessive nephrolithiasis)
Galactosemia
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
Acute tubular necrosis
Renal dysplasia
Polycystic kidney disease
Reflux nephropathy
Renal transplant rejection
Drugs (aminoglycosides, cisplatin, penicillamine, lithium,
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, cyclosporine)
Heavy metals (lead, gold, mercury)

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 567

Nephrotic Syndrome
Elif Erkan
Nephrotic syndrome is the clinical manifestation of glomerular diseases associated with heavy (nephrotic range) proteinuria. Nephrotic-­
range proteinuria is defined as proteinuria >3.5 g/24 hr or a urine

protein:creatinine ratio >2. The triad of clinical findings associated
with nephrotic syndrome arising from the large urinary losses of protein are hypoalbuminemia (≤2.5 g/dL), edema, and hyperlipidemia
(cholesterol >200 mg/dL).
Nephrotic syndrome affects 1-­3 per 100,000 children <16 years
of age. Without treatment, nephrotic syndrome in children is associated with a high risk of death, most commonly from infections.
Fortunately, 80% of children with nephrotic syndrome respond to
corticosteroid therapy. Although glucocorticoid therapy is standard therapy for nephrotic syndrome, neither the target cell nor the
mechanism of action of steroids has been determined. Early referral
to a pediatric nephrologist is recommended for initial management

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 567 u Nephrotic Syndrome
of nephrotic syndrome. However, continued care of these children
is always a collaborative effort between the nephrologist and the
primary care physician.

ETIOLOGY

Most children with nephrotic syndrome have a form of primary or
idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (Table 567.1). Glomerular lesions
associated with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome include minimal
change disease (most common), focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, C3 glomerulopathy, and membranous nephropathy (Table 567.2). These
etiologies have different age distributions (Fig. 567.1). Nephrotic
syndrome may also be secondary to systemic diseases such as
systemic lupus erythematosus, IgA vasculitis (formerly Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura), malignancy (lymphoma and leukemia), and
infections (hepatitis, HIV, and malaria) (see Table 567.1). A number of hereditary proteinuria syndromes are caused by pathogenic
variants in genes that encode critical protein components of the glomerular filtration apparatus (Table 567.3).

PATHOGENESIS
Role of the Podocyte

The underlying abnormality in nephrotic syndrome is an increased
permeability of the glomerular capillary wall, which leads to massive proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia. The podocyte plays a crucial role in the development of proteinuria and the progression of
glomerulosclerosis (Fig. 567.2). The podocyte is a highly differentiated epithelial cell located on the outside of the glomerular capillary
loop. Foot processes are extensions of the podocyte that terminate
on the glomerular basement membrane. The foot processes of a
podocyte interdigitate with those from adjacent podocytes and are
connected by a slit called the slit diaphragm. The podocyte functions as structural support of the capillary loop, is a major component of the glomerular filtration barrier to proteins, and is involved
in synthesis and repair of the glomerular basement membrane. The
slit diaphragm is one of the major impediments to protein permeability across the glomerular capillary wall. Slit diaphragms are not
simple passive filters; they consist of numerous proteins that contribute to complex signaling pathways and play an important role in
podocyte function. Important component proteins of the slit diaphragm include nephrin, podocin, CD2AP, and α-­actinin 4. Podocyte injury or pathogenic variants of genes producing podocyte
proteins may cause nephrotic-­range proteinuria (see Table 567.3).
Genetic screening of 1,655 patients with steroid-­resistant nephrotic
syndrome and congenital nephrotic syndrome in the European
PodoNet Registry Cohort has shown that pathogenic variants in
NPHS1, WT1, and NPHS2 were the most common. The proportion
of patients with pathogenic variants of podocyte genes decreased by
age; it was 66% in patients with congenital nephrotic syndrome and
15–16% in school-­age patients and adolescents.
In idiopathic, hereditary, and secondary forms of nephrotic syndrome, there are immune and nonimmune insults to the podocyte that
lead to foot process effacement of the podocyte, a decrease in number
of functional podocytes, and altered slit diaphragm integrity. The end
result is increased protein leakiness across the glomerular capillary
wall into the urinary space.

Role of the Immune System

Minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) may occur after
viral infections and allergen challenges. MCNS has also been found
to occur in children with Hodgkin lymphoma and T-­cell lymphoma.
That immunosuppression occurs with drugs such as corticosteroids
and cyclosporine and provides indirect additional evidence that
the immune system contributes to the overall pathogenesis of the
nephrotic syndrome.

3223

Considering the recurrence rate of 30% after kidney transplantation, a permeability factor was implicated in pathophysiology of
FSGS. Rat glomeruli exposed to patient sera with FSGS has demonstrated increased permeability to albumin. A subset of adult and
pediatric patients was found to have circulating nephrin autoantibodies, suggesting the role of circulating antibodies in the pathogenesis of MCNS.

CLINICAL CONSEQUENCES OF NEPHROTIC
SYNDROME
Edema

Edema is the most common presenting symptom of children with
nephrotic syndrome. Despite its almost universal presence, there
is uncertainty as to the exact mechanism of edema formation.
There are two opposing theories, the underfill hypothesis and the
overfill hypothesis, that have been proposed as mechanisms causing
nephrotic edema.
The underfill hypothesis is based on nephrotic-­range proteinuria
that leads to a fall in the plasma protein level with a corresponding
decrease in intravascular oncotic pressure. This leads to leakage of
plasma water into the interstitium, generating edema. As a result of
reduced intravascular volume, there is increased secretion of vasopressin and atrial natriuretic factor, which, along with aldosterone,
results in increased sodium and water retention by the tubules.
Sodium and water retention therefore occur as a consequence of
intravascular volume depletion.
This hypothesis does not fit the clinical picture of some patients
with edema caused by nephrotic syndrome who have clinical signs
of intravascular volume overload, not volume depletion. Treating
these patients with albumin alone may not be sufficient to induce
a diuresis without the concomitant use of diuretics. Also, reducing
the renin-­aldosterone axis with mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists does not result in a marked increase in sodium excretion. With
the onset of remission of MCNS, many children will have increased
urine output before their urinary protein excretion is measurably
reduced.
The overfill hypothesis postulates that nephrotic syndrome is associated with primary sodium retention, with subsequent volume
expansion and leakage of excess fluid into the interstitium. There is
accumulating evidence that the epithelial sodium channel in the distal
tubule may play a key role in sodium reabsorption in nephrotic syndrome. The clinical weaknesses of this hypothesis are evidenced by
the numerous nephrotic patients who present with an obvious clinical
picture of intravascular volume depletion: low blood pressure, tachycardia, and elevated hemoconcentration. Furthermore, amiloride, an
epithelial sodium channel blocker, used alone is not sufficient to induce
adequate diuresis.
The goal of therapy should be a gradual reduction of edema with judicious use of diuretics, sodium restriction, and cautious use of IV albumin
infusions, if indicated.

Hyperlipidemia

There are several alterations in the lipid profile in children with
nephrotic syndrome, including an increase in cholesterol, triglycerides, low-­density lipoproteins, and very low-density lipoproteins.
The high-­density lipoprotein level remains unchanged or is low.
In adults, this results in an increase in the adverse cardiovascular
risk ratio, although the implications for children are not as serious, especially those with steroid-­responsive nephrotic syndrome.
Hyperlipidemia is thought to be the result of increased synthesis as
well as decreased catabolism of lipids. Although commonplace in
adults, the use of lipid-­lowering agents in children is uncommon.

Increased Susceptibility to Infections

Children with nephrotic syndrome are especially susceptible to
infections such as cellulitis, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3224 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 567.1  Causes of Childhood Nephrotic Syndrome
IDIOPATHIC NEPHROTIC SYNDROME
Minimal change disease
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Membranous nephropathy
Glomerulonephritis associated with nephrotic syndrome–
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, crescentic
glomerulonephritis, immunoglobulin A nephropathy
GENETIC DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH PROTEINURIA OR
NEPHROTIC SYNDROME (SEE ALSO TABLE 567.3)
Nephrotic Syndrome (Typical)
Finnish-­type congenital nephrotic syndrome (absence of nephrin)
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (pathogenic variants in nephrin,
podocin, MYO1E, α-­actinin 4, TRPC6)
Diffuse mesangial sclerosis (pathogenic variants in laminin β2 chain)
Denys-­Drash syndrome (pathogenic variants in WT1 transcription
factor)
Congenital nephrotic syndrome with lung and skin involvement
(integrin α-­3 pathogenic variant)
Mitochondrial disorders
Proteinuria With or Without Nephrotic Syndrome
Nail–patella syndrome (pathogenic variant in LMX1B transcription
factor)
Alport syndrome (pathogenic variant in collagen biosynthesis genes)
Multisystem Syndromes With or Without Nephrotic Syndrome
Galloway-­Mowat syndrome
Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease
Jeune syndrome
Cockayne syndrome
Laurence-­Moon-­Biedl-­Bardet syndrome
Metabolic Disorders With or Without Nephrotic Syndrome
Alagille syndrome
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Fabry disease
Glutaric acidemia
Glycogen storage disease
Hurler syndrome
Partial lipodystrophy
Mitochondrial cytopathies
Sickle cell disease

SECONDARY CAUSES OF NEPHROTIC SYNDROME
Infections
Endocarditis
Post-­streptococcal
Hepatitides B, C
HIV-­1
Infectious mononucleosis
Cytomegalovirus
Malaria
Syphilis (congenital and secondary)
Toxoplasmosis
Tuberculosis
Schistosomiasis
Filariasis
Drugs
Captopril
Penicillamine
Gold
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Pamidronate, other bisphosphonates
Interferon
Mercury
Heroin
Lithium
Rifampicin
Sulfasalazine
Immunologic or Allergic Disorders
Vasculitis syndromes
Castleman disease
Kimura disease
Bee sting
Snake venom
Food allergens
Serum sickness
Poison ivy, poison oak
ASSOCIATED WITH MALIGNANT DISEASE
Wilms Tumor
Lymphoma
Pheochromocytoma
Leukemia
Thymoma
Solid tumors
Glomerular Hyperfiltration
Oligomeganephronia
Morbid obesity
Adaptation to nephron reduction

Adapted from Eddy AA, Symons JM. Nephrotic syndrome in childhood. Lancet. 2003;362:629–638.

Table 567.2  Summary of Primary Renal Diseases That Manifest as Idiopathic Nephrotic Syndrome
MEMBRANOPROLIFERATIVE
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS

FEATURES

MINIMAL CHANGE
NEPHROTIC
SYNDROME

FOCAL SEGMENTAL
GLOMERULOSCLEROSIS

MEMBRANOUS
NEPHROPATHY

TYPE I

TYPE II

DEMOGRAPHICS
Age (years)

2-­6, some adults

2-­10, some adults

40-­50

5-­15

5-­15

Sex (male:female)

2:1

1.3:1

2:1

1:1

1:1

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Nephrotic syndrome
100%

90%

80%

60%*

60%*

Asymptomatic
proteinuria

0

10%

20%

40%

40%

Hematuria (microscopic
or gross)

10–20%

60–80%

60%

80%

80%

Hypertension

10%

20% early

Infrequent

35%

35%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 567 u Nephrotic Syndrome

3225

Table 567.2  Summary of Primary Renal Diseases That Manifest as Idiopathic Nephrotic Syndrome—cont’d
MEMBRANOPROLIFERATIVE
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS

MINIMAL CHANGE
NEPHROTIC
SYNDROME

FOCAL SEGMENTAL
GLOMERULOSCLEROSIS

MEMBRANOUS
NEPHROPATHY

TYPE I

TYPE II

Rate of progression to
renal failure

Does not progress

10 years

50% in 10-­20 years

10-­20 years

5-­15 years

Associated conditions

Usually none

HIV, heroin use, sickle cell
disease, reflux nephropathy

Renal vein thrombosis;
medications; SLE;
hepatitides B, C;
lymphoma; tumors

None

Partial
lipodystrophy

None except
in congenital
nephrotic
syndrome (see
Table 567.3)

Podocin, α-­actinin 4, TRPC6
channel, INF-­2, MYH-­9

None

None

None

Manifestations
of nephrotic
syndrome
↑ BUN in 15–30%
Normal complement
levels

Manifestations of nephrotic
syndrome
↑ BUN in 20–40%
Normal complement levels

Manifestations of
nephrotic syndrome
Normal complement
levels

Low complement
levels: C1, C4,
C3-­C9

Normal
complement
levels: C1,
C4, low
C3-­C9

RENAL PATHOLOGY
Light microscopy

Normal

Focal sclerotic lesions

Thickened GBM, spikes

Thickened GBM,
proliferation

Lobulation

Immunofluorescence

Negative

IgM, C3 in lesions

Fine granular IgG, C3

Granular IgG, C3

C3 only

Electron microscopy

Foot process fusion

Foot process fusion

Subepithelial deposits

Mesangial and
subendothelial
deposits

Dense deposits

Resistant

Not established/
resistant

Not
established/
resistant

FEATURES

GENETICS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

REMISSION ACHIEVED AFTER 8 WK OF ORAL CORTICOSTEROID THERAPY
90%
15–20%

*Approximate frequency as a cause of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Approximately 10% of cases of adult nephrotic syndrome are a result of various diseases that usually manifest
as acute glomerulonephritis.
↑, Elevated; C, complement; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; Ig, immunoglobulin; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Modified from Couser WG. Glomerular disorders. In: Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992. p. 560.

100

Percent

80
60

15

of complement factors (predominantly C3 and C5), as well as alternative pathway factors B and D, lead to impaired opsonization of
microorganisms. Children with nephrotic syndrome are at significantly increased risk for infection with encapsulated bacteria and, in
particular, pneumococcal disease. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
presents with fever, abdominal pain, and peritoneal signs. Although
pneumococcus is the most frequent cause of peritonitis, gram-­negative
bacteria also are associated with a significant number of cases. Children with nephrotic syndrome and fever or other signs of infection
must be evaluated aggressively, with appropriate cultures drawn, and
should be treated promptly and empirically with antibiotics. Peritoneal
leukocyte counts >250 cells/μL are highly suggestive of spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis.

115

Hypercoagulability

FSGS
C1Q
Membranous
MCNS
MPGN
Lupus membranous

40
20
0
1–5
n 22

5–10
10–15
Age at biopsy (yr)
25
61

Fig. 567.1 Kidney biopsy results from 223 children with proteinuria

referred for diagnostic kidney biopsy (Glomerular Disease Collaborative Network, J. Charles Jennette, MD, Hyunsook Chin, MS, and D.S.
Gipson, 2007). C1Q, Nephropathy; FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; MCNS, minimal change nephrotic syndrome; MPGN, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; n, number of patients. (From
Gipson DS, Massengill SF, Yao L, et al. Management of childhood onset
nephrotic syndrome. Pediatrics. 2009;124:747–757.)

bacteremia. This occurs as a result of many factors, particularly hypoglobulinemia, as a result of the urinary losses of immunoglobulin (Ig)
G. In addition, defects in the complement cascade from urinary loss

Nephrotic syndrome is a hypercoagulable state resulting from multiple factors: vascular stasis from hemoconcentration and intravascular
volume depletion, increased platelet number and aggregability, and
changes in coagulation factor levels. There is an increase in hepatic
production of fibrinogen along with urinary losses of antithrombotic
factors such as antithrombin III and protein S. Deep venous thrombosis may occur in any venous bed, including the cerebral venous
sinus, renal vein, and pulmonary veins. The clinical risk is low in children (2–5%) compared with adults but has the potential for serious
consequences.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3226 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 567.3  Causative Genes and Histologic Patterns of Nephrotic Syndrome by Time of Disease Onset
CAUSE
CONGENITAL ONSET (0-­3 MO)
Isolated
Congenital nephrotic syndrome of the
Finnish type (CNF)
Recessive SRNS, type 2
Recessive SRNS, type 3
Isolated DMS
Recessive SRNS
Recessive SRNS + deafness
Dominant SRNS + deafness
DMS + neurologic findings

INHERITANCE/
LOCUS

GENE/PROTEIN

AR

NPHS1/nephrin

AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AD/11q24
AR

NPHS2/podocin
NPHS3/PLCE1
WT1
COQ2
COQ6
Unknown
ARHGDIA/Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor
(GDI) alpha
ITGA3/integrin alpha 3
Unknown

HISTOLOGIC
FEATURES
Radial dilation of
proximal tubule
FSGS/MGC
DMS
DMS
FSGS, collapsing
FSGS
FSGS
DMS

NS + lung and skin disease
Steroid-­sensitive nephrotic syndrome

AR
AR/2p12-­13.2

Denys-­Drash syndrome
Pierson syndrome
Nail–patella syndrome

AD
AR
AD

Frasier syndrome
Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia
Epidermolysis bullosa + FSGS
Galloway-­Mowat syndrome

AD
AR
AR
AR

WT1
LAMB2/laminin-­β2
LMX1B/LIM homeobox transcription
factor-­1β
WT1
SMARCAL1
ITGB4/integrin-­β4
Unknown

AR
AR
AR
AR
AD
AR

EMP2/epithelial membrane protein 2
NPHS2/podocin
NPHS1/nephrin
NPHS3/PLCE1
WT1
ARHGDIA

AR
AR

MYOE1/nonmuscle class I myosin E
PTPRO/GLEPP1 protein tyrosine
phosphatase receptor type O/glomerular
epithelial protein-­1

FSGS
FSGS

JUVENILE-­ADULT ONSET
Genetic
SRNS
Familial SRNS

AR or sporadic
AD

FSGS
FSGS

FSGS, type 1
FSGS, type 2

AD/19q13
AD/11q21-­22

FSGS, type 3
SRNS

AR-­AD/6p12
AR

SRNS
SRNS (no extrarenal symptoms)

AR
AD or sporadic

NPHS2 (p.R229Q)
INF2/formin family of actin-­regulating
proteins
ACTN4/α-­actinin-­4
TRPC6/transient receptor potential cation
channel, subfamily C, member 6
CD2AP/CD2-­associated protein
PTPRO/GLEPP1 protein tyrosine
phosphatase receptor type O/glomerular
epithelial protein-­1
ADCK4/aarF domain-­containing kinase 4
LMX1B encodes homeodomain-­containing
transcription factor

Syndromic

INFANCY-­CHILDHOOD ONSET
Genetic
Recessive SSNS
Recessive SRNS
Recessive SRNS
Recessive SRNS
Isolated DMS
Recessive SRNS + deafness or
intellectual disability
SRNS
SRNS

DMS
MGC/FSGS
DMS
FSGS
FSGS
FSGS
FSGS
MGC to FSGS

FSGS/MGC
FSGS/MGC
DMS
DMS
DMS

FSGS
FSGS
FSGS
FSGS
FSGS
FSGS

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; DMS, diffuse mesangial sclerosis; FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; MGC, minimal glomerular changes; NS, nephrotic
syndrome; SRNS, steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome.
From Bakkaloglu SA, Schaefer F. Diseases of the kidney and urinary tract in children. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 74-­2.

567.1 Idiopathic Nephrotic Syndrome
Elif Erkan

segmental glomerulosclerosis, membranous nephropathy, and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis.

PATHOLOGY

Approximately 90% of children with nephrotic syndrome have idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome is associated with primary glomerular disease without an identifiable causative
disease or drug. Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome includes multiple histologic types: minimal change disease, mesangial proliferation, focal

In minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) (approximately
85% of total cases of nephrotic syndrome in children), the glomeruli
appear normal or show a minimal increase in mesangial cells and
matrix. Findings on immunofluorescence microscopy are typically
negative, and electron microscopy simply reveals effacement of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 567 u Nephrotic Syndrome

3227

Glomerular filtration barrier in nephrotic syndrome
Kidney

Nephron

Glomerulus

Glomerular
filtrate

Afferent
capillary
Efferent
capillary
Normal

Nephrotic syndrome
Pathogenesis
(a) Immune-mediated
(b) Systemic circulating factors (eg, suPAR)
(c) Podocyte related factors (eg, ANGPTL4)
(d) Genetic variants
Mutant proteins play roles in:
1 Nucleus
Urinaryspace

4 Actin

2 Mitochondria 5 Slit diaphragm
3 Lysosomes

6 Basement membrane

Podocyte
cellbody

1
3
4
2
Slitdiaphragm

5

Podocyte
effacement

Basement
membrane

6

Red
bloodcell

White
bloodcell

Fenestrated
endothelial
cells

Fig. 567.2 The glomerular filtration barrier and pathogenesis of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Within the kidney is the glomerulus, a capillary tuft

that filters the blood. The podocyte, glomerular basement membrane, and fenestrated glomerular endothelium form the glomerular filtration barrier, allowing the ultrafiltrate to enter the urinary space. The podocyte has extensive cellular extensions that interdigitate, and these foot processes are
connected by the slit diaphragm. In nephrotic syndrome, there is extensive effacement of the podocytes and loss of this barrier to protein, allowing
excessive serum albumin to leak into the urine. The pathogenesis of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome is hypothesized to be either immune mediated,
due to a systemic podocyte-­derived circulating factor, or, in rarer or familial forms, a genetic variant. Numerous pathogenic variants are associated
with steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome that affect various parts of the podocyte itself or the other constituents of the glomerular basement membrane. These include pathogenic variants affecting the podocyte nucleus, mitochondria or lysosomes, the slit diaphragm or actin cytoskeleton, and
the glomerular basement membrane. Nephrin, podocin, and CD2AP, for example, are essential components of a zipper-­like structure spanning the
interdigitating foot processes of the podocyte and the slit diaphragm and link directly with the podocyte actin cytoskeleton. The actin cytoskeleton
is further supported by microfilaments that maintain structural stability and facilitate the dynamic nature of the podocyte structure and function.
The importance of these microfilaments is evident because pathogenic variants in both α-­actinin 4 and INF2, which are involved in actin regulation
and polymerization, lead to FSGS. (From Noone DG, Iijima K, Parekh R. Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in children. Lancet. 2018;392:61–72. Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3228 Part XXI u Nephrology
epithelial cell foot processes. More than 95% of children with minimal
change disease respond to corticosteroid therapy.
Mesangial proliferation is characterized by a diffuse increase in
mesangial cells and matrix on light microscopy. Immunofluorescence
microscopy might reveal trace to 1+ mesangial IgM and/or IgA staining. Electron microscopy reveals increased numbers of mesangial cells
and matrix as well as effacement of the epithelial cell foot processes.
Approximately 50% of patients with this histologic lesion respond to
corticosteroid therapy.
In focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), glomeruli show
lesions that are both focal (present only in a proportion of glomeruli) and segmental (localized to ≥1 intraglomerular tufts). The
lesions consist of mesangial cell proliferation and segmental scarring on light microscopy (Fig. 567.3; see Table 567.2). Immunofluorescence microscopy is positive for IgM and C3 staining in the areas
of segmental sclerosis. Electron microscopy demonstrates segmental scarring of the glomerular tuft with obliteration of the glomerular capillary lumen. The tip variant of FSGS is more common in
Caucasians and is associated with better renal survival; by contrast,
the collapsing variant of FSGS has a faster progression rate to end-­
stage kidney disease and is more common in Black patients.
Lesions consistent with FSGS may be seen secondary to HIV
infection, vesicoureteral reflux, and IV use of heroin and other
drugs of abuse. Only 20% of patients with FSGS respond to prednisone. The disease is often progressive, ultimately involving all glomeruli with end-­stage kidney disease in most patients.

MINIMAL CHANGE NEPHROTIC SYNDROME
Clinical Manifestations

Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome is more common in males than in
females (2:1) and most commonly appears between the ages of 2
and 6 years (see Fig. 567.1). However, it has been reported as early
as 6 months of age and throughout adulthood. MCNS is present
in 85–90% of patients <6 years of age. In contrast, only 20–30% of
adolescents who present for the first time with nephrotic syndrome
have MCNS. The more common cause of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in this older age group is FSGS. The incidence of FSGS is
increasing; it may be more common in Black, Hispanic, and Asian
patients. FSGS is the most common cause of end-­stage kidney disease in adolescents.
The initial episode of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome, as well as subsequent relapses, usually follows minor infections and, uncommonly,
reactions to insect bites, bee stings, or poison ivy.

Children usually present with mild edema, which is initially
noted around the eyes and in the lower extremities. Nephrotic syndrome can initially be misdiagnosed as an allergic disorder because
of the periorbital swelling that decreases throughout the day. With
time, the edema becomes generalized, with the development of
ascites, pleural effusions, and genital edema. Anorexia, irritability,
abdominal pain, and diarrhea are common. Important features of
MCNS are the absence of hypertension and gross hematuria (the
so-­called nephritic features).
The differential diagnosis of the child with marked edema includes
protein-­
losing enteropathy, hepatic failure, heart failure, acute or
chronic glomerulonephritis, and protein malnutrition. A diagnosis
other than MCNS should be considered in children <1 year of age,
with a positive family history of nephrotic syndrome, and/or the presence of extrarenal findings (e.g., arthritis, rash, anemia), hypertension
or pulmonary edema, acute or chronic renal insufficiency, and gross
hematuria.

Diagnosis
Recommendations for the Initial Evaluation of
Children with Nephrotic Syndrome

Confirming the Diagnosis of Nephrotic Syndrome. The initial

workup for a child with nephrotic syndrome is shown in Table 567.4.
Labs should be obtained including urinalysis with the first morning
urine protein:creatinine ratio, CBC, serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glomerular filtration rate, albumin, complement C3 and C4 levels, antinuclear and anti-­streptococcal antibodies, and antineutrophil
cytoplastic antibodies.
The urinalysis reveals 3+ or 4+ proteinuria, and microscopic hematuria is present in 20% of children. A spot urine protein:creatinine
ratio should be >2.0. The serum creatinine value is usually normal,
but it may be abnormally elevated if there is diminished renal perfusion from contraction of the intravascular volume. The serum
albumin level is <2.5 g/dL, and serum cholesterol and triglyceride
levels are elevated. Serum complement levels are normal. Kidney
ultrasound may be considered to exclude renal malformations and
venous thrombosis but is not mandatory. A renal biopsy is not routinely performed if the patient fits the standard clinical picture of
MCNS.

Treatment

Children with their first episode of nephrotic syndrome and mild
to moderate edema may be managed as outpatients. Such outpatient management is not practiced in all major centers, because the
time required for successful education of the family regarding all
aspects of the condition can require a short period of hospitalization. The child’s parents must be able to recognize the signs and
symptoms of the complications of the disease and may be taught
how to use a dipstick and interpret the results to monitor for the
degree of proteinuria. Tuberculosis must be ruled out before starting immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids by placing
a purified protein derivative skin test or obtaining an interferongamma release assay and confirming a negative result.
Children with onset of uncomplicated nephrotic syndrome
between 1 and 12 years of age are likely to have steroid-­responsive
MCNS, and steroid therapy may be initiated without a diagnostic
renal biopsy. Children with features that make MCNS less likely
(gross hematuria, sustained hypertension, acute kidney injury, low
C3 levels, arthritis and/or rash to suggest glomerulonephritis, or
age <1 year or >12 years) should be considered for renal biopsy
before treatment.

Fig. 567.3 Steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS). Kidney bi-

opsy image of patient with SRNS shows focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Segmental sclerosis is noted in a perihilar location with hyalinosis.
Evidence of tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis is also present. H&E
magnification 20×. (From Tullus K, Webb H, Bagga A. Management of
steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome in children and adolescents. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2018;2:880–888. Fig. 1B, p. 881.)

Use of Corticosteroids to Treat Minimal Change
Nephrotic Syndrome

Corticosteroids are the mainstay of therapy for MCNS. The treatment
guidelines for corticosteroid use presented in the following sections
are adapted from and based on the 2021 Kidney Disease: Improving

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 567 u Nephrotic Syndrome
Table 567.4  Investigations in a Child with Nephrotic
Syndrome (NS)
BASELINE INVESTIGATIONS
1.	Urinalysis and urine microscopy
2.	Urine albumin or protein:creatinine ratio
3.	24-­hr timed collection of urine for protein quantification
4.	Serum electrolytes, albumin, total protein, renal function, and
cholesterol
ADDITIONAL TESTING IF THERE IS A SUSPICION OF A
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
1.	Serum complement C3 and C4 concentrations
2.	Serum immunoglobulins
3.	Antistreptolysin titers
4.	Anti-­DNase B antibodies
5.	Antinuclear antigen antibodies
6.	Anti–double-­stranded DNA antibodies
7.	Anti-­neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
INFECTIOUS WORKUP DEPENDING ON CLINICAL CONTEXT
1.	Hepatitis B and C, HIV, syphilis, or tuberculosis can also be
considered depending on the clinical context
CONSIDERATION OF GENETIC TESTING
1.	A positive family history of NS
2.	Congenital NS
3.	Failure to respond to steroid therapy
4.	Persistent kidney dysfunction
5.	Features suggestive of a known syndrome (appendix)
RENAL BIOPSY CONSIDERED IN THE FOLLOWING SITUATIONS
1.	Age <1 or >12 years
2.	Persistent or sustained elevation in creatinine
3.	Significant hematuria or gross hematuria
4.	Hypocomplementemia
5.	Findings indicative of another autoimmune disease
6.	Infection with hepatitis B or C, HIV, or tuberculosis
7.	Hypertension
8.	Glucocorticoid resistance
From Noone DG, Iijima K, Parekh R. Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in children. Lancet.
2018;392:61–72. Panel 3.

Global Outcomes (KDIGO) clinical practice guidelines on glomerulonephritis (Fig. 567.4).

Treatment of the Initial Episode of Nephrotic
Syndrome

In children with presumed MCNS, prednisone or prednisolone should
be administered as a single daily dose of 60 mg/m2/day or 2 mg/kg/
day to a maximum of 60 mg daily for 4-­6 weeks followed by alternate-­
day prednisone (starting at 40 mg/m2 every other day or 1.5 mg/kg
every other day) for a period ranging from 4-­6 weeks. The issue of the
duration of steroid treatment has been controversial, but current evidence suggests that prolonged (>12 weeks) glucocorticoid treatment
increases the risk of adverse effects without further improving clinical outcomes. Approximately 80–90% of children respond to steroid
therapy.
Response is defined as the attainment of remission within the initial 4 weeks of corticosteroid therapy. Remission consists of a urine
protein:creatinine ratio of <0.2 or <1+ protein on urine dipstick testing for 3 consecutive days. Most children who respond to prednisone
therapy do so within the first 5 weeks of treatment.

Managing the Clinical Sequelae of Nephrotic
Syndrome

Edema. Children with severe symptomatic edema, including large

pleural effusions, ascites, or severe genital edema, should be hospitalized. In addition to sodium restriction (<1,500 mg daily), water/fluid
restriction may be necessary if the child is hyponatremic. A swollen
scrotum may be elevated with pillows to enhance fluid removal by
gravity. Diuresis may be augmented by the administration of loop
diuretics (furosemide), orally or intravenously, although extreme

3229

caution should be exercised. Aggressive diuresis can lead to intravascular volume depletion and an increased risk for acute renal failure and
intravascular thrombosis.
When a patient has severe generalized edema with evidence of intravascular volume depletion (e.g., hemoconcentration, hypotension,
tachycardia), IV administration of 25% albumin (0.5-­1.0 g albumin/
kg) as a slow infusion followed by furosemide (1-­2 mg/kg/dose IV)
is sometimes necessary. Such therapy should be used only in collaboration with a pediatric nephrologist and mandates close monitoring
of volume status, blood pressure, serum electrolyte balance, and renal
function. Symptomatic volume overload, with hypertension, heart
failure, and pulmonary edema, is a potential complication of parenteral albumin therapy, particularly when it is administered as a rapid
infusion.
Dyslipidemia. Dyslipidemia should be managed with a low-­
fat
diet. Dietary fat intake should be limited to <30% of calories with a
saturated fat intake of <10% calories. Dietary cholesterol intake should
be <300 mg/day. There are insufficient data to recommend the use of
3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylgluataryl coenzyme A (HMG-­CoA) reductase
inhibitors routinely in children with dyslipidemia.
Infections. Families of children with nephrotic syndrome should
be counseled regarding the signs and symptoms of infections such as
cellulitis, peritonitis, and bacteremia. If there is a suspicion of infection, a blood culture should be drawn before starting empiric antibiotic therapy. In the case of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, peritoneal
fluid should be collected if there is sufficient fluid to perform a paracentesis and sent for cell count, Gram stain, and culture. The antibiotic
provided must be of broad enough coverage to include pneumococcus and gram-­negative bacteria. A third-­generation cephalosporin is a
common choice of IV antibiotic.
Thromboembolism. Children who present with the clinical signs
of thromboembolism should be evaluated with appropriate imaging
studies to confirm the presence of a clot. Studies to delineate a specific
underlying hypercoagulable state are recommended. In children with
thrombotic events, anticoagulation therapy including heparin, low
molecular weight heparin, and warfarin are therapeutic options that
appear to be effective.
Obesity and Growth. Glucocorticoids may increase the body
mass index in children who are overweight when steroid therapy is initiated, and these children are more likely to remain overweight. Anticipatory dietary counseling is recommended. Growth may be affected in
children who require long-­term corticosteroid therapy. Steroid-­sparing
strategies may improve linear growth in children who require prolonged courses of steroids.
Relapse of Nephrotic Syndrome. Relapse of nephrotic syndrome
is defined as a urine protein:creatinine ratio of >2 or ≥3+ protein on
urine dipstick testing for 3 consecutive days. Relapses are common,
especially in younger children, and are often triggered by upper
respiratory or gastrointestinal infections. Relapses are usually treated
similar to the initial episode, except that daily prednisone courses are
shortened. Daily high-­dose prednisone is given until the child has
achieved remission, and the regimen is then switched to alternate-­day
therapy. The duration of alternate-­day therapy varies depending on the
frequency of relapses of the individual child. Children are classified as
infrequent relapsers or frequent relapsers, and as being steroid dependent, based on the number of relapses in a 12-­month period or their
inability to remain in remission following discontinuation of steroid
therapy.
Steroid Resistance. Steroid resistance is defined as the failure to
achieve remission after 4 weeks of corticosteroid therapy. Children
with steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome require further evaluation,
including a diagnostic kidney biopsy and genetic testing. Steroid-­
resistant nephrotic syndrome is usually caused by FSGS (80%), MCNS,
or membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis.
Implications of Steroid-­
Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome.

Steroid-­
resistant nephrotic syndrome, and specifically FSGS, is
associated with a 50% risk for end-­stage kidney disease within 5
years of diagnosis if patients do not achieve a partial or complete
remission. Persistent nephrotic syndrome is associated with a poor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3230 Part XXI u Nephrology
New onset nephrotic syndrome

<12 years of age
No syndromic features
or family history

12 years of age
Syndromic features
or family history

Glucocorticoids*

Biopsy and/or genetic testing
+ referral to specialty center

No response ×
4 or 6 weeks

Complete
responder

• Genetic testing
• Kidney biopsy
• Calcineurin inhibitor
• Renin-angiotensinaldosterone system
blockade

Glucocorticoids*
× 8–12 weeks

Frequent relapser

Infrequent relapser

Steroid-dependent

• Cyclophosphamide
• Levamisole
• Mycophenolate mofetil
• Rituximab
• Calcineurin inhibitor

Glucocorticoids*

• Mycophenolate mofetil
• Rituximab
• Calcineurin inhibitor
• Cyclophosphamide

patient-­reported quality of life, hypertension, serious infections,
and thromboembolic events. Children reaching end-­stage kidney
disease have a greatly reduced life expectancy compared with their
peers.
Alternative Therapies to Corticosteroids in the Treatment
of Nephrotic Syndrome. Steroid-­dependent patients, frequent

relapsers, and steroid-­resistant patients are candidates for alternative therapies, particularly if they have severe corticosteroid toxicity (cushingoid appearance, hypertension, cataracts, and/or growth
failure). Cyclophosphamide prolongs the duration of remission
and reduces the number of relapses in children with frequently
relapsing and steroid-­dependent nephrotic syndrome. The potential side effects of the drug (neutropenia, disseminated varicella,
hemorrhagic cystitis, alopecia, sterility, increased risk of future
malignancy) should be carefully reviewed with the family before
initiating treatment. Cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg) is given as a
single oral dose for a total duration of 8-­12 weeks. Alternate-­day
prednisone therapy is often continued during cyclophosphamide
administration. During cyclophosphamide therapy, the white blood
cell count must be monitored weekly, and the drug should be withheld if the count falls below 5,000/mm3. The cumulative threshold
dose above which oligospermia or azoospermia occurs in males is
>250 mg/kg.

Fig. 567.4 Treatment algorithm for
new-­onset nephrotic syndrome (NS).
Therapeutic approach to NS in children from onset. *Glucocorticoids
include PO prednisone or prednisolone. NS, Nephrotic syndrome.
(From Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Glomerular Diseases Work Group. KDIGO
2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for
the Management of Glomerular Diseases. Kidney Int. 2021;100[4S]:S1–
S276. Fig. 40.)

Calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine or tacrolimus) are recommended as initial therapy for children with steroid-­resistant
nephrotic syndrome. Children must be monitored for side effects,
including hypertension, nephrotoxicity, hirsutism, and gingival
hyperplasia. Mycophenolate can maintain remission in children
with steroid-­
dependent or frequently relapsing nephrotic syndrome. Levamisole, an anthelmintic agent with immunomodulating effects that has been shown to reduce the risk of relapse when
compared with prednisone, is not available in the United States.
Rituximab, the chimeric monoclonal antibody against CD20-­
targeting B cells, was found to be effective in children by maintaining
remission and decreasing the number of relapses in steroid-­dependent
and/or steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome. Randomized trials with
rituximab have shown promising results of an up to 80% drug-­free
remission rate at 1 year in patients with steroid-­dependent nephrotic
syndrome. However, rituximab is less effective in patients treated
with calcineurin inhibitors and steroids and with multidrug-­resistant
nephrotic syndrome.
Most children who respond to cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or mycophenolate therapy tend to relapse when the medication is discontinued.
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor
blockers may be helpful as adjunct therapy to reduce proteinuria in
steroid-­resistant patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 567 u Nephrotic Syndrome
Immunizations in Children with Nephrotic Syndrome. To
reduce the risk of serious infections in children with nephrotic
syndrome, give the full pneumococcal vaccination (with the
13-­valent conjugant vaccine and 23-­valent polysaccharide vaccine)
and influenza vaccination annually to the child and their household contacts; defer vaccination with live vaccines until the prednisone dose is below either 1 mg/kg daily or 2 mg/kg on alternate
days. Live virus vaccines are contraindicated in children receiving corticosteroid-­
sparing agents such as cyclophosphamide or
cyclosporine. Following close contact with varicella infection, give
immunocompromised children taking immunosuppressive agents
varicella-­zoster immune globulin if available; immunize healthy
household contacts with live vaccines to minimize the risk of transfer of infection to the immunosuppressed child, but avoid direct
exposure of the child to gastrointestinal or respiratory secretions of
vaccinated contacts for 3-­6 weeks after vaccination.
Table 567.5 provides monitoring recommendations for children
with nephrotic syndrome.

Prognosis

Most children with steroid-­responsive nephrotic syndrome have
repeated relapses, which generally decrease in frequency as the
child grows older. Although there is no proven way to predict an
individual child’s course, children who respond rapidly to steroids
and those who have no relapses during the first 6 months after
diagnosis are likely to follow an infrequently relapsing course. It
is important to indicate to the family that the child with steroid-­
responsive nephrotic syndrome is unlikely to develop chronic
kidney disease, that the disease is rarely hereditary, and that the
child (in the absence of prolonged cyclophosphamide therapy) will
remain fertile. To minimize the psychologic effects of the condition and its therapy, children with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome
should not be considered chronically ill and should participate
in all age-­appropriate childhood activities and maintain an unrestricted diet when in remission.

3231

Children with steroid-­
resistant nephrotic syndrome, most often
caused by FSGS, generally have a much poorer prognosis. These
children develop progressive renal insufficiency, ultimately leading
to end-­stage kidney disease requiring dialysis or kidney transplantation. Recurrent nephrotic syndrome develops in 30–50% of transplant
recipients with FSGS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

567.2 Secondary Nephrotic Syndrome
Elif Erkan
Nephrotic syndrome can occur as a secondary feature of many forms
of glomerular disease. Membranous nephropathy, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, postinfectious glomerulonephritis,
lupus nephritis, and IgA vasculitis nephritis (formerly Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura nephritis) can all have a nephrotic component
(see Tables 567.1 and 567.3). Secondary nephrotic syndrome should
be suspected in patients >12 years and those with sustained hypertension, hematuria, renal dysfunction, extrarenal symptoms (e.g.,
rash, arthralgias, fever), or depressed serum complement levels. In
certain areas of the world, malaria and schistosomiasis are the leading causes of nephrotic syndrome. Other infectious agents associated with nephrotic syndrome include hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C
virus, filaria, leprosy, and HIV.
Nephrotic syndrome has been associated with malignancy, particularly in the adult population. In patients with solid tumors,
such as carcinomas of the lung and gastrointestinal tract, the renal
pathology often resembles membranous glomerulopathy. Immune
complexes composed of tumor antigens and tumor-­specific antibodies presumably mediate the renal involvement. In patients with
lymphomas, particularly Hodgkin lymphoma, the renal pathology most often resembles MCNS. The proposed mechanism of

Table 567.5  Monitoring Recommendations for Children with Nephrotic Syndrome
HOME
URINE
PROTEIN

WEIGHT,
GROWTH,
BMI

BP

•

•

•

Moderate (frequent
relapsing, steroid
dependent)

•

•

•

•

•

•

Severe (steroid
resistant)

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

DISEASE AND
TREATMENT
DISEASE TYPE
Mild (steroid
responsive)

THERAPY
Corticosteroids
Cyclophosphamide

CR

ELECTROLYTES

SERUM
GLUCOSE

DRUG
LEVELS

LFTS

UA

CPK

•

•
•

•
•

Mycophenolate
mofetil

•

•

Calcineurin
inhibitors

•

•

•

ACEIs/ARBs

•

•

•

HMG-­CoA
reductase
inhibitors

CBC

LIPID
PROFILE

•

•
•

•

•
•

•

•

ACEI, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; BMI, body mass index; BP, blood pressure; CPK, creatine phosphokinase; Cr, creatinine; HMG-­
CoA, 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl coenzyme A; LFTs, liver function tests; UA, urinalysis.
From Gipson DS, Massengill SF, Yao L, et al. Management of childhood onset nephrotic syndrome. Pediatrics. 2009;124:747–757.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3232 Part XXI u Nephrology
the nephrotic syndrome is that the lymphoma produces a lymphokine that increases permeability of the glomerular capillary wall.
Nephrotic syndrome can develop before or after the malignancy is
detected, resolve as the tumor regresses, and return if the tumor
recurs.
Nephrotic syndrome has also developed during therapy with numerous
drugs and chemicals. The histologic picture can resemble membranous
glomerulopathy (penicillamine, captopril, gold, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, mercury compounds), MCNS (probenecid, ethosuximide,
methimazole, lithium), or proliferative glomerulonephritis (procainamide, chlorpropamide, phenytoin, trimethadione, paramethadione).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

567.3 Congenital Nephrotic Syndrome
Elif Erkan
Nephrotic syndrome (massive proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia,
edema, and hypercholesterolemia) has a poorer prognosis when it
occurs in the first year of life, when compared with nephrotic syndrome manifesting in childhood. Congenital nephrotic syndrome
is defined as nephrotic syndrome manifesting at birth or within the
first 3 months of life. Congenital nephrotic syndrome may be classified as primary or as secondary to a number of etiologies such as
in utero infections (cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, hepatitides B and C, HIV), infantile systemic lupus erythematosus, or
mercury exposure.
Primary congenital nephrotic syndrome is due to a variety of
syndromes inherited as autosomal recessive disorders (see Table
567.3). A number of structural and functional abnormalities of
the glomerular filtration barrier causing congenital nephrotic syndrome have been elucidated. In a large European cohort of children with congenital nephrotic syndrome, 85% carried pathogenic
variants in four genes (NPHS1, NPHS2, WT1, and LAMB2), the
first three of which encode components of the glomerular filtration barrier. The Finnish type of congenital nephrotic syndrome is
caused by pathogenic variants in the NPHS1 or NPHS2 gene, which
encodes nephrin and podocin, critical components of the slit diaphragm. Affected infants most commonly present at birth with
edema caused by massive proteinuria, and they are typically delivered with an enlarged placenta (>25% of the infant’s weight). Severe
hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and hypogammaglobulinemia
result from loss of filtering selectivity at the glomerular filtration
barrier. Prenatal diagnosis can be made by the presence of elevated
maternal and amniotic α-­fetoprotein levels.
Denys-­Drash syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in the
WT1 gene, which results in abnormal podocyte function. Patients
present with early-­onset nephrotic syndrome, progressive renal insufficiency, ambiguous genitalia, and Wilms tumor.
Pathogenic variants in the LAMB2 gene, seen in Pierson syndrome,
lead to abnormalities of β2-­laminin, a critical component of the glomerular and ocular basement membranes. In addition to congenital
nephrotic syndrome, affected infants display bilateral microcoria (fixed
narrowing of the pupil).
Galloway-­Mowat syndrome is characterized by microcephaly
with hiatal hernia and congenital nephrotic syndrome. Patients
have distinctive kidney biopsy findings with loss of or poor basement membrane formation or permeation of their basement membranes with fibrils.
Regardless of the etiology of congenital nephrotic syndrome, the
diagnosis is made clinically in newborns or infants who demonstrate severe generalized edema, poor growth and nutrition with

Table 567.6  Causes of Nephrotic Syndrome in Infants
Younger Than 1 Year of Age
SECONDARY CAUSES
Infections
Syphilis
Cytomegalovirus
Toxoplasmosis
Rubella
Hepatitis B or C
HIV
Malaria
Drug Reactions
Toxins
Mercury
Syndromes with Associated Renal Disease
Nail–patella syndrome
Lowe syndrome
Nephropathy associated with congenital brain malformation
Denys-­Drash syndrome: Wilms tumor
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
PRIMARY CAUSES (SEE TABLE 567.3)
Congenital nephrotic syndrome
Diffuse mesangial sclerosis
Minimal change disease
Focal segmental sclerosis
Membranous nephropathy
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric
Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 418.

hypoalbuminemia, increased susceptibility to infections, hypothyroidism (from urinary loss of thyroxin-­binding globulin), and an
increased risk of thrombotic events (urinary loss of antithrombin).
Most infants have progressive renal insufficiency.
Albumin and diuretic infusions, providing high amounts of protein
(3-­4 g/kg), lipids, and a high caloric intake to maintain nutrition, along
with vitamin and thyroid hormone replacement, have been the mainstream therapy for congenital nephrotic syndrome. Treatment of the
congenital syndrome also consists of unilateral nephrectomy and use
of angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors and/or indomethacin to
decrease the proteinuria and glomerular filtration rate. Some centers
prefer more aggressive therapy, including bilateral nephrectomy at 1-­2
years of age, weight >7 kg, and initiation of peritoneal dialysis with
subsequent kidney transplantation.
Secondary congenital nephrotic syndrome can resolve with
treatment of the underlying cause, such as syphilis (Table 567.6).
The management of primary congenital nephrotic syndrome
includes intensive supportive care with IV albumin and diuretics,
regular administration of IV γ-­globulin, and aggressive nutritional
support (often parenteral), while attempting to pharmacologically
decrease urinary protein loss with angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor inhibitors, and prostaglandin
synthesis inhibitors, or even unilateral nephrectomy. If conservative
management fails and patients suffer from persistent anasarca or
repeated severe infections, bilateral nephrectomies are performed,
and chronic dialysis is initiated. Renal transplantation is the definitive treatment of congenital nephrotic syndrome, though recurrence of the nephrotic syndrome has been reported to occur after
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 568 u Tubular Function

Section 4

Tubular Disorders
Chapter 568

Tubular Function

3233

all filtered potassium is fully reabsorbed in the proximal tubule and
ascending loop of Henle. Therefore urinary excretion of potassium
is completely dependent on tubular secretion by potassium channels
(renal outer medullary potassium [ROMK] and big potassium [BK]
channels) present in the principal cells of the collecting tubule. Factors that promote potassium secretion include aldosterone, increased
sodium delivery to the distal nephron, and increased urine flow rate.

CALCIUM

Water and electrolytes are freely filtered at the level of the glomerulus.
Thus the electrolyte content of ultrafiltrate at the beginning of the proximal tubule is similar to that of plasma. Carefully regulated processes
of tubular reabsorption and/or tubular secretion determine the final
water content and electrolyte composition of urine. Bulk movement of
solute tends to occur in the proximal portions of the nephron, and fine
adjustments tend to occur distally (see Chapter 73).

A significant portion of filtered calcium (70%) is reabsorbed in the
proximal tubule. Additional calcium is reabsorbed in the ascending
loop of Henle (20%) and the distal tubule and collecting duct (5–10%).
Calcium is reabsorbed by passive movement between cells (paracellular absorption) in a process driven by sodium chloride reabsorption
and potassium recycling into the lumen. In addition, calcium uptake
is actively regulated by calcium receptors, specific transporters, and
calcium channels. Factors that promote calcium reabsorption include
parathyroid hormone (released in response to hypocalcemia), calcitonin, vitamin D, thiazide diuretics, and volume depletion (see Chapter
610). Factors that promote calcium excretion include volume expansion, increased sodium intake, and diuretics such as mannitol and
furosemide.

SODIUM

PHOSPHATE

Eliza Blanchette and Bradley P. Dixon

Sodium is essential in maintaining extracellular fluid balance and,
thus, volume status. The kidney is capable of effecting large changes in
sodium excretion in a variety of normal and pathologic states.
There are four main sites of sodium transport. Approximately 60% of
sodium is absorbed in the proximal tubule by coupled transport with
glucose, amino acids, and phosphate; 25% in the ascending loop of Henle
(mediated by NKCC2, the loop diuretic-­sensitive sodium-­potassium-­2
chloride transporter); and 15% in the distal tubule (mediated by NCCT,
the thiazide-­sensitive sodium chloride co-transporter) and collecting
tubule (mediated by ENaC, the epithelial sodium channel).
The urinary excretion of sodium normally approximates the sodium
intake of 2-­6 mEq/kg/24 hr for a child consuming a typical American
diet, minus 1-­2 mEq/kg/24 hr required for normal metabolic processes.
However, in states of volume depletion (dehydration, blood loss) or
decreased effective circulating blood volume (septic shock, hypoalbuminemic states, heart failure), there may be a dramatic decrease in
urinary sodium excretion to as low as 1 mEq/L. Changes in systemic
volume status are detected by (1) baroreceptors in the atria, afferent
arteriole, and carotid sinus and (2) by the macula densa, which detects
changes in chloride delivery.
The major hormonal mechanisms mediating sodium balance
include the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone axis, atrial natriuretic factor, and norepinephrine. Angiotensin II and aldosterone increase
sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule and distal tubule, respectively. Norepinephrine, released in response to volume depletion, does
not directly act on tubular transport mechanisms but affects sodium
balance by decreasing renal blood flow, thus decreasing the filtered
load of sodium as well as stimulating renin release. With more severe
volume depletion, antidiuretic hormone is also released (see Chapter
570). Sodium excretion is promoted by atrial natriuretic factor and
suppression of renin.

POTASSIUM

Extracellular potassium homeostasis is regulated because small changes
in plasma potassium concentrations have dramatic effects on cardiac,
neural, and neuromuscular function (see Chapter 73.4). Essentially,

The majority of filtered phosphate is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule
by active transport coupled with sodium through the NaPi2a, NaPi2c,
and PiT-­2 channels. Reabsorption is increased by dietary phosphorus restriction, volume contraction, and growth hormone. Fibroblast
growth factor 23 (FGF-­23), parathyroid hormone, and volume expansion increase phosphate excretion.

MAGNESIUM

Approximately 25% of filtered magnesium is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. Modulation of renal magnesium excretion occurs primarily in the ascending loop of Henle, with some contribution of the distal
convoluted tubule. Magnesium is transported by the paracellular route
similar to calcium, as well as through the transcellular route. Although
specific magnesium transporters for transcellular absorption have been
identified such as TRPM6, the precise mechanisms by which they are
regulated remain unclear.

ACIDIFICATION AND CONCENTRATING
MECHANISMS

Acidification and concentration are addressed in the sections on renal
tubular acidosis and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, respectively (see
Chapters 569 and 570).

DEVELOPMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS

The tubular transport capabilities of neonates (especially premature
infants) and young infants are less than those of adults. Although
nephrogenesis (the formation of new glomerular/tubular units) is
complete by about 36 weeks of gestation, significant tubular maturation occurs during infancy. Renal tubular immaturity, a reduced
glomerular filtration rate, a decreased concentrating gradient, and a
diminished responsiveness to antidiuretic hormone are characteristic
of young infants. These factors can contribute to impaired regulation
of water, solute, and electrolyte and acid-­base homeostasis, particularly
during times of acute illness.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3234 Part XXI u Nephrology
H+ATPase (adenosine triphosphatase), and HCO3− is returned to the
systemic circulation by the HCO3−-­Cl− exchanger located on the basolateral membrane. The H+ secreted proximally and distally in excess
of the filtered HCO3− is excreted in the urine either as titratable acid
(H2PO4−) or as NH4+.

Chapter 569

Renal Tubular Acidosis
Melisha G. Hanna and Bradley P. Dixon
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is a disease state characterized by a
non–anion gap (hyperchloremic) metabolic acidosis in the setting of a
normal or near-­normal glomerular filtration rate. There are four main
types of RTA: proximal (type II), classic distal (type I), hyperkalemic
(type IV), and a combined proximal and distal (type III). Proximal
RTA (pRTA) results from impaired bicarbonate reabsorption and distal
RTA (dRTA) from failure to secrete acid. These defects may be inherited and persistent from birth or acquired, as is seen more commonly
in clinical practice.

NORMAL URINARY ACIDIFICATION

Kidneys contribute to the acid-­base balance by reabsorption of filtered
bicarbonate (HCO3−) and excretion of hydrogen ion (H+) produced
every day. Hydrogen ion secretion from tubule cells into the lumen is
key in the reabsorption of HCO3− and the formation of titratable acid
(H+ bound to buffers such as HPO42−) and ammonium ions (NH4+).
Because loss of filtered HCO3− is equivalent to the addition of H+ to
the body, all filtered bicarbonate should be absorbed before dietary H+
can be excreted. Approximately 90% of filtered bicarbonate is absorbed
in the proximal tubule and the remaining 10% in the distal segments,
mostly the thick ascending limb and outer medullary collecting tubule
(Fig. 569.1). In the proximal tubule and thick ascending limb of the
loop of Henle, H+ from water is secreted by the Na+-­H+ exchanger on
the luminal membrane. H+ combines with filtered bicarbonate, resulting in the formation of H2CO3, which decomposes into water and CO2
in the presence of carbonic anhydrase IV. CO2 diffuses freely back into
the cell, combines with OH− (from H2O) to form HCO3− in the presence of carbonic anhydrase II, and returns to the systemic circulation
via a Na+-­HCO3− co-transporter situated at the basolateral membrane
of the cell. In the collecting tubule, H+ is secreted into the lumen by

569.1 Proximal (Type II) Renal Tubular
Acidosis
Melisha G. Hanna and Bradley P. Dixon
pRTA can be inherited and persistent from birth or occur as a transient phenomenon during infancy. Although rare, it may be primary
and isolated. Typically, however, pRTA occurs as a component of
global proximal tubular dysfunction or Fanconi syndrome, which
is characterized by low molecular weight proteinuria, glycosuria,
phosphaturia, aminoaciduria, and pRTA. Table 569.1 outlines the
causes of pRTA and Fanconi syndrome. Many of these causes are
inherited disorders. In addition to cystinosis and Lowe syndrome,
autosomal recessive and dominant pRTA are addressed further in
this section. Other inherited forms of Fanconi syndrome include
galactosemia (see Chapter 107.2), hereditary fructose intolerance
(see Chapter 107.3), tyrosinemia (see Chapter 105.2), and Wilson
disease (see Chapter 405.2). Dent disease, or X-­linked nephrolithiasis, is discussed in Chapter 571.3. In children, an important form
of secondary Fanconi syndrome is exposure to medications such as
the chemotherapy agents ifosfamide and cisplatin.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE DISEASE

Isolated autosomal recessive pRTA is caused by pathogenic variants
in SLC4A4 encoding the sodium bicarbonate co-transporter NBC1.
It manifests with ocular abnormalities (band keratopathy, cataracts,
and glaucoma, often leading to blindness), short stature, enamel
defects of the teeth, intellectual impairment, and occasionally basal
ganglia calcification along with pRTA. An autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance has also been identified but is rare; these patients
present with hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, a normal ability to
acidify urine, normal renal function, and growth retardation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF PROXIMAL RTA
AND FANCONI SYNDROME
Proximal tubule cell

Collecting tubule cell

3Na
Na

2K

H
H2O

Na

filtered secreted
HCO3  H
H2CO3

3HCO3
CA II

CO2  OH

CA IV
H2O  CO2

CI

H

3HCO3
H2O

CA II
OH  CO2

Fig. 569.1 Major cellular luminal events in acid-­base regulation in the

proximal and collecting tubule cells. In the proximal tubule, H+, split
from H2O, is secreted into the lumen via the Na+/H+ exchanger, and
HCO3−, formed by a combination of OH− (split from H2O) with CO2 in
the presence of carbonic anhydrase (CA) II, is returned to the systemic
circulation by an Na+-­3HCO3− co-transporter. Similarly, in the collecting
tubule, H+ is secreted into the lumen by an active H+-­ATPase (adenosine triphosphatase), and HCO3− is returned to the systemic circulation
via an HCO3−-­Cl− exchanger. H+ secreted into the lumen combines with
filtered HCO3− to form carbonic acid (H2CO3) and then CO2 and H2O
in the presence of CA IV, which can be passively reabsorbed. (Modified
from Rose BD, Post TW. Clinical Physiology of Acid-­Base and Electrolyte Disorders, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2001.)

Patients with isolated, sporadic, or inherited pRTA present with
growth failure in the first year of life. Additional symptoms can
include polyuria, dehydration (from sodium loss), anorexia, vomiting, constipation, and hypotonia. Patients with primary Fanconi
syndrome have additional symptoms, secondary to phosphate
wasting, such as rickets. Those with systemic diseases present with
additional signs and symptoms specific to their underlying disease.
Urinalysis in patients with isolated pRTA is generally unremarkable.
The urine pH is acidic (<5.5) because distal acidification mechanisms are intact in these patients. Urinary studies in patients with
Fanconi syndrome demonstrate varying degrees of phosphaturia,
aminoaciduria, glycosuria, uricosuria, and elevated urinary sodium
or potassium. Depending on the nature of the underlying disorder,
laboratory evidence of chronic kidney disease (CKD), including
elevated serum creatinine, may be present.

Cystinosis

Cystinosis is an autosomal recessive, systemic lysosomal storage disease caused by a defect in the transport of cystine out of lysosomes
resulting in the accumulation of cystine crystals in most of the major
organs of the body, notably the kidney, liver, eye, and brain. It occurs
at an incidence of 1:100,000 to 1:200,000. At least three clinical patterns have been described. The most severe form of the disease,
infantile or nephropathic cystinosis, presents in the first or second

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 569 u Renal Tubular Acidosis
Table 569.1  Disorders with Dysfunction of Renal
Acidification—Defective HCO3− Reclamation:
Proximal Renal Tubular Acidosis
ISOLATED PURE BICARBONATE WASTING (UNASSOCIATED
WITH FANCONI SYNDROME)
Primary
Autosomal recessive with ocular abnormalities (pathogenic variant of
SLC4A4/NBC1)
Autosomal dominant with short stature (pathogenic variant of
SLC9A3/ NHE3)
Carbonic anhydrase deficiency, inhibition, or alteration
Drugs
Acetazolamide
Topiramate
Sulfanilamide
Mafenide acetate
Carbonic anhydrase II deficiency with osteopetrosis (mixed proximal
and distal RTA type III)
GENERALIZED (ASSOCIATED WITH FANCONI SYNDROME)
Primary (Without Associated Systemic Disease)
Genetic
Sporadic
Genetically Transmitted Systemic Diseases
Cystinosis
Lowe syndrome
Wilson syndrome
Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome
Tyrosinemia
Galactosemia
Hereditary fructose intolerance (during fructose ingestion)
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Methylmalonic acidemia
Dysproteinemic States
Multiple myeloma
Monoclonal gammopathy
Secondary Hyperparathyroidism with Chronic Hypocalcemia
Vitamin D deficiency or resistance
Vitamin D dependency
Drugs or Toxins
Ifosfamide
Cisplatin
Outdated tetracycline
3-­Methylchromone
Streptozotocin
Valproate
Topiramate
Lead
Mercury
Amphotericin B (historical)

3235

cystinosis, and it is characterized by less severe tubular abnormalities and a slower progression to renal failure. A nonnephropathic
adult form also exists called ocular cystinosis and has isolated ocular
involvement.
Cystinosis is caused by pathogenic variants in CTNS, which
encodes the protein cystinosin, a lysosomal cystine transporter.
Genotype-­phenotype studies demonstrate that patients with severe
nephropathic cystinosis carry variants that lead to complete loss
of cystinosin function. Patients with milder clinical disease have
variants that lead to the expression of partially functional protein.
Patients with nephropathic cystinosis present with clinical manifestations reflecting their pronounced tubular dysfunction and Fanconi syndrome, including polyuria and polydipsia, growth failure,
and rickets. Fever, caused by dehydration or diminished sweat production, is common. Patients are typically fair skinned and blond
because of diminished pigmentation. Ocular presentations include
photophobia, retinopathy, and impaired visual acuity. Patients also
can develop hypothyroidism, hepatosplenomegaly, and delayed sexual maturation. With progressive tubulointerstitial fibrosis, CKD is
invariant.
The diagnosis of cystinosis is suggested by the detection of cystine
crystals in the cornea and confirmed by measurement of increased leukocyte cystine content and genetic testing for biallelic pathogenic variants in the CTNS gene. Prenatal testing is available for at-­risk families.
Treatment of cystinosis is directed at correcting the metabolic
abnormalities associated with Fanconi syndrome. In addition, lifelong therapy is required with cysteamine, a therapy which converts
cystine to cysteine and a cysteine-­cysteamine heterodimer. This
facilitates lysosomal transport and decreases tissue cystine. Oral
cysteamine does not achieve adequate levels in ocular tissues, so
additional therapy with cysteamine eyedrops is required. Early initiation of cysteamine can prevent or delay deterioration of renal
function and the need for renal replacement therapy. Patients with
growth failure that does not improve with cysteamine may benefit from treatment with growth hormone. Kidney transplantation
is a viable option in patients with renal failure. With prolonged
survival, additional complications may become evident, including
central nervous system abnormalities, muscle weakness, swallowing dysfunction, and pancreatic insufficiency. It is unclear whether
long-­term cysteamine therapy will decrease these complications.

Lowe Syndrome

Other Renal and Miscellaneous Diseases
Nephrotic syndrome
Amyloidosis
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria

Lowe syndrome (oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe) is a rare
X-­linked disorder characterized by congenital cataracts, developmental delay, and Fanconi syndrome. The disease is caused by pathogenic variants in OCRL1, which encodes the phosphatidylinositol
polyphosphate 5-­
phosphatase protein. The abnormalities seen in
Lowe syndrome are thought to be caused by abnormal transport of
vesicles within the Golgi apparatus. Kidneys show nonspecific tubulointerstitial changes. Thickening of glomerular basement membrane
and changes in proximal tubule mitochondria are also seen.
Patients with Lowe syndrome typically present in infancy with
cataracts, progressive growth failure, hypotonia, and Fanconi syndrome. Significant low molecular weight proteinuria is common.
Blindness and CKD often develop. Characteristic behavioral abnormalities are also seen, including tantrums, stubbornness, stereotypy
(repetitive behaviors), and obsessions. There is no specific therapy
for the renal disease or neurologic deficits. Cataract removal is generally required.

From DuBose TD Jr. Disorders of acid-­base balance. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM,
Marsden PA, et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2016: Table 17-­7.

569.2 Distal (Type I) Renal Tubular Acidosis

Tubulointerstitial Diseases
Sjögren syndrome
Medullary cystic disease
Renal transplantation

Melisha G. Hanna and Bradley P. Dixon
year of life with severe tubular dysfunction and growth failure. If the
disease is not treated, the children develop end-­stage kidney disease
by the end of their first decade. A milder form of the disease manifests by adolescence called juvenile or intermediate nephropathic

dRTA can be sporadic or inherited. It can also occur as a complication of inherited or acquired diseases of the distal tubules. Primary
or secondary causes of dRTA can result from damaged or impaired

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3236 Part XXI u Nephrology
functioning of one or more transporters or proteins involved in
the acidification process, including the H+/ATPase, the HCO3−/Cl−
anion exchangers, or the components of the aldosterone pathway.
Because of impaired hydrogen ion excretion, the urine pH cannot
be reduced to <5.5, despite the presence of severe metabolic acidosis. Loss of sodium bicarbonate distally, due to lack of H+ to bind to
in the tubular lumen (see Fig. 569.1), results in increased chloride
absorption and hyperchloremia. Inability to secrete H+ is compensated for by increased K+ secretion distally, leading to hypokalemia.
Hypercalciuria is usually present and can lead to nephrocalcinosis
or nephrolithiasis. Chronic metabolic acidosis also impairs urinary
citrate excretion. Hypocitraturia further increases the risk of calcium deposition in the tubules. Bone disease is common, resulting
from mobilization of organic components from bone to serve as
buffers to chronic acidosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF DISTAL RTA

dRTA shares features with those of pRTA, including non–anion gap
metabolic acidosis and growth failure; distinguishing features of
dRTA include nephrocalcinosis and hypercalciuria. The phosphate
and massive bicarbonate wasting characteristic of pRTA is generally
absent. Table 569.2 lists the causes of primary and secondary dRTA.
Although inherited forms are rare, three specific inherited forms of
dRTA have been identified, including an autosomal recessive form
associated with sensorineural deafness.
Medullary sponge kidney is a relatively rare sporadic disorder
in children, although not uncommon in adults. HNF1B pathogenic
variants have been implicated in some patients. It is characterized
by cystic dilation of the terminal portions of the collecting ducts
as they enter the renal pyramids. On ultrasound studies, patients
often have medullary nephrocalcinosis. Although patients with this
condition typically maintain normal renal function through adulthood, complications include nephrolithiasis, pyelonephritis, hyposthenuria (inability to concentrate urine), and dRTA. Associations of
medullary sponge kidney with Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome or
hemihypertrophy have been reported.

569.3 Hyperkalemic (Type IV) Renal Tubular
Acidosis
Melisha G. Hanna and Bradley P. Dixon
Type IV RTA occurs as the result of impaired aldosterone production (hypoaldosteronism) or impaired renal responsiveness to
aldosterone (pseudohypoaldosteronism). Acidosis results because
aldosterone has a direct effect on the H+/ATPase responsible for
hydrogen secretion. In addition, aldosterone is a potent stimulant
for potassium secretion in the collecting tubule; consequently, lack
of aldosterone results in hyperkalemia. This further affects the acid-­
base status by inhibiting ammoniagenesis and, thus, H+ excretion.
Aldosterone deficiency typically occurs as a result of adrenal gland
disorders such as Addison disease or some forms of congenital
adrenal hyperplasia. In children, aldosterone unresponsiveness is
a more common cause of type IV RTA. This can occur transiently,
during an episode of acute pyelonephritis or acute urinary obstruction, or chronically, particularly in infants and children with a history of obstructive uropathy. The latter patients can have significant
hyperkalemia, even in instances when renal function is normal or
only mildly impaired. Rare examples of inherited forms of type IV
RTA have been identified (Table 569.3).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF TYPE IV RTA

Patients with type IV RTA can present with growth failure in the
first few years of life. Polyuria and dehydration (from salt wasting)
are common. Rarely, patients (especially those with pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1) present with life-­threatening hyperkalemia.

Table 569.2  Disorders with Dysfunction of Renal
Acidification—Selective Defect in Net Acid
Excretion: Classic Distal Renal Tubular
Acidosis
PRIMARY DISORDERS
Familial
Autosomal dominant
SLC4A1 gene
Autosomal recessive
With deafness (rdRTA1 or ATP6V1B1 gene)
Without deafness (rdRTA2 or ATP6V0A4 )
Sporadic
ENDEMIC DISORDERS
Northeastern Thailand
DISORDERS SECONDARY TO SYSTEMIC DISORDERS
Autoimmune Diseases
Hyperglobulinemic purpura
Fibrosing alveolitis
Cryoglobulinemia
Chronic active hepatitis
Sjögren syndrome
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Thyroiditis
Polyarteritis nodosa
HIV nephropathy
Hypercalciuria and Nephrocalcinosis
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Medullary sponge kidney
Fabry disease
X-­linked hypophosphatemia
Vitamin D intoxication
Idiopathic hypercalciuria
Wilson disease
Hereditary fructose intolerance
DRUG-­AND TOXIN-­INDUCED DISEASE
Amphotericin B
Toluene
Cyclamate
Mercury
Hepatic cirrhosis
Vanadate
Ifosfamide
Lithium
Foscarnet
Classic analgesic nephropathy
TUBULOINTERSTITIAL DISEASES
Balkan nephropathy
Kidney transplantation
Chronic pyelonephritis
Leprosy
Obstructive uropathy
Vesicoureteral reflux
Jejunoileal bypass with hyperoxaluria
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH GENETICALLY TRANSMITTED
DISEASES
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Sickle cell anemia
Marfan syndrome
Medullary cystic disease
Hereditary sensorineural deafness
Jejunal bypass with hyperoxaluria
Osteopetrosis with carbonic anhydrase II deficiency (mixed proximal
and distal RTA type III)
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency
From Hamm LL, DuBose TD Jr. Disorders of acid-­base balance. In: Yu AS, Chertow GM,
Luyckx VA, et. Al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2020: Table 16.9.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 569 u Renal Tubular Acidosis
Table 569.3  Disorders with Dysfunction of Renal
Acidification: Generalized Abnormality of
Distal Nephron with Hyperkalemia
MINERALOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY
Primary Mineralocorticoid Deficiency
• Combined deficiency of aldosterone, desoxycorticosterone, and
cortisol
• Addison disease
• Bilateral adrenalectomy
• Bilateral adrenal destruction
• Hemorrhage or carcinoma
• Congenital enzymatic defects
• 21-­Hydroxylase deficiency
• 3β-­Hydroxydehydrogenase deficiency
• Desmolase deficiency
• Isolated (selective) aldosterone deficiency
• Chronic idiopathic hypoaldosteronism
• Heparin (low molecular weight or unfractionated)
administration in critically ill patient
• Familial hypoaldosteronism
• Corticosterone methyl oxidase deficiency types 1 and 2
• Primary zona glomerulosa defect
• Transient hypoaldosteronism of infancy
• Persistent hypotension and/or hypoxemia
• Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibition
• Endogenous
• Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin
receptor blockers
Secondary Mineralocorticoid Deficiency
• Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
• Diabetic nephropathy
• Tubulointerstitial nephropathies
• Nephrosclerosis
• Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents
• Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
• Immunoglobulin M monoclonal gammopathy
• Obstructive uropathy
MINERALOCORTICOID RESISTANCE
• PHA I: autosomal dominant (human mineralocorticoid receptor
defect)
Renal Tubular Dysfunction (Voltage Defect)
• PHA I: autosomal recessive
• PHA II: autosomal dominant
• Drugs that interfere with Na+ channel function in the CCT
• Amiloride
• Triamterene
• Trimethoprim
• Pentamidine
• Drugs that interfere with Na+-­K+-­ATPase in the CCT
• Cyclosporine
• Tacrolimus
• Drugs that inhibit aldosterone effect on the CCT
• Spironolactone
• Eplerenone
• Disorders associated with tubulointerstitial nephritis and renal
insufficiency
• Lupus nephritis
• Methicillin nephrotoxicity
• Obstructive nephropathy
• Kidney transplant rejection
• Sickle cell disease
• Williams syndrome with uric acid nephrolithiasis
ATPase, Adenosine triphosphatase; CCT, cortical collecting tubule; PHA I, PHA II,
pseudohypoaldosteronism types 1 and 2.
From Hamm LL, DuBose TD Jr. Disorders of acid-­base balance. In: Yu AS, Chertow GM,
Luyckx VA, et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:
Table 16.11.

Patients with obstructive uropathies can present acutely with signs
and symptoms of pyelonephritis, such as fever, vomiting, and foul-­
smelling urine. Laboratory tests reveal a hyperkalemic non–anion
gap metabolic acidosis. Urine may be alkaline or acidic. Elevated

3237

urinary sodium levels with inappropriately low urinary potassium
levels reflect the absence of aldosterone effect.

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO RENAL TUBULAR
ACIDOSIS

The first step in the evaluation of a patient with suspected RTA is to
confirm the presence of a normal anion gap metabolic acidosis, identify electrolyte abnormalities, assess renal function, and rule out other
causes of bicarbonate loss such as diarrhea (Table 569.4). Metabolic
acidosis associated with diarrheal dehydration is extremely common,
and acidosis generally improves with correction of volume depletion.
Patients with protracted diarrhea can deplete their total-­body bicarbonate stores and can have persistent acidosis despite apparent restoration of volume status. In instances where a patient has a recent history
of severe diarrhea, full evaluation for RTA should be delayed for several
days to permit adequate time for reconstitution of total-­body bicarbonate stores. If acidosis persists beyond a few days in this setting, additional studies are indicated.
Serum electrolytes, BUN, calcium, phosphorus, creatinine, and
venous blood gas for pH should be obtained by venipuncture. Traumatic blood draws (such as heel-­stick specimens), small volumes
of blood in adult-­size specimen collection tubes, or a prolonged
specimen transport time at room temperature can lead to falsely
low bicarbonate levels, often in association with an elevated serum
potassium value. True hyperkalemic acidosis is consistent with type
IV RTA, whereas the finding of normal or low potassium suggests
type I or II RTA. The blood anion gap should be calculated using
the formula [Na+] − [Cl− + HCO3−]. Typically, values of <12 demonstrate the absence of an anion gap. Values of >20 indicate the presence of an anion gap and other diagnoses (lactic acidosis, diabetic
ketoacidosis, inborn errors of metabolism, ingested toxins) should
be investigated. If tachypnea is noted, evaluation of an arterial blood
gas may be appropriate to evaluate the possibility of a mixed acid-­
base disorder primarily involving respiratory and metabolic components. A detailed history, with particular attention to growth and
development, recent or recurrent diarrheal illnesses, a family history
of developmental delay, failure to thrive, end-­stage kidney disease,
infant deaths, or miscarriages is essential. The physical examination
should determine growth parameters and volume status as well as
the presence of any dysmorphic features suggesting an underlying
syndrome.
Once the presence of a non–anion gap metabolic acidosis is confirmed, the urine pH can help distinguish distal from proximal
causes. A urine pH <5.5 in the presence of acidosis suggests pRTA,
whereas patients with dRTA typically have a urine pH >6.0. The
urine anion gap ([urine Na+ + urine K+] − urine Cl−) is sometimes
calculated to confirm the diagnosis of dRTA. A positive gap suggests a deficiency of ammoniagenesis and, thus, the possibility of a
dRTA. A negative gap is consistent with proximal tubule bicarbonate wasting (or gastrointestinal bicarbonate wasting). A urinalysis
should also be obtained to determine the presence of glycosuria,
proteinuria, or hematuria, suggesting more global tubular damage
or dysfunction. Random or 24-­hour urine calcium and creatinine
measurements will identify hypercalciuria. Renal ultrasonography
should be performed to identify underlying structural abnormalities such as obstructive uropathies, as well as to determine the presence of nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis (Fig. 569.2).

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

The mainstay of therapy in all forms of RTA is bicarbonate replacement. Patients with pRTA often require large quantities of bicarbonate, up to 20 mEq/kg/24 hr, in the form of sodium bicarbonate
or sodium citrate solution (Bicitra or Shohl solution). The base
requirement for dRTA is generally in the range of 2-­4 mEq/kg/24 hr,
although individual patient requirements can vary. Patients with Fanconi syndrome usually require phosphate supplementation. Patients
with dRTA should be monitored for the development of hypercalciuria. Those with symptomatic hypercalciuria (recurrent episodes of
gross hematuria), nephrocalcinosis, or nephrolithiasis may require

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3238 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 569.4  Contrasting Features and Diagnostic Studies in Renal Tubular Acidosis
TYPE OF RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS
FINDING

PROXIMAL

CLASSIC DISTAL

GENERALIZED DISTAL DYSFUNCTION

Plasma [K+]

Low

Low

High

Urine pH with acidosis

<5.5

>5.5

<5.5 or >5.5

Urine net charge

Negative

Positive

Positive

Fractional bicarbonate excretion

>10–15% during alkali therapy

2–5%

5–10%

U−BPco2

Normal

Low

Low

Response to therapy

Least responsive

Responsive

Less responsive

Associated features

Fanconi syndrome

Nephrocalcinosis/
hyperglobulinemia

Renal insufficiency

U−BPco2, urine minus blood CO2 pressure.
Modified from DuBose TD Jr. Disorders of acid-­base balance. In: Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2016: Table 17-­17.

LT kidney long

Fig. 569.2 Ultrasound examination of a child with distal RTA, demon-

metabolic bone disease may be characterized by bone pain, growth
retardation, osteopenia, and, occasionally, pathologic fractures.
Bone demineralization in dRTA probably relates to dissolution
of bone because the calcium carbonate in bone serves as a buffer
against the metabolic acidosis due to the hydrogen ions retained by
patients with RTA.
Administration of sufficient bicarbonate to reverse acidosis
reverses bone dissolution and the hypercalciuria that is common
in dRTA. pRTA is treated with both bicarbonate and oral phosphate
supplements to heal rickets. Doses of phosphate similar to those
used in familial hypophosphatemia or Fanconi syndrome may be
indicated. Vitamin D is required to offset the secondary hyperparathyroidism that complicates oral phosphate therapy. Following
therapy, growth in patients with type II (proximal) RTA is greater
than in patients with primary Fanconi syndrome.

strating medullary nephrocalcinosis.

Chapter 570

thiazide diuretics to decrease urine calcium excretion. Patients with
type IV RTA can require chronic treatment for hyperkalemia with a
sodium-­potassium exchange resin (i.e., sodium polystyrene sulfonate
or patiromer).
The prognosis of RTA depends to a large extent on the nature of any
existing underlying disease. Patients with treated isolated proximal or
dRTA generally demonstrate improvement in growth, provided serum
bicarbonate levels can be maintained in the normal range. Patients with
systemic illness and Fanconi syndrome can have ongoing morbidity
with growth failure, rickets, and signs and symptoms related to their
underlying disease.

Nephrogenic Diabetes
Insipidus

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

569.4 Rickets Associated with Renal Tubular
Acidosis
Melisha G. Hanna and Bradley P. Dixon
Rickets may be present in primary RTA, particularly in pRTA, due
to the added features of hypophosphatemia and phosphaturia from
generalized proximal tubular dysfunction. Bone demineralization
without overt rickets usually is detected in distal (type I) RTA. This

Margret E. Bock and Bradley P. Dixon
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a rare congenital or, more
commonly, acquired, disorder of water metabolism characterized
by an inability of the kidneys to concentrate urine, even in the presence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). The most common pattern
of inheritance in congenital NDI is as an X-­linked recessive disorder (90% of cases of congenital NDI). Rarely, affected females
are seen, presumably secondary to nonrandom X-­
chromosome
inactivation. Approximately 10% of cases of congenital NDI are
inherited as autosomal dominant or recessive disorders, with males
and females affected equally. The clinical phenotype of autosomal
recessive forms is similar to that of the X-­linked form. Secondary
(acquired) forms of NDI, either partial or complete, are not uncommon. They may be seen in many disorders affecting renal tubular
function, including obstructive uropathies, acute kidney injury or
chronic kidney disease, cystic kidney diseases, interstitial nephritis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 570 u Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
nephrocalcinosis, or toxic nephropathy caused by hypokalemia,
hypercalcemia, lithium, or amphotericin B.

PATHOGENESIS

The ability to concentrate urine (and thus absorb water) requires
three components: (1) the delivery of urine to the collecting tubule,
(2) an intact concentrating gradient in the renal medulla, and (3) the
ability to modulate water permeability in the collecting tubule by
ADH. ADH (also called arginine vasopressin [AVP]) is synthesized
in the hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary. Under
basal situations, the collecting tubule is impermeable to water.
However, in response to increased serum osmolality (as detected by
osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus) and/or severe volume depletion, ADH is released into the systemic circulation. It then binds
to its receptor, vasopressin V2R (AVPR2), on the basolateral membrane of the collecting tubule cell. Binding of the hormone to its
receptor activates a cyclic adenosine monophosphate–dependent
cascade that results in insertion of preformed water channels (aquaporin 2 [AQP2]) into the luminal membrane of the collecting duct,
rendering it permeable to water.
Pathogenic variants in AVPR2 cause the more common X-­linked
form of NDI. Pathogenic variants in AQP2 have been identified in
patients with the rarer autosomal dominant and recessive forms.
Pathogenic variants in STIM1 (stromal interaction molecular 1)
have also been identified in a mouse model exhibiting partial NDI,
due to abnormalities in intracellular calcium regulation by the
endoplasmic reticulum. Prenatal testing is available for families at
risk for X-­linked NDI. Patients with secondary forms of NDI can
have ADH resistance due to defective aquaporin expression (as seen
in lithium intoxication). Most often, secondary ADH resistance
occurs as the result of loss of the hypertonic medullary gradient as a
result of solute diuresis or tubular damage, resulting in the inability
to absorb sodium or urea.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with congenital NDI typically present in the newborn
period with massive polyuria, volume depletion, hypernatremia,
and hyperthermia. Irritability and inconsolability are common features. Constipation and poor weight gain are also seen. After multiple episodes of hypernatremic dehydration in infancy, patients
may develop intellectual disabilities, although this has become
less common with cautious fluid resuscitation and gradual correction of hypernatremia. Toddlers and older children often display a
marked thirst and a preference particularly for cold water. Mediated by the intact thirst mechanism, the need to consume large volumes of water during the day is profound, and patients often have
diminished appetite and poor food intake, which may contribute to
failure to thrive. However, even with adequate caloric supplementation, patients still exhibit growth abnormalities. Daytime and nighttime enuresis, caused by large urine volumes, is common. Patients
with congenital NDI also may exhibit behavioral problems, including hyperactivity and short-­term memory problems. Patients with
the secondary form generally present later in life, primarily with
hypernatremia and polyuria. Associated symptoms such as developmental delay and behavioral abnormalities are less common in
this latter group.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is suggested in a male infant with polyuria, hypernatremia, and dilute urine. Simultaneous serum and urine osmolality

3239

measurements should be obtained. If the serum osmolality value is
≥290 mOsm/kg with a simultaneous urine osmolality value of <290
mOsm/kg, a formal water-­deprivation test is not necessary. Because
the differential diagnosis includes causes of central diabetes insipidus, the inability to respond to ADH (and thus the presence of
NDI) should be confirmed by the administration of vasopressin
(10-­20 μg intranasally) followed by serial urine and serum osmolality measurements hourly for 4 hours. In patients with possible
“partial” or secondary diabetes insipidus, in whom the initial serum
osmolality value may be <290 mOsm/kg, a water-­deprivation test
should be considered. Fluids should be withheld and urine and
serum osmolalities measured periodically until the serum osmolality value is >290 mOsm/kg; vasopressin is then given as before. Criteria for premature termination of a water-­deprivation test include
a decrease in body weight of >3%. These evaluations typically
require an inpatient admission, given the need for serial laboratory
monitoring and prompt intervention/response to results. If NDI is
confirmed or suspected, an additional evaluation should include a
detailed history to assess possible toxic exposures, determination
of renal function by serum creatinine and BUN levels, and renal
ultrasonography to identify obstructive uropathies or cystic kidney
disease. Because of the massive urine output, patients with congenital NDI can have nonobstructive hydronephrosis of varying severity.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Treatment of NDI includes maintenance of adequate fluid intake
and access to free water, minimizing the urine output by limiting
the solute load with a low-­osmolar, low-­sodium diet, and administering medications directed at decreasing the urine output. For
infants, human milk or a low-­solute formula, such as Similac PM
60/40, is preferred. Most infants with congenital NDI require gastrostomy or nasogastric feedings to ensure adequate fluid administration throughout the day and night. Sodium intake in older
patients should be <0.7 mEq/kg/24 hr. Thiazide diuretics (2-­3 mg/
kg/24 hr of hydrochlorothiazide) effectively induce sodium loss and
stimulate proximal tubule reabsorption of water. Potassium-­sparing
diuretics, in particular, amiloride (0.3 mg/kg/24 hr in three divided
doses), are often additionally indicated. Patients who have an inadequate response to diuretics alone might benefit from the addition
of prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors such as indomethacin (2 mg/
kg/24 hr), which has an additive effect in reducing water excretion
in some patients. Renal function must be monitored closely in such
patients because indomethacin can cause deterioration in renal
function over time. Patients with secondary NDI may not require
medications but should have access to free water. Such patients
should have the serum electrolytes and volume status monitored
closely, particularly during periods of superimposed acute illnesses.
Amiloride may also play a role in managing lithium-­induced NDI
by blocking entry of lithium into the tubular cell through the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC).
Prevention of recurrent dehydration and hypernatremia in patients
with congenital NDI has significantly improved the neurodevelopmental outcome of these patients. However, behavioral issues remain
a significant problem. In addition, chronic use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs can predispose patients to chronic kidney disease.
The prognosis of patients with secondary NDI generally depends on
the nature of the underlying disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3240 Part XXI u Nephrology
PATHOGENESIS

Chapter 571

Inherited Tubular
Transport Abnormalities
571.1 Bartter Syndrome
Danielle E. Soranno and Bradley P. Dixon
Bartter syndrome is a group of disorders characterized by hypokalemic hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis with hypercalciuria and salt
wasting (see Chapter 73). These disorders are currently classified by
the anatomic site affected by the pathogenic variant (Tables 571.1 and
571.2). Antenatal Bartter syndrome (types I, II, and IV; also called
hyperprostaglandin E syndrome) typically manifests in infancy and
has a more severe phenotype than classic Bartter syndrome (type III).
The perinatal onset includes maternal polyhydramnios, neonatal salt
wasting, and severe episodes of recurrent dehydration. The milder phenotype, classic Bartter syndrome, manifests in childhood with failure
to thrive and a history of recurrent episodes of dehydration. A phenotypically related disease, Gitelman syndrome, has a distinct genetic
defect and is discussed in Chapter 571.2 (see Table 571.1). One distinct
variant of antenatal Bartter syndrome is associated with sensorineural
deafness (type IV). Bartter-­like phenotypes have been noted in other
diseases such as Kearns-­Sayre syndrome.

The biochemical features of Bartter syndrome, such as hypokalemic
hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis with hypercalciuria, resemble those
seen with chronic use of loop diuretics and reflect a defect in sodium,
chloride, and potassium transport in the ascending loop of Henle. The
urinary loss of sodium and chloride, with resultant volume contraction, stimulates the renin-­angiotensin II-­aldosterone axis. Aldosterone
promotes distal sodium uptake and potassium secretion, exacerbating
the hypokalemia. It also stimulates hydrogen ion secretion distally, worsening the metabolic alkalosis. Hypokalemia stimulates prostaglandin
synthesis, which further activates the renin-­angiotensin II-­aldosterone
axis. Bartter syndrome has been associated with at least five distinct
genetic defects in transporters along the loop of Henle (see Table 571.1).
Each contributes, in some manner, to sodium and chloride transport.
Pathogenic variants in the genes that encode the Na+/K+/2Cl− transporter (NKCC2, the site of action of furosemide), the luminal potassium
channel (ROMK), combined chloride channel (CLC-­Ka, CLC-­Kb), or
subunit of chloride channels (barttin) cause neonatal Bartter syndrome.
Isolated defects in the genes that produce a specific basolateral chloride
channel (ClC-­Kb) cause classic Bartter syndrome.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A history of maternal polyhydramnios with or without prematurity
may be elicited. Dysmorphic features, including triangular facies, protruding ears, large eyes with strabismus, and drooping mouth may be
present on physical examination. Consanguinity suggests the presence
of an autosomal recessive disorder. Older children can have a history
of recurrent episodes of polyuria with dehydration, failure to thrive,
nonspecific fatigue, dizziness, and chronic constipation. Older children may also present with muscle cramps and weakness secondary

Table 571.1  Types of Bartter Syndrome, Gitelman Syndrome, and Related Conditions
DISORDER

OMIM, GENE

GENE PRODUCT

INHERITANCE

FEATURES

601678,
SLC12A1

NKCC2

AR

Polyhydramnios, prematurity, hypokalemic hypochloremic
alkalosis, nephrocalcinosis, with or without concentrating defect

BS II (ABS with transient
hyperkalemia and
acidosis, HPES)

241200,
KCNJ1

ROMK1

AR

Polyhydramnios, prematurity, transient hyperkalemia and
acidosis, then hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis,
nephrocalcinosis, with or without concentrating defect

BS III (CBS)

607364,
CLCNKB

ClC-­Kb

AR; many
sporadic

Variable age at presentation with severity corresponding
to type of gene pathogenic variant; hypokalemic
hypochloremic alkalosis

BS IVa and BS IVb
(ABS or HPES
with sensorineural
deafness)

602522, BSND
CLCNKA,
CLCNKB

Bartter
ClC-­Ka and ClC-­Kb

AR

Polyhydramnios, prematurity, hypokalemic hypochloremic
alkalosis, sensorineural deafness, with or without
concentrating defect

BS V (transient ABS)

300971,
MAGED2

MAGED2

XR

Severe polyhydramnios, hypokalemic hypochloremic alkalosis
with symptoms resolving within the first few months of life

AD hypocalcemic
hypercalciuria

601199, L125P

CaSR

AD

Hypocalcemic hypocalciuria, hypokalemic hypochloremic
alkalosis, suppressed PTH

263800,
SLC12A3

NCC

AR

Present in later childhood or adulthood with weakness,
lethargy, carpopedal spasm, hypokalemic alkalosis,
hypomagnesemia, hypermagnesuria and hypocalciuria

612780, Kir4.1

KCNJ10

AR

Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, hypokalemic
hypochloremic alkalosis

617579,
CLDN10

Claudin-­10

AR

Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with hypocalciuria but
normal to elevated magnesium

BS VARIANTS
BS I (ABS, HPES)

GS VARIANTS
GS

EAST syndrome
(SeSAME)
OTHER VARIANTS
CLDN10 pathogenic
variants

ABS, Antenatal Bartter syndrome; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BS, Bartter syndrome; CaSR, calcium-­sensing receptor; CBS, classic Bartter syndrome; ClC-­Ka,
chloride channel-­Ka; ClC-­Kb, chloride channel-­Kb; GS, Gitelman syndrome; HPES, hyperprostaglandin E syndrome; MAGED, melanoma-­associated antigen-­D2; NCC, thiazide-­
sensitive NaCl cotransporter; NKCC2, furosemide-­sensitive Na-­K-­2Cl cotransporter; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man; PTH, parathyroid hormone; ROMK, renal outer
medullary K channel; SeSAME, seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte imbalances; XR, X-­linked recessive.
From Fulchiero R, Seo-­Mayer P. Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2019;66:121–134. Box 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 571 u Inherited Tubular Transport Abnormalities

3241

Table 571.2  Features That Distinguish Bartter and Gitelman Syndrome Variants
VARIANT

AGE OF
ONSET

SERUM K

SERUM CL

SERUM MG

SERUM RENIN,
ALDOSTERONE

URINE CA/CR

OTHER DISTINCT
FEATURES

BS I

AN

Low

Low

Normal

High, high

High

—

BS II

AN

High, then low

Low

Normal

High, high

High

Transient hyperkalemia

BS III

N, C, A

Low

Very low

Normal

High, high

Low, normal, or high

—

BS IVa, IVb

AN

Low

Low

Normal

High, high

Normal or high

Sensorineural deafness

BS V

AN

Low

Low

Normal

High, high

—

Transient features

Hypocalcemic
hypercalciuria

—

Low

Low

Normal

High, high

High

Family history,
hypocalcemia,
suppressed PTH

GS

C, A

Low

Low

Low

High, high

Low

—

EAST syndrome

—

Low

Low

Low

High, high

Low

Epilepsy, ataxia,
sensorineural deafness

A, Adult; AN, antenatal; BS, Bartter syndrome; C, child; Ca/Cr, spot calcium to creatinine ratio; GS, Gitelman syndrome; Mg, magnesium; N, neonate; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
From Fulchiero R, Seo-­Mayer P. Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2019;66:121–134. Box 3.

to chronic hypokalemia. Blood pressure is usually preserved, although
patients with the antenatal form can have severe salt wasting, resulting in dehydration and hypotension. Serum chemistry reveals the
classic biochemical abnormalities of a hypokalemic hypochloremic
metabolic alkalosis. Renal function is typically normal. Urinary calcium levels are typically elevated, as are urinary potassium and sodium
levels. Serum renin, aldosterone, and prostaglandin E levels are often
markedly elevated, particularly in the more severe antenatal form.
Nephrocalcinosis, resulting from hypercalciuria, may be seen on ultrasound examination (types I and II).

571.2 Gitelman Syndrome

DIAGNOSIS

The biochemical features of Gitelman syndrome resemble those of
chronic use of thiazide diuretics. Thiazides act on the sodium chloride cotransporter NCCT, present in the distal convoluted tubule.
Through linkage analysis and mutational studies, defects in the gene
encoding NCCT have been demonstrated in patients with Gitelman
syndrome.

The diagnosis is usually made based on the clinical presentation and
laboratory findings. The diagnosis in the neonate or infant is suggested
by severe hypokalemia, usually <2.5 mmol/L, with metabolic alkalosis. Hypercalciuria is typical; hypomagnesemia is seen in a minority
of patients but is more common in Gitelman syndrome. Because features of Bartter syndrome resemble the chronic use of loop diuretics,
diuretic abuse should be considered in the differential diagnosis, even
in young children. Chronic vomiting and cystic fibrosis can also present a similar clinical picture but can be distinguished by the measurement of urinary chloride, which is elevated in Bartter syndrome and
low in patients with chronic vomiting and cystic fibrosis. Kidneys demonstrate hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular apparatus, although renal
biopsy is rarely performed to diagnose this condition.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Treatment of Bartter syndrome is directed at preventing dehydration,
maintaining nutritional status, and correcting hypokalemia. Potassium
supplementation, usually in the form of potassium chloride to correct
the concomitant chloride depletion and often at very high doses, is
required. Potassium-­sparing diuretics (such as spironolactone) are also
often used to inhibit distal potassium secretion. Even with appropriate
therapy, serum potassium values might not normalize, particularly in
patients with the neonatal form. Infants and young children require a
high-­sodium diet and, at times, sodium supplementation. Indomethacin, a prostaglandin inhibitor, can also be effective. If hypomagnesemia
is present, magnesium supplementation is required. With close attention to electrolyte balance, volume status, and growth, the long-­term
prognosis is generally good. Routine monitoring is necessary, particularly during periods of growth, to ensure that electrolytes are maintained in a safe range. Strict return/call precautions are needed in times
of illness with extrarenal volume loss such as vomiting or diarrhea. In
a minority of patients, chronic hypokalemia, nephrocalcinosis, and
chronic indomethacin therapy can lead to chronic interstitial nephritis
and chronic renal failure.

Danielle E. Soranno and Bradley P. Dixon
Gitelman syndrome (often called a Bartter syndrome variant) is a rare
autosomal recessive cause of hypokalemic hypochloremic metabolic
alkalosis, with distinct features of hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia. Patients with Gitelman syndrome are typically diagnosed incidentally in late childhood or early adulthood (see Tables 571.1 and 571.2).

PATHOGENESIS

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with Gitelman syndrome typically present at a later age than
those with Bartter syndrome and may have symptoms similar to
older children with Bartter syndrome (see Chapter 571.1). Patients
often have a history of salt craving, recurrent muscle cramps and
spasms, presumably caused by low serum magnesium levels, nocturia, polyuria, and occasional hypotension. They usually do not have
a history of recurrent episodes of dehydration. Biochemical abnormalities include hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hypomagnesemia. The urinary calcium level is usually very low (in contrast to
the elevated urinary calcium level often seen in Bartter syndrome),
and the urinary magnesium level is elevated. Renin and aldosterone levels are usually normal, and prostaglandin E secretion is not
elevated. Growth failure is less prominent in Gitelman syndrome
than in Bartter syndrome.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of Gitelman syndrome is suggested in an adolescent or
adult presenting with hypokalemic hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalciuria. The diagnosis is often made
incidentally after hypokalemia is noted on bloodwork, spurring further
evaluation.

TREATMENT

Therapy is directed at correcting hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia
with supplemental potassium and magnesium. Sodium supplementation or treatment with prostaglandin inhibitors is generally not
necessary because patients typically do not have episodes of volume

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3242 Part XXI u Nephrology
depletion or elevated prostaglandin E excretion. Recently, SGLT2
inhibitors have begun to be utilized in adults with refractory hypomagnesemia; however, further studies are needed to investigate their utility
in the treatment of Gitelman syndrome.

Chapter 572

Renal Failure

571.3 Other Inherited Tubular Transport
Abnormalities

572.1 Acute Kidney Injury

Danielle E. Soranno and Bradley P. Dixon

Prasad Devarajan

Inherited abnormalities in distinct transporters in each segment of the
nephron have now been identified and the molecular defects have been
characterized. Renal tubular acidosis and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
are discussed in detail in Chapters 569 and 570, respectively. Cystinuria is
an autosomal recessive disorder seen primarily in patients of Middle Eastern descent and is characterized by recurrent stone formation. The disease
is caused by a defective high-­affinity transporter for l-­cystine and dibasic
amino acids present in the proximal tubule; affected females form fewer
stones than males. Treatment focuses on stone prevention via hydration,
sodium restriction, urine alkalinization, and cystine-­binding therapy.
Dent disease is an X-­linked proximal tubulopathy with characteristic
abnormalities that include low molecular weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, and variably other features of Fanconi syndrome, such as glycosuria, aminoaciduria, and phosphaturia. Although some patients develop
nephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis, progressive renal failure, and hypophosphatemic rickets, patients with Dent disease typically do not have proximal renal tubular acidosis or extrarenal manifestations. Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic variants of CLCN5, which encodes a renal Cl−/H+ antiporter
(ClC-­5), are reported in ∼50–60% of patients with Dent disease. The
genetic heterogeneity of Dent disease in some patients who exhibit pathogenic variants in the gene for OCRL1 (responsible for Lowe syndrome)
also meet the criteria for Dent disease (∼15% of patients) called Dent 2
disease. Dent disease includes X-­linked recessive nephrolithiasis with renal
failure, X-­linked recessive hypophosphatemic rickets, and idiopathic low
molecular weight proteinuria seen in Japanese children.
Pathogenic variants in an extracellular basolateral calcium-­
sensing
receptor, normally present in the loop of Henle, can cause a dominant
Bartter syndrome–like picture (also known as Bartter syndrome type V).
These patients’ predominant symptoms are hypocalcemia and suppressed
parathyroid hormone function, which differentiates them from patients
with Bartter syndrome.
In the distal convoluted tubule, gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants
in WNK1 and loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in WNK4, both serine
threonine kinases, lead to excessive NCCT-­mediated salt reabsorption with
the clinical picture of pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 (familial hyperkalemic hypertension, or Gordon syndrome), including volume expansion
with hypertension, hyperkalemia, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, and
hypercalciuria. Due to the excessive activation of the thiazide-­sensitive
NCCT, this disorder can be effectively treated with thiazide diuretics.
In the collecting duct, gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants of the
gene that encodes the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) cause an
inherited form of hypertension, Liddle syndrome. Patients with this
disorder have constitutive sodium uptake in the collecting duct, with
hypokalemia and suppressed aldosterone. Due to the excessive activation of ENaC, potassium-­sparing diuretics (specifically amiloride)
are an effective treatment for Liddle syndrome. Conversely, loss-­of-­
function pathogenic variants cause pseudohypoaldosteronism, characterized by severe sodium wasting and hyperkalemia as well as a distal
(type IV) RTA (also discussed in Chapter 569.3). A variant of the latter
disorder is associated with systemic abnormalities, including defects in
sweat chloride, and can resemble cystic fibrosis.
Renal hypouricemia, a defect in SLC22A12, presents with low
serum uric acid levels and is complicated by exercise-­induced acute
kidney injury. Patients have elevated urine uric acid levels and present
with loin pain, nausea, and vomiting after exercise. Treatment is for
acute kidney injury and reducing the intensity of exercise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) has been traditionally defined as an abrupt loss
of kidney function leading to a rapid decline in the glomerular filtration
rate (GFR), accumulation of waste products such as blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) and creatinine, and dysregulation of extracellular volume and electrolyte homeostasis. The term AKI has replaced acute renal failure (ARF);
AKI embodies a continuum of renal dysfunction that ranges from a small
increase in serum creatinine to complete anuric renal failure. The incidence of AKI varies from 5–10% of all hospitalizations to >25% in critically ill infants and children. The etiology of AKI varies widely according
to age, geographic region, and clinical setting. Functional AKI induced
by dehydration is usually reversible with early fluid therapy. However, the
prognosis for patients with structural AKI in the intensive care setting with
multiorgan failure remains guarded.
A classification system proposed by the Kidney Disease Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) AKI Consensus Conference takes both
serum creatinine and urine output criteria into account to define and
stage AKI (Table 572.1). Thus AKI is defined as
Increase in serum creatinine by ≥0.3 mg/dL from baseline within 48
hours, or
Increase in serum creatinine to ≥1.5 times baseline within the prior 7
days, or
Urine volume ≤0.5 mL/kg/hr for 6 hours

PATHOGENESIS

AKI has been conventionally classified into three categories: prerenal,
intrinsic renal, and postrenal (Table 572.2 and Fig. 572.1).
Prerenal AKI, also called prerenal azotemia, is characterized by a
diminished effective circulating arterial volume, which leads to inadequate kidney perfusion and a decreased GFR. Evidence of structural
kidney damage is largely absent. Common causes of prerenal AKI
include dehydration, sepsis, hemorrhage, severe hypoalbuminemia,
and cardiac failure. If the underlying cause of the kidney hypoperfusion
is reversed promptly, kidney function returns to normal. If hypoperfusion is sustained, intrinsic kidney parenchymal damage can develop.
Intrinsic renal AKI includes a variety of disorders characterized
by kidney parenchymal damage, including sustained hypoperfusion
and ischemia. Ischemic/hypoxic injury and nephrotoxic insults are the
most common causes of intrinsic AKI in high-resource countries and
are more common with an underlying comorbid condition; most are
associated with cardiac, oncologic, urologic, kidney, and genetic disorders or prematurity (Table 572.3). Many forms of glomerulonephritis,
Table 572.1  Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes
Staging of Acute Kidney Injury
STAGE

SERUM CREATININE

URINE OUTPUT

1

1.5-­1.9 times baseline, OR
≥0.3 mg/dL increase

<0.5 mL/kg/hr for 6-­12 hr

2

2.0-­2.9 times baseline

<0.5 mL/kg/hr for ≥12 hr

3

3.0 times baseline, OR
SCr ≥4.0 mg/dL, OR
Initiation of renal replacement
therapy, OR
eGFR <35 mL/min per 1.73 m2
(<18 yr)

<0.3 mL/kg/hr for ≥24 hr,
OR
Anuria for ≥12 hr

SCr, Serum creatinine; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 572 u Renal Failure

Table 572.3  Major Endogenous and Exogenous Toxins
Causing Acute Tubular Injury

Table 572.2  Common Causes of Acute Kidney Injury
PRERENAL
Dehydration (hypovolemia)
Gastroenteritis (hypovolemia)
Hemorrhage (hypovolemia)
Burns
Sepsis
Shock
Capillary leak/systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Hypoalbuminemia
Cirrhosis
Abdominal compartment syndrome
Cardiac failure
Anaphylaxis
INTRINSIC RENAL
Glomerulonephritis
Postinfectious/poststreptococcal
Lupus erythematosus
IgA vasculitis
Membranoproliferative
Anti–glomerular basement membrane
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Acute tubular necrosis
Cortical necrosis
Renal vein thrombosis
Infarction
Rhabdomyolysis
Acute interstitial nephritis
Tumor infiltration
Toxin and drugs (see Table 572.3)
Tumor lysis syndrome
Vasculitis

Pr

er

EXOGENOUS TOXINS

MYOGLOBULINURIA

ANTIBIOTICS

Muscle breakdown: trauma,
compression, electric shock,
hypothermia, hyperthermia,
seizures, exercise, burns
Metabolic: hypokalemia,
hypophosphatemia
Infections: tetanus, influenza
Toxins: isopropyl alcohol,
ethanol, ethylene glycol,
toluene, snake and insect bites,
cocaine, heroin
Drugs: HMG-­CoA reductase
inhibitors (statins),
amphetamines, fibrates
Inherited disease: deficiency
of myophosphorylase,
phosphofructokinase, carnitine
palmitoyltransferase
Autoimmune: polymyositis,
dermatomyositis

Aminoglycosides
Amphotericin B
Antiviral agents: acyclovir,
cidofovir, indinavir, foscarnet,
tenofovir
Pentamidine
Piperacillin tazobactam**
Vancomycin
CHEMOTHERAPY
Cisplatin
CAR-­T cell therapy*
Ifosfamide
Plicamycin
5-­Fluorouracil
Cytarabine
6-­Thioguanine
Methotrexate
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
CALCINEURIN INHIBITORS

HEMOGLOBINURIA

ORGANIC SOLVENTS

Mechanical: prosthetic valves,
microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia, extracorporeal
circulation
Drugs: hydralazine, methyldopa
Chemicals: benzene, arsine, fava
beans, glycerol, phenol
Immunologic: transfusion
reaction
Genetic: G6PD deficiency, PNH

Toluene
Ethylene glycol
Mannitol
POISONS
Snake venom
Paraquat
MISCELLANEOUS
Radiocontrast media
Intravenous immune globulin
ACE inhibitors
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs
Allopurinol
Oral phosphate bowel
preparations
Synthetic cannabinoids

INTRATUBULAR OBSTRUCTION
FROM CRYSTALLURIA OR
PARAPROTEINS

en

al
A

Tumor lysis syndrome
HGPRT deficiency
Multiple myeloma
Oxalate (ethylene glycol)

Inflation

GFR (%)

ENDOGENOUS TOXINS

Cyclosporine
Tacrolimus

POSTRENAL
Posterior urethral valves
Ureteropelvic junction obstruction
Ureterovesical junction obstruction
Ureterocele
Tumors
Urolithiasis
Urethral strictures
Hemorrhagic cystitis (blood clots)
Neurogenic bladder
Anticholinergic drugs

100

3243

B
ns
te

Ex

y

ion

er

ov

c
Re

C
Maintenance

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Days

Fig. 572.1 Phases of acute kidney injury. GFR, Glomerular filtration
rate. (From Sutton TA, Fisher CJ, Molitoris BA. Microvascular endothelial injury and dysfunction during ischemic acute renal failure. Kidney
Int. 2002;62:1539–1549.)

*Associated cytokine release syndrome, tumor lysis syndrome.
**Controversial
ACE, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme; CAR-­T, chimeric antigen receptor T cells;
G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HGPRT, hypoxanthine-­guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase; HMG-­CoA, 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl coenzyme A; PNH,
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Modified from Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM. Acute kidney injury. In: Yu AS, Chertow GM, Luyckx
VA, et al, eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 29.3.

including postinfectious glomerulonephritis, lupus nephritis, IgA vasculitis nephritis (formerly Henoch-­Schönlein purpura nephritis), membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, and anti–glomerular basement
membrane nephritis, can also cause intrinsic AKI. Severe and prolonged
ischemic/hypoxic injury and nephrotoxic insult lead to acute tubular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3244 Part XXI u Nephrology
necrosis (ATN), seen most often in critically ill infants and children.
Mechanisms leading to ischemic AKI include hypotension/intravascular volume depletion (hemorrhage, third-­space fluid losses, diarrhea),
decreased effective intravascular volume (heart failure, cirrhosis, hepatorenal syndrome, peritonitis, abdominal compartment syndrome),
vasodilation/vasoconstriction (sepsis, hepatorenal syndrome), renal
artery obstruction (thrombosis, embolization, stenosis), intrarenal
artery disease (vasculitis, hemolytic uremic syndrome [HUS], sickle
cell anemia, transplant rejection), and impaired renal blood flow (cyclosporine, tacrolimus, angiotensin-­converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors,
angiotensin-­receptor blocking agents, radiocontrast agents).
The typical pathologic feature of ATN is tubular cell necrosis,
although significant histologic changes are not consistently seen in
patients with clinical ATN. The mechanisms of injury in ATN can
include alterations in intrarenal hemodynamics, tubular obstruction,
and passive back leak of the glomerular filtrate across injured tubular
cells into the peritubular capillaries.
Tumor lysis syndrome is a specific form of AKI related to spontaneous or chemotherapy-­induced cell lysis in patients with lymphoproliferative malignancies. This disorder is primarily caused by obstruction
of the tubules by uric acid crystals (see Chapters 544 and 545). Acute
interstitial nephritis is another common cause of AKI and is usually
a result of a hypersensitivity reaction to a therapeutic agent or various
infectious agents (see Chapter 561.2).
Postrenal AKI includes a variety of disorders characterized by
obstruction of the urinary tract. In neonates and infants, congenital
conditions, such as posterior urethral valves and bilateral ureteropelvic
junction obstruction, account for most cases of AKI. Other conditions,
such as urolithiasis, tumor (intraabdominal lesion or within the urinary
tract), hemorrhagic cystitis, and neurogenic bladder, can cause AKI in
older children and adolescents. In a patient with two functioning kidneys, obstruction must be bilateral to result in AKI. Relief of the obstruction usually results in recovery of renal function, except in patients with
associated renal dysplasia or prolonged urinary tract obstruction.

hypotension or with exposure to nephrotoxic medications most likely
has ATN. A neonate with a history of hydronephrosis seen on prenatal ultrasound studies and a palpable bladder most likely has congenital
urinary tract obstruction, probably related to posterior urethral valves.
The physical examination must be thorough, with careful attention to volume status. Tachycardia, dry mucous membranes, and poor
peripheral perfusion suggest an inadequate circulating volume and the
possibility of prerenal AKI. Hypertension, peripheral edema, rales, and
a cardiac gallop suggest volume overload and the possibility of intrinsic AKI from glomerulonephritis or ATN. The presence of a rash and
arthritis might indicate systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or IgA
vasculitis nephritis. Palpable flank masses may be seen with renal vein
thrombosis, tumors, cystic disease, or urinary tract obstruction.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory abnormalities can include anemia (the anemia is usually
dilutional or hemolytic, as in SLE, renal vein thrombosis, HUS); leukopenia (SLE, sepsis); thrombocytopenia (SLE, renal vein thrombosis,
sepsis, HUS); hyponatremia (dilutional); metabolic acidosis; elevated
serum concentrations of blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, uric
acid, potassium, and phosphate (diminished kidney function); and
hypocalcemia (hyperphosphatemia).
The serum C3 level may be depressed (postinfectious glomerulonephritis, SLE, or membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis), and
antibodies may be detected in the serum to streptococcal (poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis), nuclear (SLE), neutrophil cytoplasmic
(granulomatosis with polyangiitis, microscopic polyarteritis), or glomerular basement membrane (Goodpasture disease) antigens.
The presence of hematuria, proteinuria, and red blood cell or granular urinary casts suggests intrinsic AKI, in particular glomerular disease and ATN. The presence of white blood cells and white blood cell
casts with low-­grade hematuria and proteinuria suggests tubulointerstitial disease. Urinary eosinophils may be present in some children
with drug-­induced tubulointerstitial nephritis.
Urinary indices may be useful in differentiating prerenal AKI from
intrinsic AKI (Table 572.4). Patients whose urine shows an elevated specific gravity (>1.020), elevated urine osmolality (UOsm >500 mOsm/kg),
low urine sodium (UNa <20 mEq/L), and fractional excretion of sodium
<1% (<2.5% in neonates) most likely have prerenal AKI. Those with a
specific gravity of <1.010, low urine osmolality (UOsm <350 mOsm/
kg), high urine sodium (UNa >40 mEq/L), and fractional excretion of
sodium >2% (>10% in neonates) most likely have intrinsic AKI.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

A carefully taken history is critical in defining the cause of AKI. An infant
with a three day history of vomiting and diarrhea most likely has prerenal AKI caused by volume depletion, but hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
(HUS) must also be a consideration. A 6-­year-­old child with a recent
pharyngitis who presents with periorbital edema, hypertension, and
gross hematuria most likely has intrinsic AKI related to acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis. A critically ill child with a history of protracted

Table 572.4  Urinalysis, Urine Chemistries, and Osmolality in Acute Kidney Injury
HYPOVOLEMIA

ACUTE TUBULAR
NECROSIS

ACUTE INTERSTITIAL
NEPHRITIS

GLOMERULONEPHRITIS

OBSTRUCTION

Sediment

Bland, may have
hyaline casts

Broad, brownish
granular casts

White blood cells,
eosinophils, cellular casts

Red blood cells, red blood
cell casts

Bland or bloody

Protein

None or low

None or low

Minimal but may be
increased with NSAIDs

Increased, >100 mg/dL

Low

Urine sodium (mEq/L)*

<20

>40

>30

<20

<20 (acute)

Urine osmolality
(mOsm/kg)

>400

<350

<350

>400

<350

Fractional excretion of
sodium %†

<1

>2‡

Varies

<1

<1 (acute)

>40 (few days)

>1 (few days)

*The sensitivity and specificity of urine sodium of <20 mEq/L in differentiating prerenal azotemia from acute tubular necrosis are 90% and 82%, respectively.
†Fractional excretion of sodium is the urine:plasma (U:P) ratio of sodium divided by U:P of creatinine × 100. The sensitivity and specificity of fractional excretion of sodium of <1% in
differentiating prerenal azotemia from acute tubular necrosis are 96% and 95%, respectively.
‡The fractional excretion of sodium may be <1% in acute tubular necrosis secondary to radiocontrast material or rhabdomyolysis.
NSAIDs, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
From Singri N, Ahya SN, Levin ML. Acute renal failure. JAMA. 2003;289:747–751.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 572 u Renal Failure
Chest radiography may reveal cardiomegaly, pulmonary congestion
(fluid overload), or pleural effusions. Renal ultrasonography can reveal
hydronephrosis and/or hydroureter, which suggest urinary tract obstruction, or nephromegaly, consistent with intrinsic renal disease. Renal biopsy
may ultimately be required to determine the precise cause of AKI in
patients who do not have clearly defined prerenal or postrenal AKI.
Although serum creatinine is used to measure kidney function, it
is an insensitive and delayed measure of decreased kidney function
following AKI. Tissue inhibitor of metallopritinase-­2 (TIMP2) and
insulin-­like growth factor binding protein-­7 (IGFBP7) are biomarkers
for early tubular injury and the risk for the development of AKI used
mostly in critically ill adult patients.

TREATMENT
Medical Management

Complications of AKI are noted in Table 572.5. In infants and children
with urinary tract obstruction, such as in a newborn with suspected posterior ureteral valves, a bladder catheter should be placed immediately to
ensure adequate drainage of the urinary tract. The placement of a bladder catheter may also be considered in nonambulatory older children
and adolescents to accurately monitor urine output during AKI; however, precautions to prevent iatrogenic infection should be taken.
Determination of the volume status is of critical importance when
initially evaluating a patient with AKI. If there is no evidence of volume overload or cardiac failure, the intravascular volume should be
expanded by intravenous (IV) administration of isotonic saline, 20 mL/
kg over 30 minutes. In the absence of blood loss or hypoproteinemia,
colloid-­containing solutions are not required for volume expansion.
Severe hypovolemia may require additional fluid boluses (see Chapters 74, 75, and 85). Determination of the central venous pressure may
be helpful if adequacy of the blood volume is difficult to determine.
After volume resuscitation, hypovolemic patients generally void within
2 hours; failure to do so suggests intrinsic or postrenal AKI. Hypotension caused by sepsis requires vigorous fluid resuscitation followed by
a continuous infusion of vasopressors.
Diuretic therapy should be considered only after the adequacy of
the circulating blood volume has been established. Furosemide (2-­4
mg/kg) may be administered as a single IV dose. Bumetanide (0.1
mg/kg) may be given as an alternative to furosemide. If urine output
is not improved, then a continuous diuretic infusion may be considered. To increase renal cortical blood flow, many clinicians administer dopamine (2-­3 μg/kg/min) in conjunction with diuretic therapy,
although no controlled data support this practice. There is little evidence that diuretics or dopamine can prevent AKI or hasten recovery.
Mannitol may be effective in the prevention of pigment (myoglobin,
hemoglobin)-­induced renal failure. Atrial natriuretic peptide may be
of value in preventing or treating AKI, although there is little pediatric
evidence to support its use.
If there is no response to a diuretic challenge, diuretics should be discontinued and fluid restriction is essential. Patients with a relatively normal intravascular volume should initially be limited to 400 mL/m2/24
hr (insensible losses) plus an amount of fluid equal to the urine output
for that day. Extrarenal (blood, GI tract) fluid losses should be replaced,

3245

milliliter for milliliter, with appropriate fluids. Markedly hypervolemic
patients can require further fluid restriction, omitting the replacement
of insensible fluid losses, urine output, and extrarenal losses to diminish
the expanded intravascular volume. Fluid intake, urine and stool output,
body weight, and serum chemistries should be monitored daily.
In AKI, rapid development of hyperkalemia (serum potassium level
>6 mEq/L) can lead to cardiac arrhythmia, cardiac arrest, and death.
The earliest electrocardiographic change seen in patients with developing hyperkalemia is the appearance of peaked T waves. This may
be followed by widening of the QRS intervals, ST segment depression,
ventricular arrhythmias, and cardiac arrest (see Chapter 472.2). Procedures to deplete body potassium stores should be initiated when
the serum potassium value rises to >6.0 mEq/L. Exogenous sources
of potassium (dietary, IV fluids, total parenteral nutrition) should be
eliminated. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) resin (Kayexalate), 1 g/
kg, should be given orally or by retention enema. This resin exchanges
sodium for potassium and can take several hours to take effect. A single
dose of 1 g/kg can be expected to lower the serum potassium level by
about 1 mEq/L. Resin therapy may be repeated every 2 hours, the frequency being limited primarily by the risk of sodium overload.
More severe elevations in serum potassium (>7 mEq/L), especially
if accompanied by electrocardiographic changes, require emergency
measures in addition to Kayexalate. The following agents should be
administered:
Calcium gluconate 10% solution, 100 mg/kg/dose (maximum 3,000
mg/dose)
Sodium bicarbonate, 1-­2 mEq/kg IV, over 5-­10 minutes
Regular insulin, 0.1 units/kg, with glucose 50% solution, 1 mL/kg,
over 1 hour
Calcium gluconate counteracts the potassium-­induced increase in
myocardial irritability but does not lower the serum potassium level.
Administration of sodium bicarbonate, insulin, or glucose lowers the
serum potassium level by shifting potassium from the extracellular
to the intracellular compartment. A similar effect has been reported
with the acute administration of β-­adrenergic agonists in adults, but
there are no controlled data in pediatric patients. Because the duration
of action of these emergency measures is just a few hours, persistent
hyperkalemia should be managed by dialysis.
Mild metabolic acidosis is common in AKI because of the retention of hydrogen ions, phosphate, and sulfate, but it rarely requires
treatment. If acidosis is severe (arterial pH <7.15; serum bicarbonate
<8 mEq/L) or contributes to significant hyperkalemia, treatment is
indicated. The acidosis should be corrected partially by the IV route,
generally by giving enough bicarbonate to raise the arterial pH to 7.20
(which approximates a serum bicarbonate level of 12 mEq/L). The
remainder of the correction may be accomplished by oral administration of sodium bicarbonate after normalization of the serum calcium and phosphorus levels. Correction of metabolic acidosis with IV
bicarbonate can precipitate tetany in patients with renal failure because
rapid correction of acidosis reduces the ionized calcium concentration.
Hypocalcemia is primarily treated by lowering the serum phosphorus level. Calcium should not be given IV, except in cases of tetany, to avoid deposition of calcium salts into tissues. Patients should

Table 572.5  Common Complications of Acute Kidney Injury
METABOLIC

CARDIOPULMONARY GASTROINTESTINAL

NEUROLOGIC

HEMATOLOGIC INFECTIOUS OTHER

Hyperkalemia
Metabolic acidosis
Hyponatremia
Hypocalcemia
Hyperphosphatemia
Hypermagnesemia
Hyperuricemia

Pulmonary edema
Arrhythmias
Pericarditis
Pericardial effusion
Hypertension
Myocardial infarction
Pulmonary embolism

Neuromuscular
irritability
Asterixis
Seizures
Mental status
changes

Anemia
Bleeding

Nausea
Vomiting
Malnutrition
Hemorrhage

Pneumonia
Septicemia
Urinary tract
infection

Hiccups
Elevated
parathyroid
hormone level
Low total
triiodothyronine
and thyroxine
levels
Normal thyroxine
level

From Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM. Acute kidney injury. In: Yu AS, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, et al, eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 29.6.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3246 Part XXI u Nephrology
be instructed to follow a low-­phosphorus diet, and phosphate binders should be orally administered to bind any ingested phosphate
and increase the GI phosphate excretion. Common agents include
sevelamer (Renagel), calcium carbonate (Tums tablets or Titralac suspension), and calcium acetate (PhosLo). Aluminum-­based binders,
commonly employed in the past, should be avoided because of the risk
of aluminum toxicity.
Hyponatremia is most commonly a dilutional disturbance that must
be corrected by fluid restriction rather than sodium chloride administration. Administration of hypertonic (3%) saline should be limited to
patients with symptomatic hyponatremia (seizures, lethargy) or those
with a serum sodium level <120 mEq/L. Acute correction of the serum
sodium to 125 mEq/L (mmol/L) should be accomplished using the following formula:
mEq sodium required

0.6  weight in kg  125  serum sodium in mEq/L  .

AKI patients are predisposed to GI bleeding because of uremic platelet dysfunction, increased stress, and heparin exposure if treated with
hemodialysis (HD) or continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT).
Oral or IV H2 blockers such as ranitidine are commonly administered
to prevent this complication.
Hypertension can result from hyperreninemia associated with the
primary disease process and/or expansion of the extracellular fluid volume and is most common in AKI patients with acute glomerulonephritis
or HUS. Salt and water restriction is critical, and diuretic administration
may be useful (see Chapter 494). Isradipine (0.05-­0.15 mg/kg/dose, maximum dose 5 mg 4 times per day) may be administered for a relatively
rapid reduction in blood pressure (BP). Longer-­acting oral agents such
as calcium channel blockers (amlodipine, 0.1-­0.6 mg/kg/24 hr daily or
divided twice daily) or β blockers (labetalol, 4-­40 mg/kg/24 hr divided 2
or 3 times daily) may be helpful in maintaining control of the BP. Children with severe symptomatic hypertension (hypertensive urgency or
emergency) should be treated with continuous infusions of nicardipine
(0.5-­5.0 μg/kg/min), sodium nitroprusside (0.5-­10.0 μg/kg/min), labetalol (0.25-­3.0 mg/kg/hr), or esmolol (150-­300 μg/kg/min) and converted
to intermittently dosed antihypertensives when more stable.
Neurologic symptoms in AKI can include headache, seizures, lethargy, and confusion (encephalopathy). Potential etiologic factors include
hypertensive encephalopathy, hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, cerebral
hemorrhage, cerebral vasculitis, and the uremic state. Benzodiazepines
are the most effective agents in acutely controlling seizures, and subsequent therapy should be directed toward the precipitating cause.
The anemia of AKI is generally mild (hemoglobin 9-­10 g/dL) and
primarily results from volume expansion (hemodilution). Children
with HUS, SLE, active bleeding, or prolonged AKI can require transfusion of packed red blood cells if their hemoglobin level falls below 7
g/dL. In hypervolemic patients, blood transfusion carries the risk of
further volume expansion, which can precipitate hypertension, heart
failure, and pulmonary edema. Slow (4-­to 6-­hour) transfusion with
packed red blood cells (10 mL/kg) diminishes the risk of hypervolemia. The use of fresh, washed red blood cells minimizes the acute
risk of hyperkalemia, and the chronic risk of sensitization if the patient
becomes a future candidate for renal replacement therapy. In the presence of severe hypervolemia or hyperkalemia, blood transfusions are
most safely administered during dialysis or ultrafiltration.
Nutrition is of critical importance in children who develop AKI. In
most cases, sodium, potassium, and phosphorus should be restricted.
Protein intake should be moderately restricted while maximizing the
caloric intake to minimize the accumulation of nitrogenous wastes.
In critically ill patients with AKI, parenteral hyperalimentation with
essential amino acids should be considered.

Dialysis

Indications for dialysis in AKI include the following:
Anuria/oliguria with fluid overload
Volume overload with evidence of hypertension and/or pulmonary
edema refractory to diuretic therapy

Persistent hyperkalemia
Severe metabolic acidosis unresponsive to medical management
Uremia (encephalopathy, pericarditis, neuropathy)
Calcium:phosphorus imbalance, with hypocalcemic tetany that cannot be controlled by other measures
An additional important practical indication for dialysis is the
inability to provide adequate nutritional intake because of the need
for severe fluid restriction. In patients with AKI, dialysis support may
be necessary for days or for up to 12 weeks. Many patients with AKI
require dialysis support for 1-­3 weeks. Table 572.6 lists the advantages
and disadvantages of the three types of dialysis.
Intermittent HD is useful in patients with a relatively stable hemodynamic status. This highly efficient process accomplishes both fluid
and electrolyte removal in sessions of 3-­4 hours using a pump-­driven
extracorporeal circuit and large central venous catheter. Intermittent
HD may be performed 3-­7 times per week based on the patient’s fluid
and electrolyte balance.
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is most employed in neonates and infants
with AKI, although this modality may be used in children and adolescents of all ages. Hyperosmolar dialysate is infused into the peritoneal
cavity via a surgically or percutaneously placed PD catheter. The fluid is
allowed to dwell for 45-­60 minutes and is then drained from the patient
by gravity (manually or with the use of machine-­driven cycling),
accomplishing fluid and electrolyte removal. Cycles are repeated for
8-­24 hours per day based on the patient’s fluid and electrolyte balance.
Anticoagulation is not necessary. PD is contraindicated in patients
with significant abdominal pathology.
Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) is useful in patients
with an unstable hemodynamic status, increased intracranial pressure,
cerebral edema, concomitant sepsis, or multiorgan failure (including
Table 572.6  Comparison of Peritoneal Dialysis,
Intermittent Hemodialysis, and Continual
Renal Replacement Therapy
PD

IHD

CRRT

+

++

++

Urea and creatinine clearance

+

++

+

Potassium clearance

++

++

+

Toxin clearance

+

++

+

COMPLICATIONS
Abdominal pain

+

−

−

Bleeding

−

+

+

Dysequilibrium

−

+

−

Electrolyte imbalance

+

+

+

Need for heparinization

−

+

+/−

Hyperglycemia

+

−

−

Hypotension

+

++

+

Hypothermia

−

−

+

Central line infection

−

+

+

Inguinal or abdominal hernia

+

−

−

Peritonitis

+

−

−

Protein loss

+

−

−

Respiratory compromise

+

−

−

Vessel thrombosis

−

+

+

BENEFITS
Fluid removal

PD, Peritoneal dialysis; IHD, intermittent hemodialysis; CRRT, continual renal
replacement therapy.
Adapted from Rogers MC. Textbook of Pediatric Intensive Care. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins; 1992.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 572 u Renal Failure
hepatic failure) in the intensive care setting. CRRT is an extracorporeal
therapy in which fluid, electrolytes, and small-­and medium-­size solutes
are continuously removed from the blood (24 hours/day) using a specialized pump-­driven machine. Usually, a double-­lumen catheter is placed
into the internal jugular or femoral vein. The patient is then connected
to the pump-­driven CRRT circuit, which continuously passes the patient’s
blood across a highly permeable filter.
CRRT may be performed in three basic fashions. In continuous
venovenous hemofiltration, a large volume of fluid is driven by systemic or pump-­assisted pressure across the filter, bringing with it by
convection other molecules, such as urea, creatinine, phosphorus, and
uric acid. The blood volume is reconstituted by an IV infusion of a
replacement fluid having a desirable electrolyte composition similar to
that of blood. Continuous venovenous HD uses the principle of diffusion by circulating dialysate in a countercurrent direction on the
ultrafiltrate side of the membrane. No replacement fluid is used. Continuous hemodiafiltration employs both replacement fluid and dialysate, offering the most effective solute removal of all forms of CRRT.
Table 572.6 compares the relative risks and benefits of the various
renal replacement therapies. CRRT has similar outcomes for recovery
of renal function when compared with intermittent HD.

PROGNOSIS

The mortality rate in children with AKI is variable and depends entirely
on the nature of the underlying disease process rather than on the renal
failure itself. Children with AKI caused by a kidney-­limited condition
such as postinfectious glomerulonephritis have a very low mortality
rate (<1%); those with AKI related to multiorgan failure have a very
high mortality rate (>50%).
The prognosis for recovery of kidney function depends on the disorder that precipitated AKI. Recovery is likely after AKI resulting
from prerenal causes, ATN, acute interstitial nephritis, or tumor lysis
syndrome. Complete recovery of renal function is unusual when AKI
results from most types of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis,
bilateral renal vein thrombosis, or bilateral cortical necrosis. Medical management may be necessary for a prolonged period to treat the
sequelae of AKI, including chronic renal insufficiency, hypertension,
renal tubular acidosis, and urinary concentrating defect.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

572.2 Chronic Kidney Disease
Donna J. Claes
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is determined by the presence of kidney
damage and level (or severity) of kidney function (GFR; Tables 572.7 and
572.8). End-­stage kidney disease (ESKD) is an administrative term in
the United States; it is used to define patients who are treated with dialysis or kidney transplantation and is a subset of patients with stage 5 CKD.

Table 572.8  Standardized Terminology for Stages of
Chronic Kidney Disease (NKF KDOQI
Guidelines)
GFR (ML/MIN/1.73 M2)

STAGE

DESCRIPTION

1

Kidney damage with normal
or increased GFR

≥90

2

Kidney damage with mild
decrease in GFR

60-­89

3

Moderate decrease in GFR

30-­59

4

Severe decrease in GFR

5

Kidney failure

15-­29
<15 or on dialysis

GFR, Glomerular filtration rate; NKF KDOQI, National Kidney Foundation Kidney
Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative.

Distribution of primary cause of ESRD in children with incident ESRD,
by age, 2015–2018
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
<1

1–5
Primary GN

6–12
Secondary GN

Cystic/hereditary/congenital

Patient has chronic kidney disease (CKD) if either of the following
criteria are present:
1.	Kidney damage for ≥3 mo, as defined by structural or functional
abnormalities of the kidney, with or without decreased GFR,
manifested by one or more of the following features:
• Abnormalities in the composition of the blood or urine
• Abnormalities in imaging tests
• Abnormalities on kidney biopsy
2.	GFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 for ≥3 mo, with or without the other
signs of kidney damage described previously
GFR, Glomerular filtration rate; NKF KDOQI, National Kidney Foundation Kidney
Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative.

12–17
CAKUT
Other causes

Fig. 572.2 Distribution of primary cause of end-­
stage renal dis-

ease (ESRD), by age, in incident pediatric dialysis patients reported
to United States Renal Data System (USRDS) in 2016–2020. CAKUT,
Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract; GN, glomerulonephritis. (Adapted from the United States Renal Data System. 2022
USRDS Annual Data Report: Epidemiology of kidney disease in the
United States. National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 2022. Fig. 8.4.
https://usrds-­adr.niddk.nih.gov/2022/end-­stage-­renal-­disease/8-­esrd-­
among-­children-­and-­adolescents)

Pediatric CKD prevalence is approximately 18 per 1 million children. The prognosis for the infant, child, or adolescent with CKD
has improved secondary to improved medical management, dialysis
techniques, and kidney transplantation. Childhood-­onset ESKD still
carries significant morbidity and a 30-­fold increased mortality rate as
compared with healthy peers.

ETIOLOGY
Table 572.7  Criteria for Definition of Chronic Kidney
Disease (NKF KDOQI Guidelines)

3247

The etiology of pediatric CKD may be the result of congenital,
acquired, inherited, or metabolic renal disease; however, the common etiology is having a reduction in nephron mass (Fig. 572.2).
Causes of kidney disease in children are typically subdivided as
being non-­glomerular vs glomerular in origin (Table 572.9). The
underlying cause correlates with the age at the time of diagnosis.
Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT;
i.e., renal hypoplasia, dysplasia, obstructive uropathy) are predominantly diagnosed in children less than 5 years of age; in many cases,
CAKUT is diagnosed with prenatal ultrasonography. Cystic kidney disease (due to single gene pathogenic variants associated with
cilia function, or ciliopathies) can be diagnosed prenatally, during
childhood, or as a young adult depending on the underlying genetic
variant and disease phenotype. After 5 years of age, acquired or
inherited forms of glomerulonephritis predominate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3248 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 572.9  Etiologies of Pediatric Chronic Kidney
Disease
NONGLOMERULAR

GLOMERULAR

Aplastic, hypoplastic, and
dysplastic kidneys
Cystinosis
Medullary cystic kidney disease/
juvenile nephronophthisis
Obstructive uropathy (e.g., PUV,
cloaca, neurogenic bladder)
Oxalosis
Autosomal dominant and
autosomal recessive
polycystic kidney disease
(ADPKD, ARPDK)
Pyelonephritis/interstitial
nephritis/reflux nephropathy
Renal infarct
Syndrome of agenesis of
abdominal musculature
(Eagle-­Barrett syndrome)
Wilms tumor

Chronic glomerulonephritis
(including focal segmental
glomerulonephritis [FSGS])
Congenital nephrotic syndrome
(CNS)
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)
Idiopathic crescentic
glomerulonephritis
IgA nephritis
IgA nephropathy (IGAN)
Membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis (MPGN)
Membranous nephropathy
Sickle cell nephropathy
Systemic immunologic disease
(e.g., SLE, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis)
Hereditary nephritis (Alport
syndrome)

PUV, Posterior urethral valve; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.

PATHOGENESIS

In addition to progressive injury with ongoing structural or metabolic
genetic diseases, renal injury can progress despite removal of the original
insult.
Hyperfiltration injury may be an important final common pathway of glomerular destruction, independent of the underlying cause
of renal injury. As nephrons are lost, the remaining nephrons undergo
structural and functional hypertrophy characterized by an increase
in glomerular blood flow. The driving force for glomerular filtration
is thereby increased in the surviving nephrons. Although this compensatory hyperfiltration temporarily preserves total renal function,
it can cause progressive damage to the surviving glomeruli, possibly
by a direct effect of the elevated hydrostatic pressure on the integrity
of the capillary wall and/or the toxic effect of increased protein traffic
across the capillary wall. Over time, the remaining nephrons suffer an
increased excretory burden, resulting in a vicious cycle of increasing
glomerular blood flow and hyperfiltration injury.
Other pathologic etiologies of CKD include proteinuria, hypertension, hyperphosphatemia, and hyperlipidemia. Proteinuria, secondary to either damage to the glomerular capillary wall and/or decreased
tubular reabsorption, contributes to renal functional decline. Proteinuria can exert a direct toxic effect on tubular cells and initiate many
inflammatory and pro-­fibrotic cellular pathways that recruit monocytes and macrophages, enhancing the process of glomerular sclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Podocyte injury can also result from
proteinuria, although the mechanism is less understood. Uncontrolled
hypertension can exacerbate disease progression by causing arteriolar
nephrosclerosis and by increasing the hyperfiltration injury. Hyperphosphatemia can increase progression of disease by leading to calcium phosphate deposition in the renal interstitium and blood vessels.
Hyperlipidemia, a common condition in CKD patients, can adversely
affect glomerular function through oxidant-­mediated injury.
CKD is viewed as a continuum of disease, with increasing biochemical and clinical manifestations as renal function deteriorates
(Fig. 572.3). Regardless of etiology, the progression of tubulointerstitial fibrosis is the primary determinant of CKD progression.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Table 572.10 outlines the pathophysiologic manifestations of CKD. The
clinical presentation of CKD is varied and depends on the underlying etiology and CKD stage (Fig. 572.4). CAKUT and some genetic forms of renal
disease (i.e., familial nephronophthisis) demonstrate growth failure, vomiting, and polyuria with associated polydipsia. Patients with cystic kidney

disease due to a ciliopathy can have a wide range of extrarenal anomalies
of the kidneys, liver, pancreas, skeletal system, eyes, central nervous system, and/or cardiac system that can assist with disease diagnosis. Urinary
tract infection can also be common in those with urologic abnormalities. Glomerular forms of CKD often present with edema, hypertension,
hematuria, and proteinuria; in severe forms of glomerulonephritis, malnutrition can be seen. As renal deterioration advances in severity, patients
can develop uremic symptoms (i.e., worsening fatigue, weakness, nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, and poor sleep patterns) and edema, hypertension,
and other findings of fluid overload, regardless of CKD etiology.
Physical examination in CKD should focus on overall growth and
development, with special attention and/or evaluation of BP, as well
as the skin (pallor) and the extremities (edema; bony abnormalities of
rickets seen in untreated renal osteodystrophy).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory findings can include elevations in BUN and serum creatinine in addition to hyperkalemia, hyponatremia (secondary to either
renal salt wasting vs volume overload), hypernatremia (loss of free
water), acidosis, hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and an elevation
in uric acid. Patients with heavy proteinuria can have hypoalbuminemia. A complete blood cell count may show a normochromic, normocytic anemia. Dyslipidemia is commonly seen. In children with
glomerulonephritis, the urinalysis (UA) shows hematuria and proteinuria, whereas, in children with congenital lesions such as renal
dysplasia, the UA often has a low specific gravity with minimal other
abnormalities.
Renal function can be measured or estimated by GFR. Inulin clearance is the gold standard to measure GFR, but it is no longer readily
available. Other methods to measure GFR in clinical practice include
using iohexol or various radioisotopes (99mTc-­DTPA, 51Cr-­EDTA, or
125Iothalamate). However, estimating GFR by endogenous markers
(such as creatinine and/or cystatin C) is the most utilized method to
understand severity of renal disease. A “bedside” creatinine-­based estimating equation [estimated GFR (mL/min/1.73 m2) = 0.413 × height
(cm)/serum creatinine (mg/dL)] has been validated in a pediatric CKD
population of children age 1-­16 years whose GFR was between 15 and
90 mL/min/1.73 m2; however, this formula has less accuracy in the very
young (<5 years of age) and young adults (18-­25 years of age). Newer
estimation formulas (“Chronic Kidney Disease in Children [CKID]
study under 25,” or U25) have been developed that allow for age-­and
gender-­based corrections of creatinine and cystatin C with improved
accuracy of GFR estimation. Although these newer formulas are more
complex in regard to the mathematical corrections of age and gender
for both creatinine and cystatin C, they are accessible by an online calculator, which allows for ease in their clinical use.

TREATMENT/MANAGEMENT

CKD treatment is supportive, with an aim to screen for and treat various
metabolic complications of CKD in hopes of improving quality of life
and potentially slowing the progression of renal dysfunction. Children
with CKD should be treated at a pediatric center capable of supplying
multidisciplinary services, including medical, nursing, social service,
nutritional, and psychologic support.
CKD management requires close monitoring of blood studies, urine
studies (including quantitative measurement for proteinuria using
either a spot urine protein/urine creatinine ratio or 24-hour urine
collection), and overall clinical symptomatology. Ambulatory blood
pressure monitoring (ABPM) over 24 hours, the gold standard of BP
evaluation, is recommended in patients with renal disease to diagnose and treat hypertension, especially masked hypertension. Masked
hypertension (defined as a normal office BP but abnormal ABPM) is
seen in up to 35% of pediatric predialysis CKD patients and carries a
fourfold increased risk of having left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH).

Nutrition

Nutritional management by a dietician experienced in pediatric renal
patients is recommended by the National Kidney Foundation Kidney
Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (NKF KDOQI). Patients should

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Supportive care

Chapter 572 u Renal Failure

3249

Symptom management
Palliative care
Stop, reduce
frequency, or do
not start dialysis
Kidney-preserving care
Slow progression, prevent or delay dialysis, improve cardiovascular risk

Conventional care

Diet and lifestyle
• Plant-dominant, lowprotein diet
• Low salt intake
• Physical activity
• Weight loss
• Smoking cessation

Pharmacotherapy
For disease progression
• RAAS blockers
• SGLT2 inhibitors
• MR antagonists
• Disease-speciﬁc
drugs

For cardiovascular risk
management
• BP-lowering drugs
• Glucose-lowering drugs
• Lipid-lowering drugs
• Diuretics

For other comorbidities
• Acidosis management
• Potassium binders
• Anemia management
• Bone health
maintenance

Preservation of
residual renal
function

Infection control and acute kidney injury prevention
Incremental
transition to dialysis

Estimated GFR 90

60

Hyperﬁltration

Albuminuria

45

30

25

Declining GFR

15
↑Uremia

Renal replacement therapy:
dialysis or transplantation

10

5

mL/min per 1.73 m2

Loss of residual kidney function

Fig. 572.3 Conservative and preservative management of chronic kidney disease without dialysis or renal transplantation. This chart highlights the

role of preservative management and its goals (green domain) within the overall conservative management of chronic kidney disease without dialysis
(blue zone), juxtaposing renal replacement therapy including dialysis and kidney transplantation (yellow zone). The X-­axis (showing chronic kidney
disease progression) should be read exclusively from left to right. The bottom half of the chart represents conventional (life-­prolonging and kidney-­
prolonging) strategies, whereas the top half represents supportive care, including palliative and hospice care, in which dialysis is often avoided or
withdrawn (violet domain). The oblique dotted line between the two main zones (conservative management vs renal replacement therapy) suggests
that there is variability in transitioning to dialysis therapy (moving from bottom left to top right), including timing (early vs late vs never), level of care
(life-­prolonging vs supportive care), and type of dialysis (conventional vs incremental). The symptom management (purple) domain provides wide
ranges of interventions to encompass the goals of care under both kidney-­preserving care and palliative and hospice care. Preservative management
can preserve residual kidney function for longer, especially after incremental transition to dialysis. BP, Blood pressure; GFR, glomerular filtration rate;
MR, mineralocorticoid receptor; RAAS, renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system. (From Kalantar-­Zadeh K, Jafar TH, Nitsch D, et al. Chronic kidney
disease. Lancet. 2021;398:786–798. Fig. 1, p. 787.)

receive 100% of estimated energy requirement for age, individually
adjusted for physical activity level, body mass index, and response
in the rate of weight gain or loss. When oral supplemental nutrition
with increased calories or fluid volume is insufficient, tube feeding (by
nasogastric tubes or gastrostomy tubes) should be considered. Calories
should be balanced between carbohydrate, unsaturated fat in physiologic ranges (per dietary reference intake [DRI]), and protein. Dietary
protein restriction is not suggested for children with CKD because of
the concern about adverse effects on growth and development; in fact,
recommended protein intake is often 100% (or more for those receiving dialysis) of the DRI for ideal weight for children. Children with
CKD stages 2-­5 should receive 100% of DRI of vitamins and trace
elements; water-­soluble vitamin supplements are often required for
patients receiving dialysis.

CKD Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-­MBD)

CKD is characterized by systemic disorders of calcium, phosphorus,
parathyroid hormone (PTH), and vitamin D metabolism that can lead to
bone disorders (renal osteodystrophy) but also vascular and soft tissue
calcification (Fig. 572.5). Efforts have focused on the role of the hormone
fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-­23) and its cofactor, Klotho, in CKD-­
mineral and bone disorder (MBD). Elevated FGF-­23 results in increased
urinary phosphate excretion and suppression of 1-­α-­hydroxylase activity, leading to reduced 1,25-­dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25OH2D) values and increased PTH secretion. Elevated FGF-­23 is the first sign of
altered osteocyte function in pediatric and adult CKD, is seen as early as
CKD stage 2 (GFR 60-­90 mL/min/1.73 m2), and occurs despite normal

calcium, phosphorus, PTH, and 1,25OH2D levels. With continued loss
of renal function, further FGF-­23 elevation results in the development
of secondary hyperparathyroidism (low 1,25OH2D with hypocalcemia,
hyperphosphatemia, and elevated PTH values).
Renal osteodystrophy is characterized by abnormalities in bone
turnover (high vs low), mineralization, and bone volume. High-­
turnover bone disease, or osteitis fibrosa cystica, is the most common condition seen in advanced pediatric CKD, with characteristic
laboratory (hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and elevated alkaline
phosphatase and PTH values) and radiographic (subperiosteal bone
resorption, metaphyseal widening) findings. Clinical manifestations
may include bone pain, fractures with minor trauma, and various
bony abnormalities (rachitic changes, varus and valgus deformities
of the long bones, and slipped capital femoral epiphyses [SCFE]). In
contrast, low-­turnover bone disease (adynamic renal osteodystrophy) is associated with PTH over-­suppression, hypercalcemia, and low
alkaline phosphatase activity; it is more commonly seen in pediatric
dialysis patients receiving treatment for secondary hyperparathyroidism. Defective bone mineralization occurs in states of either high bone
turnover (mixed lesion) or low to normal bone turnover (osteomalacia). In terms of bone volume, most pediatric CKD patients have normal to high bone volume on bone histomorphometry unless they were
exposed to prolonged corticosteroid use.
Vascular calcification in CKD-­MBD typically occurs within the
vascular media, which is in contrast to the atherosclerotic plaques that
form within the vascular intima in patients with traditional cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension, diabetes/obesity, cigarette smoking,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3250 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 572.10  Pathophysiology of Chronic Kidney Disease
MANIFESTATION

MECHANISMS

Accumulation of
nitrogenous waste
products

Decrease in glomerular filtration rate

Acidosis

Decreased ammonia synthesis
Impaired bicarbonate reabsorption
Decreased net acid excretion

Sodium wasting

Solute diuresis
Tubular damage

Urinary concentrating
defect

Solute diuresis
Tubular damage

Hyperkalemia

Decrease in glomerular filtration rate
Metabolic acidosis
Excessive potassium intake
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism

Renal osteodystrophy

Impaired renal production of
1,25-­dihydroxycholecalciferol
(1,25OH2D)
Hyperphosphatemia
Hypocalcemia
Secondary hyperparathyroidism

Growth retardation

Inadequate caloric intake
Renal osteodystrophy
Metabolic acidosis
Anemia
Growth hormone resistance

Anemia

Decreased erythropoietin production
Iron, folate, and/or vitamin B12
deficiency
Decreased erythrocyte survival

Bleeding tendency

Defective platelet function

Infection

Defective granulocyte function
Impaired cellular immune functions
Indwelling dialysis catheters

Decreased academic
achievement, attention
regulation, or executive
functioning

Hypertension
Low birth weight

Gastrointestinal symptoms
(feeding intolerance,
abdominal pain)

Gastroesophageal reflux
Decreased gastrointestinal motility

Hypertension

Volume overload
Excessive renin production

Hyperlipidemia

Decreased plasma lipoprotein lipase
activity
Abnormal HDL-­C

Cardiomyopathy

Hypertension
Anemia
Fluid overload

Glucose intolerance

Tissue insulin resistance

Treatment for CKD-­MBD is guided by clinical assessment of calcium, phosphorus, 25OH vitamin D, and PTH. The goals of treatment are to normalize mineral metabolism with the goal of improving
growth, reducing bone deformities and fragility, and reducing vascular
and other soft tissue calcification. This is typically accomplished with
reduced phosphorus intake, normalization of 25OH vitamin D, and
use of active vitamin D sterols.
CKD patients of all ages should typically follow a low-­phosphorus
diet with the goal to maintain age-­appropriate serum phosphorus
values. Infants should be provided with a low-­phosphorus formula
(Similac PM 60/40). Phosphate binders (given with meals) are used
to enhance GI phosphate excretion, and at present are recommended
to be started at the onset of hyperphosphatemia. Phosphate binders
should be adjusted to maintain normal serum calcium and phosphorus
levels and to ensure that the recommended total daily intake of calcium
is not exceeded. Phosphate binders can be either calcium based (calcium carbonate, calcium acetate) or non–calcium based (sevelamer).
Because aluminum may be absorbed from the GI tract and can lead to
aluminum toxicity (manifested by anemia, various bony abnormalities,
and neurologic abnormalities including seizures), aluminum-­based
binders should be avoided.
Correcting 25OH vitamin D insufficiency can delay the onset of secondary hyperparathyroidism in predialysis CKD patients and improves
bone mineralization. 25OH vitamin D provides a substrate for the formation of 1,25OH2D and has been shown to directly suppress PTH
production at the level of the parathyroid gland. U.S.-­based pediatric
CKD treatment guidelines define 25OH vitamin D sufficiency as a
serum value of ≥30 ng/mL; ergocalciferol or cholecalciferol are typically recommended to treat insufficient 25OH vitamin D.
Active vitamin D sterols have been traditionally indicated when (1)
1,25OH2D levels fall below the established goal range for the child’s particular stage of CKD, (2) PTH levels increase above the established goal
range for CKD stage (after correcting for insufficient 25OH vitamin D),
or (3) patients have elevated PTH levels and hypocalcemia. Vitamin D
sterols increase calcium and phosphorus absorption from the GI tract
and are effective in reducing PTH values. Calcitriol is the most well-­
known and studied active vitamin D sterol; other agents such as paricalcitol and doxercalciferol have less intestinal calcium and phosphorus
reabsorption and are used in CKD patients predisposed to hypercalcemia. The ideal PTH target to initiate and monitor active vitamin D sterol
therapy is debated, particularly in the predialysis CKD population.

Fluid and Electrolyte Management

HDL-­C, High-­density lipoprotein cholesterol.

and dyslipidemia). Vascular calcification in CKD has been associated
with hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and an elevated calcium-­
phosphorus product (Ca × PO4); yet, studies of adult and pediatric
patients with mild to moderate CKD have noted findings of vascular
calcification despite normal serum calcium and phosphorus values. The
cause of vascular calcification in CKD is not completely understood
and is being actively studied. The proposed pathophysiologic etiology
involves the transition of vascular smooth muscle cells to osteoblast-­
like cells in response to trigger(s) that are currently unknown.

Infants and children with renal dysplasia may be polyuric with significant
urinary sodium and free water losses. These children benefit from high-­
volume, low-­caloric-­density feedings with sodium supplementation. Children with high BP or edema benefit from sodium restriction and diuretic
therapy. Fluid restriction is necessary in severe cases of nephrotic syndrome or when renal function worsens to the point of requiring dialysis.
Hyperkalemia can develop with severe deterioration in renal function, as well as in patients with moderate renal insufficiency who have
excessive dietary potassium intake, severe acidosis, or hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronism (related to destruction of the renin-­secreting juxtaglomerular apparatus). Hyperkalemia may be treated by restriction of
dietary potassium intake, administration of oral alkalinizing agents, and/
or use of cation exchange resins. The most commonly utilized cation
exchange resin, SPS (Kayexalate) has many severe adverse drug events,
including but not limited to GI abnormalities (including intestinal necrosis), hypernatremia, hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia, that can limit
its use or result in significant morbidity. Newer cation exchange resins
(such as sodium zirconium cyclosilicate and patiromer) are more selective for potassium ion exchange and have a more favorable side effect
profile compared with SPS. Patiromer is approved for ages ≥12 years
in the United States, and sodium cyclosilicate is currently approved for
adults; pediatric studies are ongoing.
Metabolic acidosis develops as a result of decreased net acid excretion
by the failing kidneys. Either Bicitra (1 mEq sodium citrate/mL) or sodium
bicarbonate tablets (650 mg = 7.7 mEq of sodium and 7.7 mEq of bicarbonate) may be used to maintain the serum bicarbonate level ≥22 mEq/L.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 572 u Renal Failure
Cognitive changes
• CKD increases risk of cognitive impairment by 65%
• cognition is affected early in CKD, but different skills
decline at different rates
• language and attention may be particularly affected

Appearance
• pallor secondary to anemia of CKD
Hypertension
• common in CKD as either
primary or secondary effect

Gastrointestinal symptoms
• anorexia, vomiting, and taste disturbance may occur
with advanced CKD. Their cause is incompletely
understood and may have a genetic component.
• uremic odor may occur in advanced CKD, caused
by breakdown of urea by saliva

Shortness of breath
• may be due to any of
the following: ﬂuid overload,
anemia cardiomyopathy, or
occult ischemic heart disease

Change in urine output
• polyuria where tubular concentrating ability is
impaired
• oliguria
• nocturia as a consequence of impaired solute
diuresis or edema
• persistently frothy urine may indicate
proteinuria

Kidneys
• kidney shape on imaging
may give clues to cause
of CKD
• bilaterally small
kidneys with thinned
cortices suggest
intrinsic disease
(eg, glomerulonephritis)
• unilateral small kidney may
indicate renal arterial disease
• clubbed calyces and cortical scars
suggest reﬂux with chronic infection
or ischemia
• enlarged cystic kidneys suggest cystic
kidney disease

Hematuria
• glomerular bleeding results from immune injury to the
glomerular capillary wall. Differentiated from lower tract
bleeding by microscopy showing dysmorphic red cells
and casts
Proteinuria
• tubular damage results in low grade proteinuria typically
<2 g, of low molecular weight proteins (eg, beta-2
microglobulin)
• glomerular damage results in loss of selectivity to protein
ﬁltration often exacerbated by hyperﬁltration. Losses
>3·5 g is regarded as nephrotic range

Itch and cramps
• common in advanced CKD
• cause of itch is incompletely understood
but may involve deregulation of immune
response and opioid systems
• cramps are typically worse at night and
are likely to be due to neuronal irritation
caused by biochemical abnormalities of CKD

+

Peripheral edema
• due to renal sodium retention
• exacerbated by reduced oncotic gradient in nephrotic
syndrome because of hypoalbuminemia

Serum calcium

–

+

Bone
resorption
Osteoclast activity

Increased
serum phosphate

+
Parathyroid hyperplasia
Osteoblast activity

+

+

Impaired
phosphate
excretion

Inadequate
hydroxylation
of vitamin D

+

+
Increased parathyroid hormone
production initially in
response to hypocalcemia
and hyperphosphatemia

–

+

Absorption of calcium

Fig, 572.5 Pathophysiology of CKD mineral bone disease. (From
Webster AC, Navler EV, Morton RL, et al. Chronic kidney disease. Lancet. 2017;389:1238–1252. Fig. 4.)

Linear Growth

3251

Short stature is a significant long-­term sequela of childhood CKD. CKD
results in an apparent growth hormone–resistant state, with elevated
growth hormone levels but decreased insulin-­like growth factor-­1 levels and abnormalities of insulin-­like growth factor–binding proteins.

Fig. 572.4 Symptoms and signs of CKD. (From Webster AC, Navler EV, Morton RL, et al. Chronic kidney disease. Lancet. 2017;389:1238–1252. Fig. 2.)

Children with CKD who remain less than −2 SD for height and/or have
a growth velocity of <25% over a minimum of 6 months despite optimal
medical support (adequate caloric intake and effective treatment of renal
osteodystrophy, anemia, and metabolic acidosis) may benefit from treatment with recombinant human growth hormone (rHuGH). rHuGH is
given by daily, subcutaneous injections and continues until the patient
reaches the 50th percentile for mid-­parental height, achieves a final adult
height, or undergoes kidney transplantation (with the caveat that rHuGH
can be restarted 1 year after kidney transplantation if there are concerns for
ongoing short stature despite kidney transplantation). Long-­term rHuGH
treatment significantly improves final adult height and induces persistent
catch-­up growth; some patients are able to achieve normal adult height.

Anemia

Anemia in patients with CKD is primarily the result of inadequate erythropoietin production by the peritubular interstitial cells of the kidneys and
typically manifests when renal function falls below 40 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Other contributory factors for anemia in CKD include iron, folic acid, and/
or vitamin B12 deficiency, and decreased erythrocyte survival secondary
to uremia.
Anemia in pediatric CKD patients is defined when the hemoglobin falls to <5% for age and gender; alternatively, anemia can also be
defined when the hemoglobin falls to <11g/dL (ages 0.5-­5 years of age),
<11.5 g/dL (5-­12 years of age), <12 g/dL (females >12 years of age,
males 12-­15 years of age), and <13 g/dL (males >15 years of age). Once
anemia is diagnosed, the recommendation is to investigate for deficiencies in iron and/or other vitamins (i.e., vitamin B12, folate). Iron supplementation (oral or IV) is recommended for patients who demonstrate
a transferrin saturation (TSAT) ≤20% and ferritin ≤100 ng/mL.
Erythropoiesis-­
stimulating agents (ESAs) have decreased the
need for transfusions in CKD patients, especially those receiving HD.
Erythropoietin and darbepoetin alfa are commonly prescribed ESAs.
All patients receiving ESA therapy should be provided with either oral
or IV iron supplementation. Patients who appear to be resistant to ESA
should be evaluated for iron deficiency, occult blood loss, a chronic
infection or inflammatory state, vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, or
bone marrow fibrosis related to secondary hyperparathyroidism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3252 Part XXI u Nephrology
Emerging therapies for anemia of CKD are being directed toward the
hypoxia-­inducible signaling factor (HIF) pathway. HIF stabilizers prevent
degradation of the HIF alpha subunit and allow for erythropoietin production. These agents are currently being studied for clinical use in adult CKD
patients.

Hypertension and Proteinuria

Hypertension in pediatric CKD can be secondary to volume overload
and/or excessive renin production due to glomerular disease. Both
hypertension and proteinuria have been independently associated with
more rapid CKD progression in various pediatric CKD observational
studies. The ESCAPE trial demonstrated that more aggressive BP control delays CKD progression. In this study, participants with 24-­hour
mean arterial pressure (MAP) <50th percentile for age and sex by
ABPM had a 35% lower risk of reaching the composite outcome (doubling of serum creatinine, estimated GFR (eGFR) of <10 mL/min/1.73
m2, or need for dialysis or kidney transplant) compared with those randomized to a conventional BP target (MAP of 50–95% by ABPM); this
effect was more notable in those with significant proteinuria.
Therapy for hypertension involves both dietary interventions and often
pharmacologic agents. Dietary sodium restriction (<2 g of sodium/24
hr) and lifestyle modifications that promote achieving a healthy weight
are both important aspects of achieving good BP control. Treatment
guidelines recommend initiating pharmacologic antihypertensive therapy when systolic or diastolic BPs are >90% for age, gender, and height.
Once therapy is started, it is recommended to titrate medications to
achieve a systolic and diastolic BP <50% for age, gender, and height,
especially in those patients with proteinuria. ACE inhibitors (such as
enalapril, lisinopril) and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs; such
as losartan) are the antihypertensive medications of choice in all children
with pediatric CKD, irrespective of the level of proteinuric renal disease,
because of their potential ability to slow CKD and their superiority in
controlling BP as noted in various observational and research studies.
It is important to closely monitor renal function and electrolyte balance
while using ACE inhibitors or ARBs, particularly in those with advanced
CKD. Thiazide (hydrochlorothiazide, chlorothiazide, metolazone, and
chlorthalidone) or loop diuretics (furosemide) can be helpful to control hypertension related to salt and fluid retention. Historical guidelines
recommend the cessation of thiazide diuretics when a patient’s eGFR
falls below 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 due to concerns of decreased efficacy;
however, many adult studies support continued thiazide use either alone
or in conjunction with loop diuretics for BP control in advanced (non-­
ESKD) CKD. Calcium channel blockers (amlodipine), β blockers (propranolol, atenolol), and centrally acting agents (clonidine) may be useful
as adjunctive agents in children with CKD whose BP cannot be controlled using dietary sodium restriction, ACE inhibitors, and diuretics.

Immunizations

Children with CKD should receive all standard immunizations according to the schedule used for healthy children, with an exception to withhold live virus vaccines (such as measles, mumps, rubella, varicella) from
those receiving immunosuppressive medications (i.e., kidney transplant
recipients, and in some patients with glomerulonephritis). It is critical
to make every attempt to administer live virus vaccines before kidney
transplantation. All children with CKD should receive a yearly influenza
vaccine; children with CKD are also eligible for pneumococcal vaccination with PPSV-­23. Data from a number of studies suggest that children
with CKD might respond suboptimally to immunizations.

Adjustment in Drug Dose

Drugs excreted by the kidneys may need to be dose adjusted in CKD
patients to maximize effectiveness and minimize the risk of toxicity.
Strategies in dosage adjustment include lengthening of the interval
between doses, decreasing the absolute dose, or both.

Progression of Disease

The timing of CKD progression from minimal renal injury to onset of
ESKD is variable. The median loss of GFR in children enrolled in the
CKID study is 1.5 (non-­glomerular CKD etiology) vs 4.3 (glomerular

CKD etiology) mL/min/1.73 m2/year. Nonmodifiable risk factors associated with more rapid CKD progression include older age, glomerular
etiology of renal disease, CKD severity, and onset of puberty. In terms
of potential modifiable risk factors, in addition to elevated BP, persistent
nephrotic range proteinuria, anemia, dyslipidemia, and no ACE inhibitor/
ARB use were important predictors of CKD progression.
In addition to addressing and treating the risk factors as noted previously, prompt treatment of infectious complications (especially urinary tract infection [UTI]) and episodes of dehydration can minimize
additional loss of renal parenchyma. Other potentially beneficial recommendations include tobacco avoidance; prevention of obesity; and
avoidance of potential nephrotoxic medications, which includes over-­
the-­counter medications (such as nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medicines), pharmacologic agents, various illegal street drugs, and herbal
and/or homeopathic medications or supplements.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

572.3 End-­Stage Kidney Disease
Donna J. Claes
Kidney failure, also termed end-stage kidney disease (ESKD), represents the state in which a patient’s kidney dysfunction has progressed to
the point at which homeostasis and survival can no longer be sustained
despite maximal medical management. At this point, kidney replacement therapy (KRT; which is either dialysis or kidney transplantation)
becomes necessary. The ultimate goal for children with ESKD is successful kidney transplantation (see Chapter 573) because it provides
the most normal lifestyle and improved mortality and morbidity.
In the United States, 75% of children with ESKD require dialysis
before transplantation. It is recommended discussions and plans for
eventual KRT be initiated when a child reaches stage 4 CKD (GFR
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2). Indications for initiating maintenance dialysis
include diuretic-­resistant fluid overload, severe fluid restrictions that
inhibit the ability to provide appropriate nutrition sufficient for linear
growth, uncontrolled electrolyte abnormalities (hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, metabolic acidosis), and subjective findings of uremia
(fatigue, weakness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and poor sleep patterns), especially if these symptoms are negatively affecting academic
performance. Although dialysis initiation should be considered as the
GFR approaches 10-­15 mL/min/1.73m2, multiple adult and pediatric
studies have indicated increased risk of mortality in those who start
dialysis with a higher GFR compared to a lower GFR. Thus it is recommended to maximize medical management of CKD for as long
as possible until concerns of severe fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, malnutrition, and uremic symptoms make medical management
unsafe and/or impossible. Dialysis modality selection must be individualized to fit the needs of each child.
In the United States, peritoneal dialysis (PD) is still the most utilized
dialysis modality (55.7%) compared to hemodialysis (44.3%); however,
there is a temporal trend toward greater use of hemodialysis (HD) as
the initial maintenance dialysis therapy. Age is a defining factor in
dialysis modality selection: 85% of infants and children from birth to 5
years of age initiate maintenance dialysis treatment using PD, whereas
50% of children ≥13 years of age initiate maintenance dialysis treatment with HD.
Peritoneal dialysis utilizes the patient’s peritoneal membrane
to transport fluid and solutes. Excess body water is removed by an
osmotic gradient created by the relatively high dextrose concentration
in the dialysis fluid; wastes are removed by diffusion from the peritoneal capillaries into the dialysis fluid. Access to the peritoneal cavity
is achieved by a surgically inserted tunneled catheter. PD may be provided either as continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) or
as an automated therapy using a cycler (APD), which allows exchanges
of peritoneal fluid to be performed automatically during sleep by a
cycler machine. APD is the PD modality of choice in countries without
cost restraints. Cycler-­driven PD therapy allows the child and family an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 573 u Renal Transplantation 3253

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 573

Renal Transplantation
David K. Hooper and Charles D. Varnell Jr.
Kidney transplantation is the optimal therapy for children with end-­
stage kidney disease (ESKD). The life expectancy in children who
receive a kidney transplant has steadily increased and is substantially
better than for those who remain on dialysis (Fig. 573.1). Children
and adolescents with ESKD have special needs that differ from adults,
including the need to achieve normal growth and cognitive development. Successful transplantation leads to accelerated linear growth,
allows for regular school attendance, and often eliminates the need for
dietary restrictions. Improvements in surgical techniques and a reduction in the early complications such as thrombosis have given young
children the best long-­term outcomes of all age-­groups among transplant recipients. Following kidney transplantation, the most commonly
encountered complications include acute or chronic allograft rejection,
an increased risk for infections with both community-­acquired and
opportunistic organisms, and cardiovascular disease (hypertension,
obesity, dyslipidemia). Providers must also be aware of the risks for
malignancy and sequelae of chronic kidney disease (CKD).

INCIDENCE AND ETIOLOGY OF ESKD

The incidence of ESKD in pediatric patients in the United States varies
by age-­group (Table 573.1), with an adjusted incident rate of 11 per million population in 2020. The etiology of ESKD in children also varies

Expected remaining years of life
80
70
Remaining life (Y)

uninterrupted day of activities (including decreased school interruption), a reduction in the number of dialysis catheter connections and
disconnections (which decreases the risk of peritonitis), often less strict
fluid and dietary restrictions, and a reduction in the time required by
patients and parents to perform dialysis, reducing the risk of caregiver
fatigue and burnout. Because PD is not as efficient as HD, it must often
be performed 6-­7 days per week. Contraindications to PD use include
anatomic abnormalities (e.g., significant surgical adhesions, omphalocele, gastroschisis, or bladder exstrophy), peritoneal injury (including
injury secondary to previous severe peritoneal infections), or lack of an
appropriate caregiver who can reliably perform PD in the home.
Hemodialysis, unlike PD, is usually performed in a hospital or outpatient clinic setting; home pediatric HD programs or programs that
provide intensified HD are available but uncommon. Access to the
child’s circulation is achieved by a surgically created arteriovenous fistula (AVF), arteriovenous graft (AVG), or tunneled dual lumen catheter. The internal jugular vein is the preferred catheter site because
indwelling subclavian catheters can cause subclavian stenosis that limits that ability to utilize future AVF and AVG in the ipsilateral arm.
Each HD treatment is typically prescribed to provide appropriate solute clearance and fluid removal. HD has historically been provided 3
times per week; however, more frequent dialysis treatments (up to 4-­5
times per week) are seen in the United States. Intensified HD programs
(such as short daily HD, intermittent nocturnal HD, and daily nocturnal HD) have demonstrated improved control of BP, fluid overload,
phosphorus, anemia, and improved growth. Contraindications to HD
include inadequate vascular access.
Pediatric patients on dialysis have a death rate 30 times higher than
the general pediatric population, with cardiovascular disease and infections as the leading causes of mortality. Dialysis-­associated infections
(peritonitis, HD-­related bloodstream infections) are also the leading
causes of hospitalization in pediatric dialysis patients.

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0–14

15–19
Age group

General population

20–24

Transplant

Dialysis

Fig. 573.1 Expected remaining years of life by end-­stage renal dis-

ease treatment modality. Patients on dialysis or with a kidney transplant
are compared to healthy children by age. (Adapted from United States
Renal Data System. 2020 USRDS annual data report: epidemiology of
kidney disease in the United States. National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 2020.)

Table 573.1  Incident Rates of Reported ESKD in the
United States
AGE RANGE (YEAR)

ADJUSTED INCIDENT RATES PER
MILLION POPULATION

<1

26

1-­5

7

6-­12

8

13-­17

16

Data from United States Renal Data System. 2022 USRDS annual data report:
epidemiology of kidney disease in the United States. National Institutes of Health,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 2022.
Fig. 8.2. https://usrds-­adr.niddk.nih.gov/2022/end-­stage-­renal-­disease/8-­esrd-­among-­
children-­and-­adolescents.

by age (Table 573.2; see Fig. 572.2 in Chapter 572). Cystic or hereditary diseases account for more than 24% of children wait-­listed for a
kidney transplant, whereas congenital anomalies of the kidney and
urinary tract (CAKUT) account for 18% of such children. In 2020,
there were 710 kidney transplants performed in children <18 years of
age in the United States, with 184 performed in children ≤5 years old,
129 in children ages 6-­10 years, and 397 in children ages 11-­17 years.
That same year, of the 6,177 children in the United States with ESKD,
4,577 (74.1%) had a functioning kidney transplant.

INDICATIONS FOR RENAL TRANSPLANTATION

Renal transplantation is generally considered for any child when
chronic renal replacement therapy is indicated. There are few absolute
contraindications for pediatric kidney transplantation, yet relative contraindications arise when the combined risks of the transplant procedure itself and lifelong immunosuppression outweigh the benefits of
improved health, longevity, and/or quality of life. Such relative contraindications include preexisting malignancy, primary or secondary
immunodeficiency, chronic severe infection, inability to receive appropriate posttransplant care, or severe neurologic dysfunction where
improvement in the quality of life and/or longevity is unlikely. In each
scenario, the multidisciplinary team must weigh the risks and benefits
of transplantation while accounting for the values of patients and caregivers. For instance, patients who have remission of malignancy for a
minimum of 1-­2 years may be considered on an individual basis for
kidney transplantation. Similarly, patients with autoimmune diseases
resulting in ESKD (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus) are candidates
for transplantation after a period of immunologic quiescence of the
primary disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3254 Part XXI u Nephrology
Table 573.2  Characteristics of Children with Incident
End-­Stage Kidney Disease, by Primary Cause
of End-­Stage Kidney Disease, 2016–2020
PRIMARY CAUSES OF ESKD

%

All Etiologies

100

Primary Glomerular Disease
Glomerulonephritis (GN) (histologically not examined)
Focal glomerulosclerosis, focal sclerosing
Membranous nephropathy
Membranoproliferative GN (MPGN) type 1, diffuse MPGN
Dense deposit disease, MPGN type 2
IgA nephropathy, Berger’s disease (proven by
immunofluorescence)
With lesion of rapidly progressive GN
Other proliferative GN

21.5
5.4
11.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.5

Secondary Glomerular Disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE nephritis)
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Polyarteritis and other vasculitis
Associated vasculitis

8.3
2.6
1.9
1.5
1.8

CAKUT1
Congenital obstructive uropathies
Renal hypoplasia, dysplasia, oligonephronia
Chronic pyelonephritis, reflux nephropathy

28.1
10.1
15.0
3.0

Cystic/Hereditary/Congenital Diseases
Polycystic kidneys, adult type (dominant)
Polycystic, infantile (recessive)
Medullary cystic disease, including nephronophthisis
Hereditary nephritis, Alport syndrome
Cystinosis
Primary oxalosis
Congenital nephrotic syndrome
Other (congenital malformation syndromes)

11.9
0.5
3.0
1.7
1.2
1.0
0.4
2.0
1.9

Tubulointerstitial Diseases
Chronic interstitial nephritis
Acute interstitial nephritis
Tubular necrosis

4.9
2.3
0.4
2.1

Transplant Complications
Other transplant complication

1.5
1.4

Diabetes

0.6

Neoplasms/Tumors
Renal tumor

0.8
0.7

Hypertensive/Large Vessel Disease
Renal artery stenosis
Renal artery occlusion

1.6
0.3
1.2

Miscellaneous Conditions
Acquired obstructive uropathy
Unspecified with renal failure
Traumatic or surgical loss of kidney(s)
Other renal disorders
Nephropathy caused by other agents

14.0
4.5
2.3
1.1
5.1
0.9

Etiology Uncertain

4.0

Etiology Missing

2.9

0.8
2.5

IgA, Immunoglobulin A; CAKUT, congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.
Modified from the United States Renal Data System. 2022 USRDS Annual Data Report:
Epidemiology of kidney disease in the United States. National Institutes of Health,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 2022.
Table 8.1. https://usrds-­adr.niddk.nih.gov/2022/end-­stage-­renal-­disease/8-­esrd-­among-­
children-­and-­adolescents.

In children, dialysis may be required before transplantation to optimize the nutritional and metabolic conditions, allow for quiescence
of an underlying autoimmune disorder, achieve an appropriate size,
or keep a patient stable until a suitable donor is available. Although

successful transplantation with an adult-­sized kidney has occurred in
children <10 kg and <6 months of age, recipients usually must weigh at
least 8-­10 kg to minimize the risk for vascular thrombosis and accommodate an adult-­size kidney. This may require a period of dialysis support until the child is 12-­18 months of age.
Preemptive transplantation (i.e., transplantation without prior
dialysis) accounts for ∼25% of all pediatric renal transplants. It is the
preferred approach when possible because of a small but incremental
decrease in patient and allograft survival for every year spent on dialysis before transplant. Preemptive renal transplantation can and should
therefore be considered in any child with stage 4 or 5 CKD who is
likely to require dialysis within 6-­12 months and/or has evidence of the
adverse effects of CKD on their health or neurocognitive development.
This requires early referral to a transplant center for evaluation of the
candidate and potential donors. The transplant team must work with
the recipient and caregivers to determine the optimal time for transplantation considering the risks and benefits posed to the recipient.

CHARACTERISTICS OF KIDNEY DONORS AND
RECIPIENTS

Approximately 30–40% of pediatric kidney transplants come from living
donors. Because the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network
(OPTN) gives preference to children waiting for a deceased-­donor renal
transplant, children have a higher rate of transplantation than adults. In
2020, children less than 17 years of age on dialysis were transplanted at a
rate of 43.7 transplants per 100 patient-­years (29.9 deceased donor, 13.8
living donor), whereas adults were transplanted at a rate of 8.3 transplant
per 100 patient-­years. The current allocation policy was implemented to
allocate priority to children based on projected organ survival using the
Kidney Donor Profile Index (KDPI), which computes the projected
allograft survival from 12 important donor characteristics. Under this
system, the top 35% of kidneys (KDPI <35%) are preferentially allocated
to children. Additional factors that determine the allocation include the
time on dialysis or since listing (whichever is longest), a zero human
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­antigen mismatch, calculated panel-­reactive
antibody (cPRA), prior living donor, and 0 or 1 HLA-­DR (HLA–antigen D–related) mismatch. In 2021, a new allocation system was implemented based on a 250-­nautical mile radius rather than allocation based
on local organ procurement organizations, and children were given even
higher priority on the wait-­list. Because of such policies, the time on the
wait-­list for children is shorter than that for adults. Median wait time
is approximately 7-­8 months for children nationally compared with 4-­5
years or more for adults.

EVALUATION AND PREPARING FOR KIDNEY
TRANSPLANTATION

A comprehensive transplant evaluation includes a transplant surgeon,
nephrologist, dietitian, social worker, psychologist, pharmacist, financial counselor, pretransplant nurse coordinator, and anesthesiologist. A
urologist familiar with transplantation is also essential for patients with
lower urinary tract anomalies. Important considerations for the transplant evaluation include considering the primary diagnosis and risk of
recurrence; ensuring an adequate lower urinary tract for drainage of
the transplanted kidney; diagnosing and treating infections; the presence of cardiovascular disease, anemia, and other sequelae of ESKD;
and preparing the patient with immunizations before starting lifelong
immunosuppression.
Understanding the primary renal disease is essential before kidney transplantation. For instance, a number of primary renal diseases
can recur in a transplanted kidney, but this is not a contraindication
to transplantation. Recurrent disease accounts for graft loss in almost
7% of primary transplantations and 10% of repeat transplants. Primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is known to recur
in 30–60% of cases and substantially decreases allograft survival.
Because primary hyperoxaluria is caused by enzymatic defects in
the liver, traditionally kidney transplantation has been accompanied
by liver transplantation to prevent recurrent disease in the kidney
allograft. However, advancements in pharmacotherapy have led to
development of lumasiran, the first medication approved by the U.S.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 573 u Renal Transplantation 3255
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat primary hyperoxaluria.
It is not yet known how these medications will affect progression to
ESKD in children and/or the need for liver transplantation. Primary
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) carries a high
risk of disease recurrence (>50%) and decreased allograft survival.
Attempts to classify MPGN into immune vs complement-­mediated
disease may facilitate research that provides insight into prognosis and
options for prevention and treatment, but data are still limited. Histologic recurrence with mesangial immunoglobulin (Ig) A deposits is
common and occurs in about half of the patients with IgA nephropathy and in approximately 30% of patients with IgA vasculitis (formerly Henoch-­Schönlein purpura), yet it may not necessarily lead to
premature allograft failure. Congenital nephrotic syndrome rarely
recurs after transplantation, although patients can develop antinephrin antibodies and present with nephrotic syndrome. Membranous
nephropathy occurs very rarely in children. The recurrence rate after
kidney transplantation for patients who have been treated for Wilms
tumor is approximately 13%. Although Alport syndrome does not
recur following transplantation, approximately 3–4% of patients with
Alport syndrome can develop de novo anti–glomerular basement
membrane (anti-­GBM) glomerulonephritis that may lead to graft
loss. Certain forms of complement-­mediated thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) (commonly referred to as atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome) caused by inherited defects in complement regulation
can recur posttransplant with devastating consequences for the new
allograft. These conditions must be evaluated with genetic testing and
analysis of the complement system before transplant so appropriate
monitoring and therapy with complement inhibition can be applied to
prevent recurrent disease.
Due to the high risk of developing Wilms tumor, patients with
Denys-­Drash syndrome should undergo bilateral nephrectomy
before transplantation. Other indications for unilateral or bilateral
native nephrectomies include hyposthenuria with polyuria, significant proteinuria leading to coagulopathy, recurrent infection of the
native kidneys, and severe hypertension resistant to medical management. Nephrectomies are also indicated in cases such as polycystic kidney disease, where the native kidneys may become so large
that they cause feeding intolerability in infants or prevent space for
a transplanted kidney. Finally, it is important to perform bilateral
native nephrectomy or ureteral ligation in patients with primary
FSGS who produce significant amounts of urine protein to allow for
surveillance of proteinuria and early identification and treatment of
recurrent FSGS.
Urologic problems, such as vesicoureteral reflux, posterior urethral
valves, and/or abnormal bladders as seen in Eagle-­Barrett syndrome,
should be addressed before surgery. Malformations and voiding abnormalities (e.g., neurogenic bladder, bladder dyssynergia, remnant posterior urethral valves, and urethral strictures) should be identified and
repaired if possible. Children with urologic disease and renal dysplasia
often require multiple operations to optimize the urinary tract anatomy and function. Such procedures include ureteric reimplantation to
correct vesicoureteral reflux, bladder augmentation or reconstruction,
urinary diversion (vesicostomy, ureterostomy, ileal conduit, continent
appendicovesicostomy), and excision of ureteroceles. Good outcomes
have been achieved in posterior urethral valve bladders by following a
staged procedure of initial valve resection and bladder rehabilitation by
a process of regimented double voiding and/or bladder cycling before
transplantation. Following transplantation, bladder function in these
patients should be followed for the long term because they can become
less compliant over time and lead to premature failure of the transplanted allograft.
A comprehensive nutritional assessment should be performed to
ensure that an optimal nutritional status is achieved before transplant.
Many children with ESKD require nutritional supplements to provide
them with sufficient protein and calories. Infants and young children on
dialysis often require nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feedings to overcome decreased oral intake from nausea and anorexia due to uremia.
Bone disease should be evaluated for and bone health optimized
before transplantation. Uncontrolled secondary hyperparathyroidism

may lead to urinary phosphate wasting, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria,
and/or nephrolithiasis posttransplant. A high calcium phosphorus
product before transplantation leads to vascular stiffness and calcifications, increasing the risk for cardiovascular disease and difficult-­to-­
control hypertension in the perioperative and posttransplant period.
In the United States, >25% of the deaths in children on maintenance
dialysis are a result of cardiovascular disease. Cardiac death is the leading cause of mortality in young adults after transplant in childhood.
Therefore evaluation of cardiac function, including echocardiography
and electrocardiography, is required before kidney transplantation to
ensure sufficient cardiac function to tolerate the large fluid load that
accompanies kidney transplantation. Hypertension is common in
ESKD and should be treated before transplant. If medical management
is insufficient, bilateral nephrectomy may be considered to control the
hyperreninemic response from the failing kidneys. Finally, patients
with a history of obstructive uropathy and oligohydramnios in utero
who survive to kidney transplant may have undiagnosed/unrecognized pulmonary hypertension, which should be evaluated before
transplantation.
Anemia needs to be treated before transplantation. Most patients
receive erythropoietin, folate, and iron to maintain goals for hemoglobin levels between 11 and 13 g/dL. Blood transfusions should be
avoided if possible due to concerns about sensitizing the patient to
HLAs before transplant. If a blood transfusion is required, patients
should receive leukoreduced red blood cells.
Evaluation for hypercoagulable states is important before renal
transplantation because venous thrombosis is an important cause of
graft failure. Risk factors for graft thrombosis include history of prior
thrombosis, surgical technique, perfusion and reperfusion injury of
the graft, young donor age (<6 years), young recipient (<5 years),
cold ischemia time >24 hours, arterial hypotension, prior history of
peritoneal dialysis, and/or hypoperfusion of an adult allograft transplanted into a small child. Particularly in the young recipient, there
must be an evaluation for thrombosis of the iliac vessels and inferior
vena cava, especially if there is a history of previous surgery or central
line placement. Children who have large protein losses, such as from
nephrotic syndrome and/or peritoneal dialysis, can be at an increased
risk for thrombosis because of protein loss, such as protein S, protein
C, and antithrombin III. Doppler ultrasound, CT angiography, and
MR angiography have all been used to evaluate vessels. To minimize
the risk of contrast-­induced nephropathy associated with CT contrast, patients with advanced CKD or ESKD not yet on dialysis should
receive intravenous hydration before and after the study and acidosis should be corrected before giving contrast medium. While MR
angiography has traditionally been avoided in patients with CKD or
ESKD because of the risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis from early
forms of gadolinium, the more recent broad availability of newer,
more stable gadolinium preparations makes contrast-­enhanced MRI
a valid and reasonably safe option. Collaboration between radiology
and nephrology is important when determining which gadolinium
agents to use and when contrast MRI is appropriate in children with
CKD and ESKD.
Infections must be identified, prevented, and treated before transplantation. Infectious disease screening includes obtaining a complete
history of the following: current or previous infections, all vaccinations, any occupational risks among family members (e.g., healthcare
worker), household or other contacts with treatment for tuberculosis, travel within the past 2 years or significant time spent in another
country, bacille Calmette-­Guérin administration, animal and/or insect
exposure, sexual activity, and consumption of high-­risk foods such as
unpasteurized products. Screening includes a tuberculosis skin test
(purified protein derivative) or interferon gamma release assay, cytomegalovirus IgG, Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) antibody panel, varicella
titer, measles antibody, hepatitis B serologies, hepatitis C antibody,
HIV, and toxoplasmosis. Additional testing for patients who live in
or have visited endemic areas might include Coccidioides immunodiffusion, serology for Strongyloides, and/or antibody for Histoplasma
antibody. Sexually active patients should also be screened for syphilis,
gonorrhea, and Chlamydia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3256 Part XXI u Nephrology
It is recommended that all immunizations be current before transplantation. All live vaccines (measles, mumps, rubella [MMR] and
varicella) should be given before transplantation, and antibody titers
should be checked for a response because these vaccines should not
be given to immunosuppressed patients. MMR may be given as early
as 6 months of age. Inhaled (live-­attenuated virus) influenza vaccine
should not be given to transplant patients, family members, or healthcare providers.
Psychiatric evaluation should be performed before transplantation to evaluate the ability of patients and families to cope with the
substantial stressors that accompany caring for a child with a kidney
transplant. This evaluation should include screening for depression,
substance abuse, and adherence so that problems can be identified and managed before kidney transplantation. If nonadherence
is identified or anticipated, interventions should be in place before
transplantation.
The ABO blood type must be confirmed twice before a patient is
listed for kidney transplantation. Donors and recipients are currently
matched for HLA-­A, HLA-­B, and HLA-­DR antigens. In general, better matched organs have improved survival times following kidney
transplantation. Matching at the DR locus appears to be especially
advantageous, though in the modern era of immunosuppression, successful six-­antigen mismatched transplants are performed routinely.
All patients must be screened for preformed anti-­
HLA antibodies before kidney transplantation. The most common, sensitive, and
specific method uses flow cytometry and single HLA-­antigen beads.
In this manner, a patient’s PRA can be assessed and is reported as
the percentage of the population against which a recipient has anti-­
HLA antibodies. Patients can become sensitized by a prior transplant,
blood transfusions, and/or pregnancy. Highly sensitized patients (PRA
>80%) may undergo desensitization with plasmapheresis, anti-­CD 20
antibody, and/or proteasome inhibitors to expand the donor pool from
which they can safely receive an organ.

IMMUNOSUPPRESSION

Most pediatric kidney transplant centers employ induction immunosuppression at the time of transplant followed by lifelong maintenance
immunosuppression with a calcineurin inhibitor and an antiproliferative agent with or without steroids.

Induction Therapy

Induction therapy is used in nearly all pediatric renal transplants to
prevent early acute rejection. The OPTN Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (OPTN/SRTR) 2020 Annual Report indicates that
60% of patients receive T-­cell–depleting induction therapy (rabbit antithymocyte globulin). Use of an interleukin (IL)-­2 receptor antagonist
(basiliximab) has been stable at between 30% and 40% for the past 5
years, and the rates of no induction therapy have declined to below
10%.

T-­Cell Antibodies

Antithymocyte globulin is comprised of rabbit-­or horse-­derived polyclonal antibodies against human T-­lymphocyte antigens that results in
a rapid depletion of T lymphocytes. The infusion is generally started in
the operating room before reperfusion of the transplant kidney. Most
centers use this for standard induction therapy, but some limit its use
to induction of sensitized high-­risk patients or patients who have concerns for delayed graft function and want to avoid high calcineurin
inhibitor levels in the early postoperative period. The standard dosage
is 1.5 mg/kg/dose for three to five doses, with daily monitoring of lymphocyte, neutrophil, and platelet counts. Some centers monitor CD3+
subsets and hold the dose if the CD3+ count is below 20 cells/mm3.

Interleukin-­2 Receptor Antibodies

Basiliximab is currently the only monoclonal anti-­CD25 antibody on
the market. This chimeric (murine/human) anti-­CD25 antibody prevents T-­cell proliferation but does not cause T-­cell depletion. Basiliximab is given in two doses of 10 mg for patients <35 kg and 20 mg for
patients ≥35 kg. The first dose should be given within 2 hours before

the transplant surgery and the second dose on day 4. Patients tend to
tolerate IL-­2 receptor antagonists well with few side effects.

Other Induction Therapies

Alemtuzumab (Campath-­1H) is a monoclonal antibody against CD52
present on T and B cells, monocytes, and natural killer cells. Some
centers have used this induction antibody in steroid and calcineurin
inhibitor-­sparing protocols, but pediatric data are limited as has been
its use.
Other induction therapies for highly sensitized patients include
targeting B cells and/or removing neutralizing antibodies by using
rituximab against the CD20 epitope on early-­lineage and intermediate-­
lineage B cells, proteasome inhibitors, and plasmapheresis and/or
high-­dose intravenous immunoglobulin for removing donor-­specific
antibodies.

Maintenance Immunosuppression

Lifelong maintenance immunosuppression is required in nearly all
patients following kidney transplantation. The most common regimens include a calcineurin inhibitor (predominantly tacrolimus vs
cyclosporine) and an antiproliferative agent (predominantly mycophenolate mofetil [MMF] vs azathioprine) with or without corticosteroids.
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors sirolimus and
everolimus are sometimes used in place of the calcineurin inhibitor or
antiproliferative agent. The rationale for combination therapy in children is to provide effective immunosuppression while minimizing the
toxicity of any single drug.

Calcineurin Inhibitors

Despite the search for immunosuppression regimens that minimize
calcineurin inhibitor exposure, tacrolimus remains the centerpiece of
maintenance immunosuppression for most pediatric patients in North
America. According to OPTN/SRTR in 2020, >90% of children in the
United States were placed on tacrolimus-­based immunosuppression
at the time of transplant. The increasing use of tacrolimus in place of
cyclosporine can be attributed to studies demonstrating better efficacy
(fewer rejections and less reliance on steroids) and less severe cosmetic
side effects, such as hypertrichosis, gingival hyperplasia, and coarsening of facial features. This is especially relevant for adolescents for
whom unwanted cosmetic side effects can become a barrier to immunosuppression adherence. Tacrolimus also appears to cause less dyslipidemia, though other side effects such as new-­onset diabetes after
transplant (NODAT), tremor, seizure, alopecia, and sleep disturbance
seem to be more common in patients treated with tacrolimus. Despite
the nearly complete replacement of cyclosporine with tacrolimus, there
are select cases when cyclosporine is the preferred agent (e.g., to treat
posttransplant recurrence of FSGS or conversion therapy in patients
who develop NODAT).
Unfortunately, both calcineurin inhibitors have a narrow therapeutic index and can cause acute and chronic kidney injury. Additionally,
many foods and drugs interact with the calcineurin inhibitor metabolism, requiring frequent therapeutic drug monitoring. A usual starting dose of tacrolimus is 0.1-­0.15 mg/kg twice a day on the day of the
transplant, targeting trough levels above 10 ng/mL for the first month
and then tapering down to trough levels of 4-­8 ng/mL by 6 months.
Patients with CYP3A5 expression (80–90% of patients from African
descent vs 20–30% of patients with Caucasian ancestry) often require
doses nearly twice as high. Pharmacogenetic testing of CYP3A5 polymorphisms is available and may assist with personalized dosing. The
recent development of long-­acting tacrolimus preparations (Envarsus
XR and Astagraf XL) have provided the opportunity for a simplified,
once daily medication regimen. Most long-­term immunosuppressive
regimens attempt to limit calcineurin inhibitor dosing as much as possible, and the search for calcineurin inhibitor–sparing drug regimens
remains an area of intense research.

Antiproliferative Agents

Most immunosuppression regimens for children following kidney transplantation include an antiproliferative agent. MMF is the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 573 u Renal Transplantation 3257
morpholinoethyl ester prodrug of mycophenolic acid, an inhibitor of
de novo purine synthesis, and is part of the initial maintenance immunosuppression regimen in at least two thirds of U.S. pediatric renal
transplant recipients. The absence of nephrotoxicity, cardiovascular risk
(hypertension, dyslipidemia), and hepatotoxicity make it an attractive
option for immunosuppression, and the fact that it has greater efficacy
than azathioprine has enabled the use of lower doses of corticosteroids
and/or calcineurin inhibitors. Primary toxicities include diarrhea and
upset stomach, as well as leukopenia and anemia, affecting up to 40% of
patients. These side effects are often transient and can be treated with a
temporary dosage reduction, but persistent dose reductions have been
associated with an increased risk of rejection. MMF is also associated
with a high risk for birth defects, so its use in adolescent females necessitates two forms of birth control and regular pregnancy screening. The
usual dose of MMF is 600 mg/m2 in patients treated with cyclosporine. MMF metabolism is slower in patients treated concomitantly with
tacrolimus, allowing for lower doses (450 mg/m2) to be used.
Azathioprine, an analog of 6-­mercaptopurine, is an alternative to
MMF that also inhibits de novo purine synthesis and contributes to
cell cycle arrest. It was the first medication approved for immunosuppression in kidney transplantation, yet in the past 2 decades, its use
has declined because of the advent of newer immunosuppressive medications with purported greater efficacy. It is inexpensive and, unlike
MMF, it can be administered once daily, so it is an attractive alternative
for patients who struggle to take twice-­daily medications. Usual dosage
is 1.5-­3 mg/kg once daily. Bone marrow suppression is the primary toxicity, but gastrointestinal side effects are less common than with MMF,
with the exception of pancreatitis, which has rarely been reported.
Unlike MMF, it is not associated with birth defects and is an important
alternative in pregnant patients. Enteric-­coated mycophenolic acid is
another alternative to MMF that may decrease upper gastrointestinal
side effects in some patients.

Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) Inhibitors

mTOR inhibitors (sirolimus more commonly than everolimus) are
used primarily as adjunctive immunosuppression in combination
with MMF to avoid tacrolimus toxicity or with tacrolimus and MMF
to spare steroids. However, they are used in only 5–10% of pediatric
kidney transplant recipients 1 year posttransplant, perhaps due to evidence suggesting a high rate of donor-­specific antibodies and antibody-­
mediated rejection (AMR) in patients taking mTOR inhibitors. Other
toxicities, including a high rate of aphthous ulcers, dyslipidemia, poor
wound healing, proteinuria, and diarrhea, have limited their use.

Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids remain integral to most immunosuppressive protocols
despite their multifaceted toxicities. According to the 2020 OPTN/
SRTR report, 54% of patients are treated with steroids at the time of
transplant. The adverse effects of steroids are especially pronounced
in children, for whom retarded skeletal growth, hypertension, obesity,
diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, osteopenia, and aseptic necrosis of
bone (particularly the femoral heads) can have dire long-­term consequences. Cosmetic side effects, such as cushingoid facies and acne,
also become barriers to adolescents taking their medication. For these
reasons, steroid-­based regimens in children seek to minimize steroid
exposure by starting with high-­dose steroids as induction therapy and
tapering down over several months to a lowest dose of 5-­10 mg or 0.1
mg/kg daily. Other protocols call for a more rapid steroid taper lasting
from 1 week to several months before stopping them altogether.
Several well-­designed randomized controlled trials in children and
adults have demonstrated that complete steroid avoidance can be safely
achieved in patients with a low immunologic risk by using induction
therapy with dual-­
maintenance immunosuppression comprised of
tacrolimus and MMF. In general, steroid avoidance is associated with
higher rates of rejection but also carries significant benefits for growth,
hypertension, and dyslipidemia with no decrease in long-­term allograft
survival. Importantly, this approach appears to be safe and without
increases in the generation of donor-­specific antibody or histologic
injury. Despite this evidence, data from the OPTN network suggest

that steroid use is largely dependent on the center where the transplant
is performed rather than the characteristics of the patient.

Other Agents

Belatacept is a fusion protein composed of the Fc fragment of a human
IgG1 linked to the extracellular domain of CTLA-­4 (a molecule crucial for T-­cell costimulation), which selectively blocks the process of
T-­cell activation. Belatacept is attractive for maintenance immunosuppression because it is a quick monthly infusion rather than a daily oral
medication, and it does not have many of the untoward side effects
associated with calcineurin inhibitors, including and especially nephrotoxicity. Adult studies of belatacept have demonstrated similar rejection rates but significantly improved kidney function up to 10 years
following kidney transplantation compared with cyclosporine. Unfortunately, there is an unacceptably high rate of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) in EBV-­naïve patients, which are most
of the children receiving a kidney transplant.

FLUID MANAGEMENT IN INFANTS AND SMALL
CHILDREN AFTER KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION

Maintenance of adequate blood flow to an adult-­sized kidney in an
infant or small child is crucial to avoid acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
and graft loss from vascular thrombosis. The recipient aortic blood flow
early after transplantation of an adult-­size kidney more than doubles
from the pretransplantation aortic blood flow. The maximum blood
flow that can be obtained in an adult-­size kidney transplanted into a
small child is approximately 65% of what was in the donor. Low blood
flow states, such as those with hypovolemia or hypotension, increase
the risk for ATN, graft thrombosis, and graft nonfunction. Thus, in the
postoperative period, patients are maintained on high fluid volumes.
Close attention is paid to the blood pressure and hydration status in
the operating room in an attempt to reduce the incidence of delayed
graft function. Typically, a central venous catheter is inserted to monitor the central venous pressure throughout the operation. A central
venous pressure of 12-­15 cm H2O should be achieved before removing
the vascular clamps; a higher central venous pressure may be desirable
in the case of a small infant receiving an adult-­size kidney. Dopamine
may be started in the operating room and continued for 24-­48 hours
postoperatively to maintain a mean arterial blood pressure (MAP)
>55 mm Hg. A blood transfusion with packed red blood cells may be
required in very small recipients because the hemoglobin can drop as
a result of sequestration of approximately 150-­250 mL of blood in the
transplanted kidney. Because an adult kidney transplanted into a small
child can produce enormous amounts of urine, a fluid strategy that
provides a constant rate for insensible losses (D10W at a rate of 400
mL/m2/day) and urine replacements helps to ensure adequate hydration of the adult kidney. Some transplant centers continue to provide
infants with aggressive fluid management by nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feedings of at least 2,500 mL/m2/day for up to 6 months
following transplant if the child is unable to take in sufficient volume
by mouth.

REJECTION OF KIDNEY TRANSPLANT

Hyperacute rejection, caused by preformed antibodies against the
donor HLA, ABO, or other antigens, occurs immediately on reperfusion of the allograft. The practice of prospective cross matching using
complement-­dependent cytotoxicity has virtually eliminated hyperacute rejection.
Acute T-­cell-­mediated rejection (TCMR) must be identified and
treated promptly, although this may not be straightforward in the
very young transplant recipient. Because most small children receive
adult-­size kidneys with a large renal reserve compared with their
body mass, significant allograft dysfunction may be present with little
or no increase in serum creatinine. Therefore even subtle findings
such as hypertension or new proteinuria can indicate acute TCMR
and must be investigated. Late diagnosis and treatment of rejection
are associated with a higher incidence of resistant rejections and graft
loss. Most cases of acute TCMR can be treated if detected early by
using a short course (3-­5 days) of high-­dose intravenous steroids

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3258 Part XXI u Nephrology
(10-­30 mg/kg) followed by an oral steroid taper over the next several weeks and either increased maintenance immunosuppression or
improved adherence, whichever is most appropriate. Steroid-­resistant
or high-­grade rejection can be treated with thymoglobulin (1.5 mg/
kg/day) for 7-­14 days, high-­dose tacrolimus (trough levels >20 ng/dL
for 1-­2 weeks), or local allograft irradiation. Following treatment for
rejection, it is important to consider 3-­12 months of prophylaxis with
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia (PJP pneumonia), valganciclovir/valacyclovir to prevent
cytomegalovirus/herpes reactivation, and nystatin or fluconazole to
prevent oral candidiasis.
Active AMR consisting of anti-­HLA donor-­specific antibodies is an
important cause of kidney function decline and allograft loss. It can
present acutely in the few weeks following transplantation in previously
sensitized patients or may develop chronically due to inadequate immunosuppression or poor adherence. Unlike acute TCMR, acute AMR is
much more difficult to treat and may require plasmapheresis, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), anti-­CD20 antibody infusions, and/or
proteasome inhibitors. Treatment is most likely to be successful if initiated within a few months of identifying new donor-­specific antibodies.
Chronic rejection (T-­cell mediated or antibody mediated) is the
leading cause of graft loss. Children often have a gradual decline in
their renal function and often have fixed proteinuria and hypertension.
Despite initial excitement about the potential of MMF and sirolimus
mitigating chronic graft injury, this has not translated readily into
observable clinical benefits. Chronic TCMR, chronic AMR, and the
impact of non-­HLA antibodies are areas of active investigation.

Kidney Biopsy

Kidney biopsy is the gold standard for the diagnosis of TCMR or AMR.
Despite attempts to develop noninvasive biomarker panels, none has
proven sensitive enough to rule out rejection. Many centers perform
surveillance biopsies at specific time points following transplantation
to detect subclinical rejection, which has been reported in <10% of
such surveillance biopsies.

GRAFT SURVIVAL OF KIDNEYS

Survival rates for live-­donor kidney allografts are superior to those for
deceased-­donor allografts. Living-­donor kidneys generally have fewer
HLA mismatches, lower cold ischemia time, and require less immunosuppression than deceased-­donor kidneys. Furthermore, deceased-­donor
transplant requires children to wait several weeks to a few years on the
deceased-­donor wait-­list before receiving an organ. The OPTN/SRTR
2021 annual report showed that the death-­censored, 5-­year allograft survival rate was 85.2% for deceased-donor kidney transplants performed in
2014–2016, whereas the death-­censored, 5-­year allograft survival rate for
living-­donor transplants was 93.1% over the same time period. For these
reasons and because it expands the donor pool, living donation should be
advocated at every opportunity.
Children <10 years of age have the best long-­term graft and patient
survival rates of all age-­groups, and adolescents and young adults have
the worst. Among patients with at least 1 year of graft function, graft
failure rates are stable at around 1.4 per 100 person-­years until 10
years of age, when rates increase, peaking at a maximum of 6.3 per 100
person-­years at age 19 years, regardless of the age at transplantation. A
variety of factors likely account for such poor outcomes in adolescents
and young adults, including the patient’s changing physiology, a transition from pediatric to adult care, and a greater number of barriers to
taking immunosuppressives.

COMPLICATIONS OF IMMUNOSUPPRESSION

Since the mid-­1990s, the incidence of acute rejection has decreased,
but the incidence of infection after transplantation has increased.
Pneumonia and urinary tract infection are the most common posttransplant bacterial infections. Urinary tract infections can progress
rapidly to urosepsis and may be confused with episodes of acute rejection. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole is used for urinary tract infection antibiotic prophylaxis as well as PJP prophylaxis for 3-­6 months
after transplant (see Chapter 290).

The herpesviruses (cytomegalovirus, herpesvirus, varicella-­zoster
virus, and EBV) pose a special problem in view of their common
occurrences in childhood (see Chapters 299-­302). Many young children have not yet been exposed to these viruses, and because they lack
protective immunity, their predisposition to serious primary infection
is high. The incidence of cytomegalovirus seropositivity is approximately 30% in children >5 years of age and rises to approximately 60%
in teenagers. Thus the younger child is at a greater potential risk for
serious infection when a cytomegalovirus-­positive donor kidney is
transplanted. About half of children are seronegative for EBV; most of
them will become infected shortly after transplant. Most EBV infections are clinically silent but put transplant recipients at risk for PTLD
in the presence of immunosuppression. The incidence of these infections is higher in children who receive antibody induction therapy and
after treatment of acute rejection. Antiviral prophylaxis with ganciclovir or valganciclovir for 3-­12 months after transplantation, especially
in the higher-­
risk groups (recipient-­
negative, donor-­
positive), has
been effective in reducing the incidence of clinical cytomegalovirus
disease. Serial surveillance for these viruses by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) for the viral load in the peripheral blood has also
allowed educated minimization of immunosuppression with a resultant reduction in the viral burden. It is important to monitor for PTLD
with routine examinations for lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly,
and EBV screening.
Polyomavirus nephropathy is an important cause of allograft
dysfunction; almost 30% of children have BK viruria (see Chapter
321), although allograft dysfunction occurs only in a small subset of
patients (∼5%). Early protocols focusing on screening for BK virus in
the urine have proven ineffective at distinguishing patients who will
develop BK nephropathy; rather, plasma BK monitoring has become
the standard of care. Ultimately, a renal biopsy, with identification
of BK virus by immunoperoxidase staining, is required to make the
diagnosis of BK virus nephropathy with certainty. Reducing immunosuppression when plasma BK PCR levels start to rise is the main
form of therapy. Cidofovir, leflunomide, and IVIG have all been used
as adjunctive therapies.
Oral candidiasis is another important infection following kidney
transplantation and can be prevented with oral nystatin 4 times daily
or fluconazole once daily for the first 3 months after transplant. Careful
monitoring of calcineurin inhibitor levels is important when starting
or stopping treatment with fluconazole as it interferes with calcineurin
inhibitor metabolism.
Pediatric solid organ transplant patients are generally considered
to be at increased risk for infections and worse outcomes compared
with their nonimmunosuppressed peers. This concern was brought
to the forefront during the global COVID-­19 pandemic. Despite their
immunosuppressed state, studies have not shown that children with
a solid organ transplant are at increased risk for complications from
COVID-­19 infection. Early studies indicate that short-­term outcomes
from COVID-­19 in pediatric kidney transplant recipients are generally favorable, without increased risk of graft loss, respiratory failure,
or death compared with nonimmunosuppressed peers. Nonetheless,
COVID-­
19 vaccination is recommended before transplantation to
minimize risk of complications and spread.
Hypertension, dyslipidemia, obesity, and posttransplant diabetes
mellitus are other complications of immunosuppression and kidney
transplantation that have been underrecognized and undertreated.
Cardiovascular disease is the primary cause of premature death in
young adults who had a kidney transplant in childhood, and uncontrolled blood pressure leads to premature allograft failure. Up to 80%
of children have hypertension and up to 60% are uncontrolled despite
multiple available therapies. The 24-­hour ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring (ABPM) is the gold standard for assessing blood pressure
control because isolated nocturnal hypertension and masked hypertension are common following kidney transplantation and can only
be diagnosed with ABPM. Guidelines for CKD recommend treating
blood pressure to achieve a MAP below the 50th percentile for age,
gender, and height on ABPM, though recommendations for children
with a kidney transplant have not been as aggressive. Blood pressure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 573 u Renal Transplantation 3259
should be treated to at least below the 90th percentile for age, gender,
and height and below 130/80 mm Hg. Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors are the preferred first-­line agents in patients with proteinuria; otherwise, either calcium channel blockers or ACE inhibitors
can be used with other agents added as needed to achieve blood pressure control.
Although growth improves after transplantation, chronic steroid
use does not allow a child to reach their full potential height. The use
of recombinant human growth hormone in pediatric renal transplant
recipients significantly improves the growth velocity and standard
deviation score (SDS). Steroid minimization and withdrawal protocols
have demonstrated growth benefits, and the steroid-­avoidance data in
children show significant catch-­up growth at 5 years after transplantation. It is thus likely that with a well-­functioning kidney and no maintenance steroids, children might now be able to realize their full height
potential.
Malignancy is an important problem following kidney transplantation for children. Lifelong immunosuppression confers at
least a twofold lifetime risk of developing cancer for solid-­organ
transplant recipients compared with the general population. The
most common cancer to develop within 10 years following kidney
transplantation in children is PTLD. It occurs in 1–5% of pediatric kidney transplant recipients and is the most likely cancer to be
encountered in childhood. Over the long term, skin cancers (basal
cell carcinoma, cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma) are the most
common malignancies, with an incidence of close to 15% by 15
years posttransplant and increasing from there. Carcinomas other
than skin carcinomas also arise at a rate far higher than in the general population. The prognosis is generally good for most of these
malignancies when they are diagnosed early and treated appropriately. Any kidney transplant recipient must be assessed regularly
for signs of malignancy and practice preventative measures such as
using appropriate sunscreen products.

Developing good adherence behaviors with immunosuppressive
medications is one of the most important challenges facing children
and adolescents following kidney transplantation. Up to 43% of adolescents display some decreased adherence to their immunosuppressive
regimen, which is thought to contribute to decreased allograft survival
rates compared with other age-­groups. A child’s normal development,
which includes establishing more independence, spending more time
away from home, feeling invincible, and being vulnerable to cosmetic
medication side effects, increases the barriers to taking immunosuppression medications. Systems-­based approaches, in which clinicians
partner with patients to identify and address adherence barriers, are
most likely to improve adherence over the long term.

LONG-­TERM OUTCOME OF KIDNEY
TRANSPLANTATION

With advances in transplant care and treatment modalities and with
diligent attention to the pediatric patient’s psychosocial, educational,
vocational, and developmental rehabilitation, the social and emotional
functioning of the child and the child’s family appears to return to the
same level as before the illness within 1 year of successful transplantation. Renal transplantation leads to improvement in linear growth
in children. School function tests improve after renal transplantation.
Most patients can reenter school and social activities after a short
recovery time of 6-­12 weeks following surgery. Surveys of 10-­year survivors of pediatric kidney transplants report that most patients consider their health to be good, and they engage in appropriate social,
educational, and sexual activities while experiencing a very good to
excellent quality of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Urologic Disorders in
Infants and Children
Chapter 574

Congenital Anomalies and
Dysgenesis of the Kidneys
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
EMBRYONIC AND FETAL DEVELOPMENT

The kidney is derived from reciprocal interaction between the ureteral
bud and the metanephric blastema. During the fifth week of gestation,
the ureteral bud arises from the mesonephric (Wolffian) duct and penetrates the metanephric blastema, which is an area of undifferentiated
mesenchyme on the nephrogenic ridge. The ureteral bud undergoes
a series of approximately 15 generations of divisions and by the 20th
week of gestation forms the entire collecting system, including the ureter, renal pelvis, calyces, papillary ducts, and collecting tubules. Signals from the mesenchymal cells induce ureteric bud formation from
the Wolffian duct as well as ureteric bud branching. Reciprocal signals
from the ureteric bud and, later, from its branching tips induce mesenchymal cells to condense, proliferate, and convert into epithelial cells.
Under the inductive influence of the ureteral bud, nephron differentiation begins during the seventh week of gestation.
By the 20th week of gestation, when the collecting system is developed, approximately 30% of the nephrons are present. Nephrogenesis
continues at a nearly exponential rate and is complete by the 36th week
of gestation. During nephrogenesis, the kidneys ascend to a lumbar site
just below the adrenal glands. At least 16 signaling agents have been
identified that regulate renal development. Defects in any of the signaling activities could cause a kidney not to form (renal agenesis) or to
differentiate abnormally (renal dysgenesis). Dysgenesis of the kidney
includes aplasia, dysplasia, hypoplasia, and certain forms of renal
cystic disease.
The fetal kidneys play a minor role in the maintenance of fetal
salt and water homeostasis. The rate of urine production increases
throughout gestation; at term, volumes have been reported to be 50
mL/hr. The glomerular filtration rate is 25 mL/min/1.73 m2 at term
and triples by 3 months postpartum. The increase in the glomerular
filtration rate is caused by a reduction in intrarenal vascular resistance
and redistribution of intrarenal blood flow to the cortex, where more
nephrons are located.

PART

XXII

The Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser (MRKH) syndrome (1 in
4,000 to 1 in 5,000 female births) is a group of associated findings that
may include vaginal aplasia, uterine maldevelopment, and normal ovaries. Two types are described. In type I, only müllerian aplasia occurs,
whereas in type II, there are associated anomalies, most commonly
unilateral renal agenesis, or a horseshoe kidney, with skeletal anomalies present in 10% (see Chapter 591). Zinner syndrome is considered
the male counterpart of MRKH syndrome (Fig. 574.1). In this condition, males with unilateral renal agenesis (or a regressed multicystic
dysplastic kidney [MCDK]) have an ipsilateral seminal vesicle cyst
and a possible epididymal cyst and dilated distal ureteral segment.
These patients typically present in adolescence. Expectant management is usually followed with interim ultrasonography unless symptoms develop, including hematuria, hematospermia, or dysuria.
Renal agenesis is distinguished from aplasia, in which a nubbin of
nonfunctioning tissue is seen capping a normal or abnormal ureter.
This distinction may be difficult but usually is clinically insignificant.
Unilateral renal agenesis is diagnosed in some patients based on the
finding of an absent kidney on ultrasonography or renal scintigraphy
(renal scan). Some of these patients were born with a hypoplastic kidney or a MCDK that underwent complete cyst regression. Although
the specific diagnosis is not critical, if the finding of an absent kidney is
based on an ultrasound, a functional imaging study such as a renal scan
should be considered because some of these patients have an ectopic
kidney in the pelvis. If there is a normal contralateral kidney, long-­term
renal function usually remains normal.
Bilateral renal agenesis is incompatible with extrauterine life
and produces Potter syndrome. Death occurs shortly after birth
from pulmonary hypoplasia. The newborn has a characteristic
facial appearance, termed Potter facies (Fig. 574.2). The eyes are
widely separated with epicanthal folds, the ears are low set, the nose
is broad and compressed flat, the chin is receding, and there are
limb anomalies. Bilateral renal agenesis should be suspected when
maternal ultrasonography demonstrates oligohydramnios, nonvisualization of the bladder, and absent kidneys. The incidence of this

RENAL AGENESIS

Renal agenesis, or absent kidney development, can occur secondary to
a defect of the Wolffian duct, ureteric bud, or metanephric blastema.
Unilateral renal agenesis has an incidence of 1 in 450-­1,000 births. Unilateral renal agenesis often is discovered during the course of an evaluation for other congenital anomalies such as VACTERL association
(vertebral defects, anal atresia, congenital heart disease, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal and limb defects; see Chapter 100.1). Its incidence is
increased in newborns with a single umbilical artery. In true agenesis,
the ureter and the ipsilateral bladder hemitrigone are absent. The contralateral kidney undergoes compensatory hypertrophy to some degree
prenatally, but primarily after birth. Approximately 15% of these children have contralateral vesicoureteral reflux, and most males have
an ipsilateral absent vas deferens because the Wolffian duct is absent.
Because the Wolffian and müllerian ducts are contiguous, müllerian
abnormalities in females also are common.

Fig. 574.1 Zinner syndrome. A 17-­yr-­old male with regressed right
multicystic dysplastic kidney and dilated ectopic distal ureter draining
into seminal vesicle cyst.

3260
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 574 u Congenital Anomalies and Dysgenesis of the Kidneys

3261

A

Fig. 574.2 Stillborn infant with renal agenesis exhibiting characteristic
Potter facies.

B
Fig. 574.3 A, Prenatal sonogram demonstrating multicystic dysplastic
kidney. B, Surgical specimen.

disorder is 1 in 5,000 births, with a male predominance, and represents 20% of newborns with the Potter phenotype. Other common
causes of neonatal renal failure associated with the Potter phenotype include cystic renal dysplasia and obstructive uropathy. Less
common causes are autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease
(infantile), renal hypoplasia, and medullary dysplasia. Neonates
with bilateral renal agenesis die of pulmonary insufficiency from
pulmonary hypoplasia rather than renal failure (see Chapter 444).
The term familial renal adysplasia describes families in which
renal agenesis, renal dysplasia, multicystic kidney (dysplasia), or a
combination occurs in a single family. This disorder has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with a penetrance of 50–90% and
variable expression. Because of this association, many clinicians
advise screening first-­degree relatives of persons who have renal
agenesis or dysplasia.
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that children
with a single kidney or single functioning kidney be allowed to play
most sports. In fact, sports are less likely to cause kidney injury than
motor vehicle crashes, horseback riding, or bicycle accidents. Children
with one kidney are not at higher risk for renal injury during contact
sports. Despite this, families should be made aware of the potential
complications of injury to the patient’s single kidney including potential need for dialysis or a renal transplant. Protective padding may be
worn during sports, but there is no evidence that this prevents renal
injury.

RENAL DYSGENESIS: DYSPLASIA, HYPOPLASIA,
AND CYSTIC ANOMALIES

Renal dysgenesis refers to maldevelopment of the kidney that
affects its size, shape, or structure. The three principal types of dysgeneses are dysplastic, hypoplastic, and cystic. Although dysplasia
always is accompanied by a decreased number of nephrons (hypoplasia), the converse is not true: hypoplasia can occur in isolation.
When both conditions are present, the term hypodysplasia is preferred. The term dysplasia is technically a histologic diagnosis and

refers to focal, diffuse, or segmentally arranged primitive structures,
specifically primitive ductal structures, resulting from abnormal
metanephric differentiation. Nonrenal elements, such as cartilage,
may also be present. The condition can affect all or only part of the
kidney. If cysts are present, the condition is termed cystic dysplasia. If the entire kidney is dysplastic with a preponderance of cysts,
the kidney is referred to as a MCDK (Fig. 574.3).
The pathogenesis of dysplasia is multifactorial. The “bud” theory
proposes that if the ureteral bud arises in an abnormal location, such
as an ectopic ureter, there is abnormal penetration and induction of
the metanephric blastema, which causes abnormal kidney differentiation, resulting in dysplasia. Renal dysplasia also can occur with severe
obstructive uropathy early in gestation, as with the most severe cases
of posterior urethral valves or in a MCDK, in which a portion of the
ureter is absent or atretic.
MCDK is a congenital condition in which the kidney is replaced by
cysts and does not function; it can result from ureteral atresia. Kidney
size is highly variable. The incidence is approximately 1 in 2,000. Some
clinicians incorrectly use the terms multicystic kidney and polycystic
kidney interchangeably. However, polycystic kidney disease is an inherited disorder that may be autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant
and affects both kidneys (see Chapter 563). MCDK usually is unilateral
and generally is not inherited. Bilateral MCDKs are incompatible with
life.
MCDK is the most common cause of an abdominal mass in the
newborn, but the vast majority are nonpalpable at birth. In most
cases, it is discovered incidentally during prenatal ultrasound. In
some patients, the cysts are identified prenatally, but the cysts regress
in utero, and no kidney is identified on imaging at birth. Contralateral hydronephrosis is present in 5–10% of patients. Sonography
shows the characteristic appearance of a kidney replaced by multiple cysts of varying sizes that do not communicate, and no identifiable parenchyma is present. In some patients, usually males, a small
nonobstructing ureterocele is present in the bladder (see Chapter
577). Although 15% have contralateral vesicoureteral reflux, it is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3262 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
usually low grade, and obtaining a voiding cystourethrogram is
unnecessary unless there is significant contralateral hydronephrosis
or the child develops an upper urinary tract infection. Management
is controversial. Complete cyst regression occurs in nearly half of
MCDKs by age 7 years. The risk of associated hypertension is 0.2–
1.2%, and the risk of Wilms tumor arising from a MCDK is approximately 1 in 1,200. Because neoplasms arise from the stromal rather
than the cystic component, even if the cysts regress completely, the
likelihood that the kidney could develop a neoplasm is not altered.
Because of the occult nature of these potential problems, many
clinicians advise follow-­up with ultrasound and blood pressure
measurement every 6 months to a year. The most important aspect
of follow-­up is being certain that the solitary kidney is functioning
normally. If there is an abdominal mass, the cysts enlarge, the stromal core increases in size, or hypertension develops, nephrectomy is
recommended. In lieu of follow-­up screening, laparoscopic nephrectomy may be performed.
Renal hypoplasia refers to a small nondysplastic kidney that has fewer
than the normal number of calyces and nephrons. The term encompasses
a group of conditions with an abnormally small kidney and should be
distinguished from aplasia, in which the kidney is rudimentary. If the
condition is unilateral, the diagnosis usually is made incidentally during
evaluation for another urinary tract problem or hypertension. Bilateral
hypoplasia usually manifests with signs and symptoms of chronic renal
failure and is a leading cause of end-­stage renal disease during the first
decade of life. A history of polyuria and polydipsia is common. Urinalysis results may be normal. In a rare form of bilateral hypoplasia called
oligomeganephronia, the number of nephrons is markedly reduced,
and those present are markedly hypertrophied.
The Ask-­Upmark kidney, also termed segmental hypoplasia, refers
to small kidneys, usually weighing less than 35 g, with one or more
deep grooves on the lateral convexity, underneath which the parenchyma consists of tubules resembling those in the thyroid gland. It is
unclear whether the lesion is congenital or acquired. Most patients are
10 years or older at diagnosis and have severe hypertension. Nephrectomy usually controls the hypertension.

Table 574.1  Cystic Diseases of the Kidney
INHERITABLE
Autosomal recessive (infantile) polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD)
Autosomal dominant (adult) polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD)
Juvenile nephronophthisis and medullary cystic disease complex
Juvenile nephronophthisis (autosomal recessive)
Medullary cystic disease (autosomal dominant)
Congenital nephrosis (familial nephrotic syndrome) (autosomal
recessive)
Familial hypoplastic glomerulocystic disease (autosomal dominant)
Multiple malformation syndromes with renal cysts (e.g., tuberous
sclerosis, von Hippel-Lindau disease)
Glomerulocystic kidney disease
Familial
Meckel-Gruber syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis
Zellweger syndrome
Trisomy 13
Jeune syndrome
Lissencephaly
Nephronophthisis
Orofacialdigital syndrome
NONHERITABLE
Multicystic kidney (multicystic dysplastic kidney)
Benign multilocular cyst (cystic nephroma)
Simple cysts
Medullary sponge kidney
Sporadic glomerulocystic kidney disease
Acquired renal cystic disease
Calyceal diverticulum (pyelogenic cyst)
Modified from Glassberg KI, Stephens FD, Lebowitz RL, et al. Renal dysgenesis and cystic
disease of the kidney: a Report of the Committee on Terminology, Nomenclature and Classification, Section on Urology, American Academy of Pediatrics. J Urol. 1987;138:1085–1092.
Table 2.

RENAL CYSTS IN CHILDREN

Although rare, there are many renal cystic disorders in children
(Table 574.1). The most common is the simple renal cyst with a
mean incidence of 0.22%. They are usually discovered incidentally
during urinary tract imaging. Most are small and asymptomatic
and do not require treatment, although follow-­up imaging is recommended. If there are septations, irregular margins, calcifications,
or a cluster of cysts, further evaluation may be indicated. The Bosniak classification of simple and complex renal cysts places various
cystic lesions into four risk categories and helps guide a decision on
whether removal of a lesion is necessary. A calyceal diverticulum is
an outpouching of the collecting system into the corticomedullary
region of the kidney, and it usually arises from the fornix of a calyx,
usually in the upper or lower pole. Typically, the infundibulum
between the diverticulum and renal pelvis is narrow. Occasionally,
calculi form within the lesion, or it causes symptoms of flank pain,
necessitating removal of the diverticulum.
A multilocular cyst (multilocular cystic nephroma) is a lesion
in the kidney that falls in a spectrum of diseases, along with multilocular cyst with partially differentiated Wilms tumor, multilocular
cyst with nodules of Wilms tumor, or cystic Wilms tumor. The multilocular cyst is considered benign and is unrelated to the MCDK.
More than 95% occur in children <4 years, and most are discovered during evaluation for an abdominal or flank mass. The lesion
should be removed.
Fig. 574.4 Crossed renal ectopia. Intravenous urography shows both

ANOMALIES IN SHAPE AND POSITION

During renal development, the kidneys normally ascend from the pelvis into their normal position within the retroperitoneum. The normal process of ascent and rotation of the kidney may be incomplete,

renal collecting systems to the left of the spine. Segmentation anomalies of the sacrum, which are subtle in this child, are one of the skeletal
anomalies associated with renal ectopia. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008. Fig.
145-­23A, p. 2244.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 575 u Urinary Tract Infections

3263

Chapter 575

Urinary Tract Infections
Marie E. Wang and Pearl W. Chang
PREVALENCE AND ETIOLOGY

Fig. 574.5 Horseshoe kidney.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) commonly occur in children of all
ages, though the prevalence varies with age. UTIs are most common in children under 1 year of age. The prevalence in febrile infants
and children less than 24 months is 7%, and the prevalence in older
children less than 19 years presenting with urinary symptoms and/
or fever is 8%. During the first 3 months of life, UTIs are most common in uncircumcised febrile males with a prevalence of 20%, which
is eight times higher than circumcised males and 2-­3 times higher
than females. After 6 months of age, UTIs are much more likely in
females, with peaks during infancy, toilet training, and onset of sexual activity.
UTIs are caused primarily by colonic bacteria. Escherichia coli (see
Chapter 246) causes the majority of UTIs, followed by Klebsiella spp.
and Proteus spp., Enterococcus, and Pseudomonas (see Chapter 148).
Other bacteria known to cause UTIs include Staphylococcus saprophyticus, group B streptococcus, and, less commonly, Staphylococcus
aureus, Candida spp., and Salmonella spp.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND CLASSIFICATION
resulting in renal ectopia or malrotation. The ectopic kidney may be
in a pelvic, iliac, thoracic, or contralateral position. Ectopia may be
bilateral; the kidneys fuse in 90% of these cases. The incidence of renal
ectopia is approximately 1 in 900 (Fig. 574.4).
Renal fusion anomalies are more common. The lower poles of
the kidneys can fuse in the midline, resulting in a horseshoe kidney (Fig. 574.5); the fused portion is termed the isthmus and may
be thick functioning parenchyma or a thin fibrous strand. Horseshoe kidneys occur in 1 in 400-­500 births and are seen in 14–20%
of patients with Turner syndrome (see Chapter 626); horseshoe
kidneys are also associated with VACTERL and caudal regression
syndromes, as well as trisomies 18 and 21. Wilms tumors are four
times more common in children with horseshoe kidneys than in
the general population. Stone disease, hydronephrosis secondary
to ureteropelvic junction obstruction, and vesicoureteral reflux are
other potential complications. The incidence of MCDK affecting
one of the two sides of a horseshoe kidney also is increased. With
crossed fused ectopia, one kidney crosses over to the other side, and
the parenchyma of the two kidneys is fused. Renal function usually
is normal. Most commonly, the left kidney crosses over and fuses
with the lower pole of the right kidney. The insertion of the ureter
to the bladder does not change, and the adrenal glands remain in
their normal positions. The clinical significance of this anomaly is
that if renal surgery is necessary, the blood supply is variable and
can make partial nephrectomy more difficult.

ASSOCIATED PHYSICAL FINDINGS

Upper urinary tract anomalies are more common in children with
certain physical findings. The incidence of renal anomalies is
increased if there is a single umbilical artery and an abnormality
of another organ system (e.g., congenital heart disease). External
ear anomalies, imperforate anus, and scoliosis are also associated
with renal anomalies. Infants with these physical findings should
undergo a renal ultrasound.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

The two basic forms of UTIs are pyelonephritis and cystitis. Focal
pyelonephritis (lobar nephronia) and renal abscesses are less common.

Pyelonephritis

Pyelonephritis is characterized by any or all of the following: abdominal, back, or flank pain; fever; malaise; nausea; vomiting; and, occasionally, diarrhea. Fever may be the only manifestation, especially in
young children; particular consideration should occur for a temperature
≥39°C (102.2°F) without another source lasting more than 48 hours in
infants. Newborns can also show nonspecific symptoms, such as poor
feeding, irritability, jaundice, or weight loss. Pyelonephritis is the most
common bacterial infection in infants younger than 24 months of age
who have fever without an obvious focus (see Chapters 220 and 221).
Involvement of the renal parenchyma is termed acute pyelonephritis
(Figs. 575.1 and 575.2), whereas if there is no parenchymal involvement, the condition may be termed pyelitis. Acute pyelonephritis can
result in renal injury, termed pyelonephritic scarring.
Acute lobar nephronia (acute focal bacterial nephritis) is a localized
renal parenchymal mass caused by acute focal infection without liquefaction; it more commonly occurs in older children. It may be an early
stage in the development of a renal abscess (Fig. 575.3). Manifestations
are identical to those of pyelonephritis and include fever and flank
pain. The epidemiology of the causative organism is also similar to that
of pyelonephritis. Renal abscess can occur following a pyelonephritic
infection caused by the usual uropathogens or less commonly following
hematogenous spread with S. aureus. Most abscesses are unilateral and
right-­sided and can affect children of all ages (Fig. 575.4). Both acute
lobar nephronia and renal abscess are associated with an increased risk
of renal scarring. Perinephric abscess can occur secondary to contiguous infection in the perirenal area (e.g., vertebral osteomyelitis, psoas
abscess) or pyelonephritis that dissects to the renal capsule. It differs
from renal abscess in that it is diffuse throughout the capsule and is not
walled off, although it can develop septations. As with renal abscesses,
the most common organisms are S. aureus and E. coli. A perinephric
abscess may not communicate with the collecting system, and, thus,
abnormal findings may not be seen on urinalysis or culture.
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis is a rare type of chronic
renal infection characterized by granulomatous inflammation with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3264 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children

Fig. 575.3 Right renal abscess (arrow) shows a thick wall and low den-

sity (30 HU). Inflammatory stranding is present in the perinephric fat.
(From Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017. Fig. 55.3, p. 1834.)

Fig. 575.1 Acute pyelonephritis seen as an area of decreased per-

fusion by CT scan done for abdominal pain and fever in a child who
subsequently was shown to have no reflux by VCUG.

hematuria. Risk factors include urinary tract instrumentation, congenital uropathies/anomalies, chronic illness, and immune suppression.

Cystitis

Cystitis indicates that there is only bladder involvement; symptoms
include dysuria, urgency, frequency, suprapubic pain, incontinence,
and possibly malodorous urine. Cystitis does not cause high fever and
does not result in renal injury. Malodorous urine is suggestive but not
specific for a UTI.
Acute hemorrhagic cystitis, though uncommon in immunocompetent children, is often caused by E. coli; it also has been attributed to
adenovirus types 11 and 21. It is self-­limiting, with hematuria lasting
approximately 4 days. Patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy
(e.g., solid-­organ or bone marrow transplantation) are at higher risk for
hemorrhagic cystitis; adenoviruses and polyomaviruses (i.e., JC virus
and BK virus) are important causes in immunocompromised populations (see Chapter 321). Other rare types of cystitis that may be confused with infection include eosinophilic cystitis or interstitial cystitis.
Eosinophilic cystitis may present with hematuria, whereas interstitial
cystitis may present with irritative voiding symptoms but a negative
urine culture.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

Fig. 575.2 Acute pyelonephritis with focal mass formation. The kid-

ney shows a rounded heterogeneous mass (arrow) with a poorly defined
margin. Inflammatory changes in the adjacent perinephric fat and renal
fascial thickening (arrowheads) are also present. (From Haaga JR, Boll
DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2017. Fig. 54-­131, p. 1833.)

giant cells and foamy histiocytes. It can manifest clinically with a renal
mass and nonspecific symptoms including fever, flank pain, weight
loss, and malaise. Dysuria and other urinary symptoms are less common. Renal calculi, obstruction, and infection with Proteus spp. or E.
coli contribute to the development of this lesion, which usually requires
total or partial nephrectomy.
Alkaline encrusted pyelitis/cystitis is a rare chronic obstruction
UTI caused by Corynebacterium urealyticum. The organism creates
an alkaline urine (converting urea to ammonia), precipitating struvite
and calcium phosphate resulting in stone formation and pyuria with

Nearly all UTIs are ascending infections. The bacteria arise from the
fecal flora, colonize the perineum, and enter the bladder via the urethra. In uncircumcised males, the bacterial pathogens arise from the
flora beneath the prepuce. In some cases, the bacteria causing cystitis
ascend to the kidney to cause pyelonephritis. Rarely, renal infection
occurs by hematogenous spread, as in endocarditis or in bacteremic
neonates.
If bacteria ascend from the bladder to the kidney, acute pyelonephritis can occur. Normally, the simple and compound papillae in
the kidney have an antireflux mechanism that prevents urine in the
renal pelvis from entering the collecting tubules. However, some compound papillae, typically in the upper and lower poles of the kidney,
allow intrarenal reflux. Infected urine stimulates an immunologic and
inflammatory response that can cause renal injury and scarring (Figs.
575.5 and 575.6).
Table 575.1 and Figure 575.7 outline the host risk factors for UTI.
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is discussed in Chapter 576. If there is
grade III, IV, or V VUR and a febrile UTI, 90% of patients have evidence of acute pyelonephritis on renal scintigraphy or other imaging
studies. In females, UTIs often occur at the onset of toilet training
because of bowel-­bladder dysfunction that occurs at that age. The child
is trying to retain urine to stay dry, yet the bladder may have uninhibited contractions forcing urine out. The resulting high-­pressure,
turbulent urine flow and incomplete bladder emptying both increase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 575 u Urinary Tract Infections

A

3265

B

Fig. 575.4 A, Renal sonogram, 19-­mo-­old infant with perirenal abscess secondary to methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus. B, CT scan demonstrates extensive perinephric and focal intrarenal abscess. Patient underwent incision and drainage.

Table 575.1  Risk Factors for Urinary Tract Infection
Female anatomy
Uncircumcised male
Age ≤1 years
Vesicoureteral reflux
Toilet training
Voiding dysfunction
Sources of external irritation
(such as tight clothing,
pinworm infestation)

Obstructive uropathy
Urethral instrumentation
Constipation
Anatomic abnormality (labial
adhesion)
Neurogenic bladder
Sexual activity
Pregnancy

POTENTIATING

PROTECTIVE

Urolithiasis
Intrarenal reflux
1. Compound papillae
2. Acquired

Unobstructed
urine transport

Fig. 575.5 Scarred kidney from recurrent pyelonephritis.
Operative antimicrobial
urothelial activity
Regular, complete
bladder emptying
Normal perineal
resistance

Fig. 575.6 CT scan showing an area of parenchymal thinning corresponding to an underlying calyx, characteristic of pyelonephritic scarring or reflux nephropathy.

Ascent of infection

Vesicoureteral reflux
Unidirectional
urine flow

Obstructive uropathy
(any level)
Defective urothelial
defense
Imbalanced voiding
1. Neurogenic bladderinfrequent, incomplete
voiding
2. Constipation, inflammation
Diverticula
Periurethral colonization
1. Soilage (diaper, encopresis)
2. Inflammation
a. diaper rash
b. tub baths with chemical
irritant:
-bubble bath
-harsh soaps
(shampoo)
3. Phimosis

Fig. 575.7 Host factors that protect the urinary tract from infection
and abnormalities that potentiate the establishment of invasive bacterial infection. (From Holcomb III GW, Murphy JP, Ostlie DJ, eds. Holcomb and Ashcraft’s Pediatric Surgery, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2020. Fig. 55-­3, p. 855.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3266 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 575.2  Sensitivity and Specificity of Components of Urinalysis, Alone and in Combination
TEST

SENSITIVITY (RANGE) %

SPECIFICITY (RANGE) %

Leukocyte esterase test

83 (67–94)

78 (64–92)

Nitrite test

53 (15–82)

98 (90–100)

Leukocyte esterase or nitrite positive

93 (90–100)

72 (58–91)

Microscopy (white blood cells)

73 (32–100)

81 (45–98)

Microscopy (bacteria)

81 (16–99)

83 (11–100)

Leukocyte esterase test, nitrite, or microscopy positive

99.8 (99–100)

70 (60–92)

From Finnell SM, Carroll AE, Downs SM, Subcommittee on Urinary Tract Infection. Technical report—diagnosis and management of an initial UTI in febrile infants and young children.
Pediatrics. 2011;128:e749–e770.

the likelihood of bacteriuria. Bowel-­bladder dysfunction can arise in
school-­age children who refuse to use the school bathroom, creating a
state of urinary retention. Obstructive uropathy resulting in hydronephrosis increases the risk of UTI because of urinary stasis. Constipation with fecal impaction can increase the risk of UTI because it can
cause bladder dysfunction.
Other host factors for UTI include anatomic abnormalities precluding normal micturition, such as a labial adhesion. This lesion acts as a
barrier and causes vaginal voiding. A neurogenic bladder can predispose to UTI if there is incomplete bladder emptying and/or detrusor-­
sphincter dyssynergia or a resultant need for frequent catheterization.
Sexual activity is associated with UTI in females due to introduction
of bacteria near the urinary tract, which can be exacerbated in part
because of urethral irritation and incomplete bladder emptying following intercourse.
The pathogenesis of UTI is based in part on the presence of bacterial pili or fimbriae on the bacterial surface, which allow for attachment to the uroepithelial cells. For E. coli, this attachment occurs
through the type 1 fimbriae and P-­fimbriae, which may result in
bacterial uptake and replication and formation of intracellular bacterial communities. These intracellular organisms may evade the
immune response, form quiescent reservoirs protected from antibiotics, and be a source of recurrent infections. Current research is
attempting to prevent the initial attachment of bacteria to the bladder wall that can lead to intracellular bacterial communities and
quiescent reservoirs.

DIAGNOSIS

Among children 2-­24 months of age, risk factors for UTI include
age younger than 12 months, being a female or uncircumcised male,
temperature ≥39°C (102.2°F), fever for at least 2 days, and absence of
another source of infection. Urine testing is recommended when the
pretest probability of a UTI is ≥2%, and an online UTI calculator can
provide probability estimates (https://uticalc.pitt.edu/). In older verbal
children, urine testing should be considered when there are UTI symptoms. A positive urinalysis suggestive of infection (i.e., presence of
pyuria) plus a urine culture with ≥50,000 colony-­forming units (CFU)/
mL of a single uropathogen are recommended for diagnosis of a UTI in
a symptomatic child. In the appropriate clinical context, ≥10,000 CFU/
mL may be sufficient for diagnosis, especially if the laboratory does not
categorize counts between 10,000 and 100,000 CFU/mL.
There are several ways to obtain a urine sample; some are more accurate than others. In toilet-­trained children, a midstream urine sample
usually is satisfactory; the introitus should be cleaned before obtaining
the specimen. In uncircumcised males, the prepuce must be retracted;
if the prepuce is not retractable, a voided sample may be unreliable and
contaminated with skin flora. For children 2-­24 months who are not
toilet trained, a catheterized urine sample should be obtained. Alternatively, the application of an adhesive, sealed, sterile collection bag after
disinfection of the skin of the genitals can be useful only if the urinalysis and culture are negative; the negative predictive value for urinalysis
from a “bag” specimen is 99%. However, a positive culture can result
from skin contamination, particularly in females and uncircumcised

males. If treatment is planned immediately after obtaining the urine
sample, a bagged specimen should not be the method because of a high
rate of contamination, often with mixed organisms. A suprapubic aspirate generally is unnecessary.
Inclusion of pyuria in the diagnostic criteria along with a positive
urine culture helps to distinguish true UTI from asymptomatic bacteriuria or contamination. Pyuria is defined as ≥5 white blood cells
(WBCs)/high-­power field on a centrifuged specimen, ≥10 WBC/mm3
on an enhanced urinalysis, or any leukocyte esterase on a dipstick.
Additional urinalysis findings that support a UTI diagnosis include
presence of nitrites. Bacteria generally require 4 hours for metabolism
of nitrates to nitrites. Thus nitrites may not be detected in cases of UTI
where the organism does not convert nitrates to nitrites (most notably
Enterococcus) or if the child has urinary frequency, where there may
not be enough time for the conversion to nitrites. Findings of leukocyte
esterase, WBC on microscopy, or nitrites has a high sensitivity for UTI,
including in febrile infants <60 days of age (Table 575.2). Microscopic
hematuria is common in acute cystitis, but microhematuria alone does
not suggest UTI. WBC casts in the urinary sediment suggest renal
involvement, but in practice these are rarely seen.
Sterile pyuria (positive leukocytes, negative culture) may occur
in partially treated bacterial UTI, viral infections, urolithiasis, renal
tuberculosis, renal abscess, UTI in the presence of urinary obstruction,
urethritis as a consequence of a sexually transmitted infection (see
Chapter 163), inflammation near the ureter or bladder (appendicitis,
Crohn disease), Kawasaki disease (see Chapter 493.1), COVID-­19–
associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C;
see Chapter 311), schistosomiasis, neoplasm, renal transplant rejection, or interstitial nephritis (eosinophils). Prompt plating of the urine
sample for culture is important, because if the urine sits at room temperature for more than 60 minutes, overgrowth of a minor contaminant
can suggest a UTI when the urine might not be infected. Refrigeration
is a reliable method of storing the urine until it can be cultured.
With acute renal infection, leukocytosis and neutrophilia are noted
on the CBC; an elevated ESR, procalcitonin level, and CRP are common. However, these are all nonspecific markers of inflammation;
thus their elevation does not prove that the child has acute pyelonephritis, and they do not need to be routinely obtained. Bacteremia in
the setting of pyelonephritis is reported to occur in 3–20% of patients
and is most common in infants <60 days old (with rates decreasing
with increasing age in the first 60 days). For infants <60 days old or
ill-­appearing patients at presentation, blood cultures should be drawn
before starting antibiotics, if possible.

IMAGING FINDINGS

Imaging is not needed to make the diagnosis of UTI. If there is concern
about acute lobar nephronia or renal abscess (e.g., patient not responding to appropriate antibiotics), imaging should be considered. Ultrasound is the first-­line imaging for screening and will likely demonstrate
an enlarged kidney with a possible mass in the case of acute lobar
nephronia or renal abscess. CT scan is more sensitive and specific for
lobar nephronia and will typically show a wedge-­shaped, lower-­density
area after contrast administration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 575 u Urinary Tract Infections
TREATMENT

Acute cystitis should be treated promptly to prevent possible progression to pyelonephritis. If the symptoms are severe, and the
urinalysis shows pyuria, presumptive treatment should be started
while awaiting urine culture results. If the symptoms are mild or
the diagnosis is doubtful, treatment can be delayed until the results
of culture are known, and the urinalysis and culture can be repeated
if the results are uncertain. In acute febrile UTI, the clinical symptoms of cystitis and pyelonephritis are difficult to differentiate.
Given the presence of systemic symptoms, it is reasonable to consider that the infection has likely progressed to the kidneys and
treat for pyelonephritis. A UTI can be treated safely and effectively
with oral antibiotics in the outpatient setting, including in younger
children. Thus route of therapy should be based on practical considerations. Parenteral therapy should be used in children who are
dehydrated, are vomiting, are unable to drink fluids, have complicated infection, or in whom urosepsis is a possibility. Infants less
than 1 month of age with suspected febrile UTI are typically hospitalized and started on parenteral antibiotics while awaiting results
of a sepsis evaluation and can be converted to oral therapy if there
is no concern for meningitis and they are otherwise clinically well.
Infants 1-­2 months of age can be managed as an outpatient unless
hospitalization is indicated for other reasons (e.g., emesis, dehydration). Although infants with bacteremic UTI are often treated with
longer parenteral courses, duration of therapy has not been associated with UTI relapse.
Local antimicrobial sensitivity patterns should be considered when
selecting empiric antibiotic treatment. For oral treatment, cephalexin
is a commonly used narrow-­spectrum empiric option, as overall rates
of E. coli resistance to first-­generation cephalosporins are low. In
areas with high rates of E. coli resistance to first-­generation cephalosporins, oral third-­generation cephalosporins such as cefixime can
be appropriate empiric options and are effective against a variety of
gram-­
negative organisms. Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­
SMX) may also be used, though resistance is increasing in some
areas. Nitrofurantoin can be used for cystitis but should not be used
routinely in children with a febrile UTI, because it does not achieve
significant renal tissue levels. The oral fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin can be considered for UTI caused by P. aeruginosa or resistant
microorganisms when there are no other oral antibiotic options.
However, clinical treatment with fluoroquinolones in young children
should be used with caution because of potential cartilage damage.
For parenteral treatment in hospitalized children 1 month and older,
ceftriaxone is a reasonable choice until culture results are available
to determine whether a narrower-­spectrum antibiotic can be used.
Ampicillin plus either gentamicin or a third-­generation cephalosporin are often used empirically in neonates. If prior urine culture
results have grown resistant or atypical organisms, other antibiotic
choices may be prudent on a case-­by-­case basis.
A repeat urine culture after the termination of UTI treatment is
not routinely needed. Urine cultures are typically negative within
24 hours of initiation of antibiotic therapy; therefore a urine culture during treatment is almost invariably negative. Most children
exhibit clinical improvement (afebrile) within 48-­72 hours of antibiotic initiation. Recommended duration of therapy is generally 3-­5
days for cystitis and 7-­10 days for uncomplicated pyelonephritis.
Atypical features include failure to respond within 48-­72 hours of
appropriate antibiotics; poor urine flow; an abdominal, flank, or
suprapubic mass; sepsis; or an elevated creatinine level. Atypical
features should prompt further evaluation.

Acute Lobar Nephronia, Renal Abscess, and Perinephric
Abscess
Acute lobar nephronia is treated with the same antibiotics as pyelonephritis. The recommended duration of treatment is 14-­21 days;

3267

one study suggested higher treatment failure in the group treated
for shorter duration. Children with a renal or perirenal abscess or
with infection in obstructed urinary tracts can require percutaneous or surgical drainage in addition to antibiotic therapy and other
supportive measures (see Fig. 575.4). Percutaneous drainage is
typically attempted prior to surgical intervention. Medical management alone has been successful in treating small-­to-­moderate renal
abscesses. Although some studies have commented that resolution
with antibiotics alone are more likely in abscesses 3 cm or less, some
patients with abscesses >3 cm have been managed successfully with
IV antibiotics only. Thus a 48-­hour trial of IV antibiotics prior to
percutaneous drainage may be warranted in otherwise stable children. Few studies address the role of oral antibiotic therapy for renal
abscess. Traditionally, patients received 10-­14 days of IV antibiotics,
followed by 2-­4 weeks of oral antibiotic therapy targeted against the
known organism (or the likely causes of E. coli and S. aureus if the
organism was unknown). The increasing use of oral antibiotics for
other serious infections (e.g., osteomyelitis) suggests that an earlier
transition to oral therapy for renal abscess is likely feasible. Kidney loss is reported to occur in 10–20% of cases of renal abscess.
Perinephric abscesses may be managed with IV antibiotics alone or
with percutaneous drainage if the area is large or causing impaired
kidney function. Identification of a causative organism can be an
additional advantage of percutaneous drainage of a perinephric
abscess because the infection may remain isolated from the collecting system based on the location.

Other Potential Treatment or Prevention Options

There is interest in probiotic therapy as well as cranberry juice to
prevent UTIs. Studies are ongoing and a probiotic containing a non-­
uropathogenic E. coli called Nissle 1917 is available in Europe and
other parts of the world. These bacteria may inhibit growth of other
bacteria. Cranberry juice may prevent bacterial adhesion and biofilm
formation, hypothesized to be via proanthocyanidin (PAC). Currently
there is insufficient evidence regarding the use of these therapies in
children to reduce UTIs.
The main consequences of chronic renal damage caused by
pyelonephritis are arterial hypertension and end-­stage renal insufficiency; when they are found, they should be treated appropriately
(see Chapters 494 and 572). Even without chronic renal damage, the
consequences of infections include lost days from school and work,
uncomfortable symptoms, and exposure to antibiotics that change
the healthy microbiome.

IMAGING STUDIES IN CHILDREN WITH A
FEBRILE UTI

The primary goal of imaging studies in children with a febrile UTI is
to identify anatomic abnormalities that predispose to future infection, such as high-­grade VUR, posterior urethral valves, or other
obstructive uropathy. Imaging is usually unnecessary in children
with afebrile cystitis. Historically, children either underwent a renal
sonogram plus a voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) in a “bottom­up” approach, or a dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) renal scan
first to identify areas of acute pyelonephritis (Fig. 575.8) in a “top-­
down” approach. If the DMSA scan was positive, then a VCUG was
performed (Fig. 575.9) because up to 90% of children with dilating
reflux have a positive DMSA scan. In the past decade, with increasing evidence that most children with first-­time UTI have normal
genitourinary tracts and the unclear benefit of early detection of
VUR, most national guidelines recommend selective imaging for
children with UTI. Though the sensitivity of renal-­bladder ultrasounds for detecting VUR is poor, there is no established harm of
nondetection of VUR after a first UTI.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3268 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children

LPO

RPO

Fig. 575.8 DMSA renal scan showing bilateral photopenic areas in-

dicating acute pyelonephritis and renal scarring. LPO, left posterior
oblique; RPO, right posterior oblique.

Most experts still recommend initial ultrasound of the kidneys,
ureters, and bladder for children 2-­24 months with a first febrile
UTI. VCUG should be obtained if the ultrasound study indicates
hydronephrosis, scarring, or other findings suggestive of high-­
grade (e.g., grades IV-­V) reflux or obstructive uropathy, or if the
patient has other atypical complex features. Further, a VCUG
should be obtained if the child has a recurrent febrile UTI (Table
575.3). The rate of renal scarring increases between days 2 and 3 of
fever; this makes the prompt evaluation and appropriate treatment
of a recurrent UTI important. The risk of scarring also increases
with the number of episodes of pyelonephritis and with higher
grades of reflux.
The NICE (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
UK) guidelines for diagnosis, management, and imaging after
UTI were released in 2022 (Table 575.4). These recommendations
divided children into those younger than 6 months, 6 months to
younger than 3 years, and 3 years and older. An initial renal-­bladder
ultrasound is recommended for all children younger than 6 months,
and a VCUG only if atypical features (including non–E. coli infection, sepsis or bacteremia, failure to respond to antibiotics within
48 hours), recurrent UTI, or abnormal ultrasound findings. For
children age 6 months to younger than 3 years who have a UTI with
atypical features or recurrent UTI, an ultrasound is recommended,
and if risk factors are present, then also a VCUG should also be
obtained (see Table 575.4). No imaging is suggested for otherwise
first-­time, typical UTI in this age group. When ultrasound is recommended, the optimal timing for obtaining it is unclear. Most
national guidelines recommend an ultrasound during the acute
infection if there is concern for obstruction (e.g., not responding
to antibiotics, elevated creatinine, poor urine flow) but otherwise
nonurgently within 2-­6 weeks after the UTI as routine ultrasound
during the acute infection rarely changes management.

PREVENTION OF RECURRENCES

Fig. 575.9 Intrarenal reflux. VCUG in an infant boy with a history of a

UTI. Note the right VUR with ureteral dilation, with opacification of the
renal parenchyma representing intrarenal reflux.

In a child with recurrent UTIs, identification of predisposing factors is beneficial. Bowel and bladder dysfunction is a very important contributor to recurrent UTIs and is one of the main reasons
for an increase in UTIs around the time of toilet training. Bladder dysfunction is manifested by urgency, wetting, and especially
“Vincent’s curtsy” (children squat on their heels in response to
an uninhibited bladder contraction) (see Chapter 580). In toilet-­
trained children, a thorough history and use of urodynamic studies
and measurement of postvoid residual volumes may be helpful in

Table 575.3  Guideline Recommendations for Diagnostic Evaluation Following a Febrile Urinary Tract Infection in Infants
GUIDELINE

ULTRASONOGRAPHY

VCUG

LATE DMSA SCAN

National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE)

See Table 575.4

American Academy of Pediatrics
(retired)

Yes

If abnormal ultrasonogram or febrile recurrence

No

Italian Society for Paediatric
Nephrology (ISPN)

Yes

If abnormal ultrasonogram, non-­Escherichia coli
infection, or febrile recurrence

If grade IV-­V VUR

Spanish Association of Paediatrics

Yes, if age <6 months,
atypical infection,* or
recurrence

If abnormal ultrasonogram, atypical infection,* or
recurrence

If atypical infection* or
recurrence

Swiss consensus recommendations

Yes

If abnormal ultrasonogram, atypical infection,† or
febrile recurrence

No

*Defined as fever >48 hours after appropriate antibiotics, sepsis, non–E. coli infection, acute kidney injury, or abdominal or vesical mass.
†Defined as failure to respond to appropriate antibiotics within 48 hours, non–E. coli infection, increased creatinine, abnormal electrolytes, hypertension, or poor urine flow.
VCUG, Voiding cystourethrogram; DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid; VUR, vesicoureteral reflux.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 575 u Urinary Tract Infections

3269

Table 575.4  NICE Recommended Imaging Schedule for Children with Urinary Tract Infection
TYPE OF INFECTION
CHILD AGE AND TESTS

RESPONDS WELL TO TREATMENT
WITHIN 48 HR

ATYPICAL INFECTION* RECURRENT INFECTION

CHILDREN YOUNGER THAN 6 MO OLD
Ultrasound scan during acute infection
Ultrasound scan within 6 wk of infection
DMSA scan 4-­6 mo after acute infection
VCUG

No
Yes
No
Consider if ultrasound scan abnormal

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

CHILDREN 6 MO TO YOUNGER THAN 3 YR OLD
Ultrasound scan during acute infection
No
Ultrasound scan within 6 wk of infection
No
DMSA scan 4-­6 mo after acute infection
No
VCUG
No

CHILDREN 3 YR OR OLDER
Ultrasound scan during acute infection
Ultrasound scan within 6 wk of infection
DMSA scan 4-­6 mo after acute infection
VCUG

No
No
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Not routine; consider if dilation on ultrasound, poor
urine flow, non–E. coli infection, or family history of
vesicoureteral reflux
Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

*Defined as seriously ill, poor urine flow, abdominal or bladder mass, raised creatinine, sepsis or bacteriemia, failure to respond to appropriate antibiotics within 48 hours, or infection
with non–E. coli organisms.
NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; DMSA, Dimercaptosuccinic acid; VCUG, voiding cystourethrogram.
Adapted from National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Urinary tract infection in children: Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term management. NICE clinical guidelines, no.
224. London: RCOG Press; 2022. Tables 4–6.

identifying children with bladder dysfunction that may contribute
to UTI. Tightening the pelvic floor during urination can sometimes be seen on a VCUG as a spinning-­top urethra (Fig. 575.10).
An ultrasound may document residual urine and possibly a thick
bladder wall. Urodynamics may show an intermittent stream with
increased activity in the pelvic floor muscles. Some children with
UTI may also have constipation (see Chapter 378.3). Behavioral
modification, with treatment of constipation as described in
Chapter 580, often is effective at reducing recurrent UTI from
constipation.
Routine use of antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended for
children with a first episode of pyelonephritis and an otherwise
anatomically normal urinary tract. Urologic conditions that can
cause recurrent UTIs that might benefit from long-­term antibiotic prophylaxis include neurogenic bladder, urinary tract stasis
and obstruction, severe VUR (see Chapter 576), and urinary calculi. The RIVUR study was a randomized trial of TMP-­SMX prophylaxis for patients with a history of UTI and diagnosed grades
I-­IV VUR. Although the UTI recurrence rate was decreased by half
from 30% in the group not receiving prophylaxis to 15% in those
receiving prophylaxis, rates of renal scarring were the same in both
groups. Additionally, the rates of UTI caused by resistant organisms
increased in the group receiving prophylaxis. Although the use of
prophylaxis can decrease rates of recurrence, routine prophylaxis is
not recommended for children with VUR (especially lower-­grade
VUR) due to the increase in antibiotic resistance, need for daily
medication in children, and lack of change in renal scarring.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 575.10 VCUG shows contraction of the pelvic floor and external
sphincter during voiding, leading to a dilated posterior urethra and bilateral reflux.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3270 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children

Chapter 576

Vesicoureteral Reflux
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) describes the retrograde flow of urine
from the bladder to the ureter and kidney. The ureteral attachment
to the bladder normally is oblique, between the bladder mucosa and
detrusor muscle, creating a flap-­valve mechanism that prevents VUR
(Fig. 576.1). VUR occurs when the submucosal tunnel between the
mucosa and detrusor muscle is short or absent. Affecting 1–2% of children, VUR usually is congenital and often is familial. VUR is present in
approximately 30% of females who had a urinary tract infection and in
5–15% of infants with antenatal hydronephrosis.
VUR predisposes to kidney infection (pyelonephritis) by facilitating the transport of bacteria from the bladder to the upper urinary
tract (see Chapter 575). The inflammatory reaction caused by pyelonephritis can result in renal injury or scarring, also termed reflux-­related
renal injury or reflux nephropathy. In children with a febrile urinary
tract infection, those with VUR are three times more likely to develop
renal injury compared with those without VUR. Extensive renal scarring impairs renal function and can result in renin-­mediated hypertension (see Chapter 494), renal insufficiency or end-­stage renal disease
(see Chapter 572), impaired somatic growth, and morbidity during
pregnancy. Scarring associated with reflux may be present at birth
or develop in the absence of infection if there is significant bladder-­
sphincter discoordination during voiding.
In the past, reflux nephropathy accounted for as much as 15–20%
of end-­stage renal disease in children and young adults. With greater
attention to the management of UTIs and a better understanding
of VUR, end-­stage renal disease secondary to reflux nephropathy is
uncommon. Reflux nephropathy remains a common cause of hypertension in children. VUR in the absence of infection or elevated bladder pressure (e.g., neuropathic bladder, posterior urethral valves) rarely
causes renal injury.

occurs primarily in males and may be unilateral or bilateral (Fig.
576.4). Reimplantation of the ureters into the bladder to correct VUR
corrects the condition.
Primary VUR appears to be an autosomal dominant inherited trait
with variable penetrance. Approximately 35% of siblings of children
with VUR also have VUR, and VUR is found in nearly half of newborn
siblings. The likelihood of a sibling having VUR is independent of the
grade of VUR or sex of the index child. Approximately 12% of asymptomatic siblings with VUR have evidence of renal scarring. In addition,
50% of children born to women with a history of VUR also have VUR.
The American Urological Association Vesicoureteral Reflux Guidelines
Panel stated that, in siblings of individuals with VUR, a VCUG or radionuclide cystogram is recommended if there is evidence of a renal cortical
abnormality or renal size asymmetry on sonography, or if the sibling has
a history of febrile UTI. Otherwise, screening is optional. VUR may be
suggested on a prenatal ultrasound that demonstrates hydronephrosis
or hydroureteronephrosis.
Approximately 1 in 125 children has a duplication of the upper
urinary tract, in which two ureters rather than one drain the kidney.
Duplication may be partial or complete. In partial duplication, the

Grade:

I

II

III

IV

V

Fig. 576.2 Grading of VUR. Grade I: VUR into a nondilated ureter.

Grade II: VUR into the upper collecting system without dilation. Grade
III: VUR into a dilated ureter and/or blunting of the calyceal fornices.
Grade IV: VUR into a grossly dilated ureter. Grade V: massive VUR, with
significant ureteral dilation and tortuosity and loss of the papillary impression.

CLASSIFICATION

VUR severity is graded using the International Reflux Study (IRS) classification of I-­V and is based on the appearance of the urinary tract on
a contrast voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) (Figs. 576.2 and 576.3).
The higher the VUR grade the greater the likelihood of renal injury.
VUR severity is an indirect indication of the degree of abnormality of
the ureterovesical junction.
VUR may be primary or secondary (Table 576.1). Bladder-­bowel
dysfunction (BBD) can worsen preexisting VUR if there is a marginally competent ureterovesical junction. In the most severe cases, there
is such massive VUR into the upper tracts that the bladder becomes
overdistended. This condition, the megacystis-­megaureter syndrome,

Fig. 576.1 Normal and abnormal configuration of the ureteral orifices. Shown from left to right, progressive lateral displacement of the
ureteral orifices and shortening of the intramural tunnels. Top, Endoscopic appearance. Bottom, Sagittal view through the intramural ureter.

Fig. 576.3 VCUG showing grade IV right VUR.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 576 u Vesicoureteral Reflux

3271

Table 576.1  Classification of Vesicoureteral Reflux
TYPE

CAUSE

Primary

Congenital incompetence of
the valvular mechanism of the
vesicoureteral junction

Primary associated with other
malformations of the
ureterovesical junction

Ureteral duplication
Ureterocele with duplication
Ureteral ectopia
Paraureteral diverticula

Secondary to increased
intravesical pressure

Neuropathic bladder
Nonneuropathic bladder
dysfunction
Bladder outlet obstruction

Secondary to inflammatory
processes

Severe bacterial cystitis
Foreign bodies
Vesical calculi
Clinical cystitis

Secondary to surgical
procedures involving the
ureterovesical junction

Surgery

Fig. 576.4 VCUG in a newborn with megacystis-­megaureter syndrome. Note the massive ureteral dilation caused by high-­grade VUR.
The bladder is very distended. There was no urethral obstruction or
neuropathic dysfunction.

ureters join above the bladder, and there is one ureteral orifice. In
complete duplication, the attachment of the lower pole ureter to the
bladder is superior and lateral to the upper pole ureter. The valvelike
mechanism for the lower pole ureter often is marginal, and VUR into
the lower ureter occurs in as many as 50% of cases (Fig. 576.5). VUR
occurs into both the lower and upper systems in some persons. With
a duplication anomaly, some patients have an ectopic ureter, in which
the upper pole ureter drains outside the bladder (see Chapter 577 and
Figs. 577.6 and 577.7). If the ectopic ureter drains into the bladder
neck, typically it is obstructed and refluxes. Duplication anomalies also
are common in children with a ureterocele, which is a cystic swelling
of the intramural portion of the distal ureter. These patients often have
VUR into the associated lower pole ureter or the contralateral ureter.
In addition, generally VUR is present when the ureter enters a bladder
diverticulum (Fig. 576.6).
VUR is present at birth in 25% of children with neuropathic bladder, as occurs in myelomeningocele (see Chapters 579 and 631.4),
sacral agenesis, and many cases of high imperforate anus. VUR is seen

Primary

A.

B.
Diverticula

Duplication

Ureterocele
with duplication

Ureteral
ectopia

Fig. 576.5 Various anatomic defects of the ureterovesical junction
associated with VUR.

Fig. 576.6 VUR and bladder diverticulum. The VCUG demonstrates
left VUR and a paraureteral diverticulum.

in 50% of males with posterior urethral valves. VUR with increased
intravesical pressure (as in detrusor-­sphincter discoordination or bladder outlet obstruction) can result in renal injury because of increased
intravesical pressure transmitted to the upper urinary tract, even in the
absence of infection.
Primary VUR occurs in association with several congenital urinary
tract abnormalities. Of children with a multicystic dysplastic kidney or
renal agenesis (see Chapter 574), 15% have VUR into the contralateral
kidney, and 10–15% of children with a ureteropelvic junction obstruction have VUR into either the hydronephrotic kidney or the contralateral kidney. As such, a diagnosis of VUR should prompt complete
investigation to rule out concomitant pathology contralaterally.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

VUR usually is discovered during evaluation for a UTI (see Chapter
575). Among these children, 80% are female, with an average age at
diagnosis of 2-­3 years. In other children, a VCUG is performed during evaluation of BBD, renal insufficiency, hypertension, or other
suspected pathologic process of the urinary tract. Primary VUR also
may be discovered during evaluation for antenatal hydronephrosis. In
this select population, 80% of affected children are male, and the VUR

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3272 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
grade usually is higher than in females whose VUR is diagnosed following a UTI. The UTI may be symptomatic, an isolated febrile event,
or more often both febrile and symptomatic (abdominal pain, dysuria).
BBD (constipation) may be present in 50% of children with reflux and
a UTI.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of VUR requires catheterization of the bladder, instillation
of a solution containing iodinated contrast or a radiopharmaceutical,
and radiologic imaging of the lower and upper urinary tract (a contrast VCUG or radionuclide cystogram, respectively). The bladder and
upper urinary tracts are imaged during bladder filling and voiding.
VUR occurring during bladder filling is termed low-­pressure VUR;
VUR during voiding is termed high-­pressure VUR. VUR in children
with low-­pressure VUR is significantly less likely to resolve spontaneously than in children who exhibit only high-­pressure VUR. Radiation
exposure during a radionuclide cystogram is significantly less than that
from a contrast VCUG. Low-­dose radiation contrast VCUG provides
more anatomic information, such as demonstration of a duplex collecting system, ectopic ureter, paraureteral (bladder) diverticulum, bladder outlet obstruction in males, upper urinary tract stasis, and signs of
voiding dysfunction, such as a spinning-­top urethra in females. The
VUR grading system is based on the appearance on contrast VCUG,
and the grade reported is the maximum grade observed during the
study. For follow-­up evaluation, some prefer the radionuclide cystogram because of the lower radiation exposure (Fig. 576.7), although it

is difficult to determine whether the VUR severity has changed and the
grading system for the radionuclide study is different than the standard
IRS grading system.
Children undergoing cystography may be psychologically traumatized by the catheterization. Careful preparation by caregivers, use of
Child Life specialists, or administration of oral or nasal midazolam (for
sedation and amnesia) or propofol before the study can result in a less-­
distressing experience.
Indirect cystography is a technique of detecting VUR without catheterization that involves injecting an intravenous radiopharmaceutical
that is excreted by the kidneys, waiting for it to be excreted into the
bladder, and imaging the lower urinary tract while the patient voids.
This technique detects only 75% of VUR cases. Another technique,
which avoids radiation exposure, involves instilling sonographic contrast medium through a urethral catheter. The kidneys are imaged
sonographically to determine whether any of the material refluxes. This
technique is currently investigational only.
After VUR is diagnosed, assessment of the upper urinary tract is
important. The goal of upper tract imaging is to assess whether renal
scarring and associated urinary tract anomalies are present. Renal
imaging typically is performed with a renal sonogram and/or renal
scintigraphy (Fig. 576.8; see Chapter 575).
The child should be evaluated for BBD, including urgency, frequency,
diurnal incontinence, infrequent voiding, or a combination of these
(see Chapter 575). Children with an overactive bladder often undergo
a regimen of behavioral modification with timed voiding, treatment of
constipation, and, on occasion, anticholinergic therapy.
After diagnosis, the child’s height, weight, and blood pressure should
be measured and monitored. If upper tract imaging shows renal scarring, a serum creatinine measurement should be obtained. The urine
should be assessed for infection and proteinuria.

NATURAL HISTORY

Fig. 576.7 Radionuclide cystogram shows bilateral VUR.

The incidence of reflux-­related renal scarring increases with VUR
grade. With bladder growth and maturation, the VUR grade often
resolves or improves. Lower grades of VUR are much more likely to
resolve than are higher grades. For grade I and II VUR, the likelihood
of resolution is similar regardless of age at diagnosis and whether it
is unilateral or bilateral. For grade III, a younger age at diagnosis and
unilateral VUR usually are associated with a higher rate of spontaneous
resolution (Fig. 576.9). Bilateral grade IV VUR is much less likely to
resolve than is unilateral grade IV VUR. Grade V VUR rarely resolves.
The mean age at VUR resolution is 6 years. BBD and grade III-­V VUR
are the most common risk factors for recurrent febrile UTI and new renal
scarring.
Sterile VUR does not usually cause renal injury in the absence of
infection, but in situations with high-­pressure VUR, as in children with
posterior urethral valves, neuropathic bladder, and nonneurogenic
neurogenic bladder (i.e., Hinman syndrome), sterile VUR can cause
significant renal damage. Children with high-­grade VUR who acquire

1

A

B

1

Posterior

Anterior

LT  33% RT  67%

RT  68% LT  32%

C

Fig. 576.8 A, VCUG in a 3-­yr-­old child with two febrile UTIs shows bilateral grade III VUR. B, At 5 years, repeat VCUG shows worsening VUR and
calyceal clubbing, indicating renal scarring. C, At 11 years, renin-­mediated hypertension has developed. Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) renal scan
shows significant VUR-­related renal scarring.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

100
80

Grade IV–Bilateral
Grade IV–Unilateral

60
Grade I

40

Grade II

20
0

0

1

A

4
2
3
Years since presentation

Percentage of children with reflux

Percentage of children with reflux

Chapter 576 u Vesicoureteral Reflux

5

B

3273

100
80
60

Bilateral age
6–10
Bilateral age 3–5

40

Unilateral age 6–10
Bilateral age 1–2
Unilateral age 3–5

20
0

Unilateral age 1–2
0

1

2
3
4
Years since presentation

5

Fig. 576.9 A, Percentage chance of VUR persistence, grades I, II, and IV, for 1-­5 years after presentation. B, Percentage chance of VUR persistence

by age at presentation, grade III, for 1-­5 years after presentation. (From Elder JS, Peters CA, Arant BS Jr, et al. Pediatric Vesicoureteral Reflux Guidelines Panel summary report on the management of primary vesicoureteral reflux in children. J Urol. 1997;157:1846–1851.)

a UTI are at significant risk for acute and recurrent pyelonephritis and
new renal scarring (see Fig. 576.8).

TREATMENT

The goals of treatment are to prevent pyelonephritis, VUR-­related
renal injury, and other complications of VUR. Medical therapy is
based on the principle that VUR often resolves over time and that if
UTIs can be prevented, the morbidity or complications of VUR may
be avoided without surgery. Medical therapy includes observation
with behavioral modification or behavioral modification with antimicrobial prophylaxis in some patients. The basis for surgical therapy is
that in selected children, ongoing VUR has caused or has significant
potential for causing renal injury or other VUR-­related complications,
and that elimination of VUR minimizes the risk of these problems.
Therapy for VUR should be individualized based on a particular
patient’s risk factors.

Observation

In children undergoing observation, therapeutic emphasis is directed at
minimizing the risk of UTI by behavioral modification. These methods
include timed voiding during the day, ensuring regular fecal elimination, increased fluid intake, periodic assessment of satisfactory bladder
emptying, and prompt assessment and treatment of UTIs, particularly
febrile UTIs. This approach is most appropriate for children with grade
I and II VUR, and perhaps older children with persistent VUR and
normal kidneys who have not experienced clinical pyelonephritis.

Antimicrobial Prophylaxis

In the past, daily antimicrobial prophylaxis was recommended as an
initial approach to most children with VUR. However, several prospective clinical trials question the benefit of prophylaxis in children with
VUR. The risk of recurrent UTI is highest in patients with grade III
or IV reflux, those with BBD, and those whose first reflux-­associated
UTI was febrile rather than just symptomatic without fever. Antibiotic
prophylaxis after a reflux-­associated UTI decreases the risk of recurrent UTI but may increase the risk of developing resistant bacteria. In
one study, antibiotic prophylaxis reduced the risk of new renal scars
in children with grade III or IV reflux, while in another larger study,
antibiotic prophylaxis did not affect the incidence of new renal scars
in those with severe reflux (approximately 10% developed new scars
regardless of prophylaxis).

Surgery

The purpose of surgical therapy is to minimize the risk of febrile UTI
from ongoing VUR and nonsurgical therapy (observation or prophylaxis with follow-­up testing). VUR can be corrected through a lower
abdominal or inguinal incision (open), laparoscopically (with or without robotic assistance), or endoscopically with subureteral injection of
a bulking agent.

Surgical management involves modifying the abnormal ureterovesical attachment. The operation can be performed from either outside (extravesical) or inside the bladder (intravesical). When VUR is
associated with severe ureteral dilation (i.e., megaureter), the ureter
must be tailored or narrowed to a more normal size to allow a smaller
length:width ratio for the intramural tunnel, and a corner of the bladder is attached to the psoas tendon, forming a psoas hitch. Most children can be discharged 1-­2 days following the surgical procedure. If the
refluxing kidney is poorly functioning, nephrectomy or nephroureterectomy is indicated. Minimally invasive approaches with laparoscopic
and robotic-­
assisted laparoscopic ureteral reimplantation offer
alternatives to open surgical management; as experience with these
procedures grows, success rates are approaching that of open surgery.
The success rate of conventional open ureteral reimplantation
in children with primary VUR is >95–98% for grades I-­IV, with 2%
experiencing persistent VUR and 1% having ureteral obstruction
that requires correction. The success rate is so high that many pediatric urologists do not perform a postoperative VCUG unless the child
develops clinical pyelonephritis. For grade V VUR, the success rate is
approximately 80%. In lower grades of VUR, a failed reimplantation
is most likely to occur in children with undiagnosed BBD. In children
with secondary VUR (posterior urethral valves, neuropathic bladder),
the success rate is slightly lower than with primary VUR. The risk of
pyelonephritis in children with grade III and IV VUR is significantly
lower following open surgical correction compared with medical
management. Surgical repair will not reverse renal scarring or lead to
improvement in renal function.
Endoscopic repair of VUR involves injection of a bulking agent
through a cystoscope just beneath the ureteral orifice, creating an
effective flap-­valve (Figs. 576.10 and 576.11). In 2001, the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of a biodegradable material, dextranomer microspheres suspended in hyaluronic
acid (Dx-­HA) (Deflux), for subureteral injection. The advantage of
subureteral injection is that it is a noninvasive outpatient procedure
(performed under general anesthesia) with no recovery time. The
success rate is 70–80% and is highest for lower grades of VUR. If the
first injection is unsuccessful, one or two repeat injections can be performed. The VUR recurrence rate is approximately 10–20%. In other
areas of the world, a polyacrylamide hydrogel is used for endoscopic
injection. The success rate with this product, which is not approved in
the United States, is similar to Dx-­HA, but the risk of reflux recurrence
is significantly less.

CURRENT VESICOURETERAL REFLUX GUIDELINES

The long-­standing belief regarding the benefit of antibiotic prophylaxis
in children with VUR has been questioned. Multiple randomized, controlled prospective trials suggested that the risk of UTI in children with
VUR is not reduced by prophylaxis. Most of the children in these trials
had grade I-­III VUR, and few younger than 1 year of age were studied.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3274 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
In contrast, the PRIVENT (Prevention of Recurrent Urinary Tract
Infection in Children with Vesicoureteric Reflux and Normal Renal
Tracts) trial from Australia showed significant benefit to prophylaxis in
children with VUR. The Swedish VUR Trial in Children studied children younger than 2 years of age with grades III and IV VUR; they
compared antibiotic prophylaxis (nitrofurantoin) with observation and
endoscopic injection therapy. Females in the surveillance group had a
significantly higher incidence of febrile UTI and new renal scarring
compared with the other treatment groups. The largest randomized
trial (RIVUR [Randomized Intervention for Children with Vesicoureteral Reflux]) enrolled more than 600 children and demonstrated

Ureteral
orifice

Bulking agent

Submucosa
Narrowed
ureteral orifice

Fig. 576.10 Endoscopic correction of VUR. Through a cystoscope,

a needle is inserted into the submucosal plane deep to the ureteral
orifice, and a bulking agent is injected, creating a flap-­valve to prevent VUR. (Adapted from Ortenberg J. Endoscopic treatment of vesicoureteral reflux in children. Urol Clin North Am. 1998;25:151–156.)

A

a reduction in the recurrence rate of UTIs with no reduction in the
occurrence of renal scarring with antibiotic prophylaxis, but the prevalence of renal scarring at study entry was low.
Prophylaxis is recommended by the American Urologic Association
(AUA) in children at greatest risk for VUR-­related renal injury (i.e.,
those <1 year of age). In addition, evaluation for bladder and bowel
dysfunction is considered a standard part of initial and ongoing patient
evaluation in children with VUR. Because children with BBD and
VUR are much more likely to have recurrent UTIs and renal scarring,
prophylaxis is recommended for these children. In children with VUR
who are being managed by surveillance, if a febrile UTI occurs, prophylaxis is recommended. The decision whether to recommend observation, medical therapy, or surgery is based on the risk of VUR to the
patient, the likelihood of spontaneous resolution, and the parents’ and
patient’s preferences; the family should understand the risks and benefits of each treatment approach.
Another aspect of VUR management pertains to screening. VUR is
known to be a familial disorder with autosomal dominant transmission
with variable penetrance. The advantage of early VUR detection is to
implement treatment before a potentially damaging episode of clinical pyelonephritis. In siblings of an index patient with VUR, optional
management includes screening of asymptomatic siblings or offspring
with a renal ultrasound or VCUG. The AUA recommends that a VCUG
should be obtained if a screening ultrasound demonstrated a renal
abnormality or if the sibling had a UTI.
The AUA also determined that female newborns with renal pelvic
dilation were more likely than male newborns to have VUR. The AUA
recommends that a VCUG be performed in neonates with grade III-­IV
antenatal hydronephrosis (moderate to severe pelvicalyceal dilation),
hydroureter, or an abnormal bladder. In children with less severe renal
pelvic dilation, an observational approach without screening for VUR,
with prompt treatment of any UTI, is appropriate. However, the AUA
also indicated that obtaining a VCUG is considered an appropriate
option for neonates with lesser grades of hydronephrosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

B

Fig. 576.11 A, Endoscopic view of right vesicoureteral refluxing ureter. B, The same ureter after subureteral injection of dextranomer microspheres.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 577 u Obstruction of the Urinary Tract

Chapter 577

Obstruction of the Urinary
Tract

Table 577.1  Types and Causes of Urinary Tract
Obstruction
LOCATION

CAUSE

Infundibula

Congenital
Calculi
Inflammatory (tuberculosis)
Traumatic
Postsurgical
Neoplastic

Renal pelvis

Congenital (infundibulopelvic
stenosis)
Inflammatory (tuberculosis)
Calculi
Neoplasia (Wilms tumor,
neuroblastoma)

Ureteropelvic junction

Congenital stenosis
Calculi
Neoplasia
Inflammatory
Postsurgical
Traumatic

Ureter

Congenital obstructive
megaureter
Midureteral structure
Ureteral ectopia
Ureterocele
Retrocaval ureter
Ureteral fibroepithelial polyps
Ureteral valves
Calculi
Postsurgical
Extrinsic compression
Neoplasia (neuroblastoma,
lymphoma, and other
retroperitoneal or pelvic tumors)
Inflammatory (Crohn disease,
chronic granulomatous disease)
Hematoma, urinoma
Lymphocele
Retroperitoneal fibrosis

Bladder outlet and urethra

Neurogenic bladder dysfunction
(functional obstruction)
Posterior urethral valves
Anterior urethral valves
Diverticula
Urethral strictures (congenital,
traumatic, or iatrogenic)
Urethral atresia
Ectopic ureterocele
Meatal stenosis (males)
Calculi
Foreign bodies
Phimosis
Extrinsic compression by tumors
Urogenital sinus anomalies

Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
Most childhood obstructive lesions are congenital, although urinary
tract obstruction can be caused by trauma, neoplasia, calculi, inflammatory processes, or surgical procedures. Obstructive lesions occur at
any level from the urethral meatus to the calyceal infundibula (Table
577.1). The pathophysiologic effects of obstruction depend on its level,
the extent of involvement, the child’s age at onset, and whether it is
acute or chronic.

ETIOLOGY

Severe ureteral obstruction early in fetal life results in renal dysplasia,
ranging from multicystic kidney, which is associated with ureteral or
ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) atresia (see Fig. 574.3), to various degrees
of histologic renal cortical dysplasia that are seen with less severe
obstruction. Chronic ureteral obstruction in late fetal life or after birth
results in dilation of the ureter, renal pelvis, and calyces with alterations
of renal parenchyma ranging from minimal tubular changes to dilation
of Bowman’s space, glomerular fibrosis, and interstitial fibrosis. After
birth, infection can complicate obstruction and worsen renal damage.
Prenatal screening with ultrasonography (US) may detect antenatal hydronephrosis (ANH), which is graded by the trimester and the
anterior-­posterior diameter of the renal pelvis (Table 577.2); most are
mild. Table 577.3 notes the eventual etiology. Risk stratification for
prenatal (Fig. 577.1) and postnatal (Fig. 577.2) urinary tract dilation
(UTD) helps plan for further evaluation and treatment.

3275

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Obstruction of the urinary tract generally causes hydronephrosis,
which typically is asymptomatic in its early phases. An obstructed
kidney secondary to a ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction or
ureterovesical junction obstruction can manifest as a unilateral mass
or cause upper abdominal or flank pain on the affected side. Pyelonephritis can occur because of urinary stasis. An upper urinary tract
stone can occur, causing abdominal and flank pain and hematuria.
With bladder outlet obstruction, the urinary stream may be weak;
urinary tract infection (UTI; see Chapter 575) is common. Many of
these lesions are identified by antenatal US; an abnormality involving
the genitourinary tract is suspected in as many as 1 in 50 fetuses (see
Table 577.3).
Obstructive renal insufficiency can manifest itself by failure to
thrive, vomiting, diarrhea, or other nonspecific signs and symptoms.
In older children, infravesical obstruction can be associated with
overflow urinary incontinence or a poor urine stream. Acute ureteral
obstruction causes flank or abdominal pain; there may be nausea and
vomiting. Chronic ureteral obstruction can be silent or can cause vague
abdominal or typical flank pain with increased fluid intake (such as in
Dietl’s crisis).

the ureter is normal or abnormal, and whether the bladder is normal or
abnormal. Normal values for UTD are based on the APRPD:

DIAGNOSIS

Antenatal

Urinary tract obstruction may be diagnosed prenatally by US, which
typically shows hydronephrosis and occasionally a distended bladder. More complete evaluation, including imaging studies, should be
undertaken in these children in the neonatal period.
A multidisciplinary consensus group has standardized the fetal
evaluation and early postnatal management of babies with ANH. The
US parameters include the anterior-­posterior renal pelvic diameter
(APRPD), calyceal dilation, whether the ANH involves the major and/
or minor calyces, the parenchymal thickness and appearance, whether

Postnatal

16-­27 weeks
≥28 weeks
(>48 hours)

<4 mm
<7 mm
<10 mm

Assuming there is no calyceal dilation, the kidneys have a normal
appearance, and the ureter and bladder are normal, the study is considered
normal.
The consensus group then categorized ANH into antenatal and postnatal risk groups. For antenatal ANH, there are two risk groups: low and
high (see Fig. 577.1). For postnatal ANH, there are three risk groups: low,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3276 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 577.2  Definition of Antenatal Hydronephrosis by
Anterior-­Posterior Diameter
DEGREE OF ANTENATAL
HYDRONEPHROSIS

SECOND
TRIMESTER

THIRD
TRIMESTER

Mild

4–6 mm

7 to 9 mm

Moderate

7–10 mm

10–15 mm

Severe

>10 mm

>15 mm

From Nguyen HT, Herndon CDA, Cooper C, et al. The Society for Fetal Urology consensus statement on the evaluation and management of antenatal hydronephrosis. J
Pediatr Urol. 2010;6:212–231. Table 2.

Table 577.3  Etiology of Antenatal Hydronephrosis
ETIOLOGY

INCIDENCE

Transient hydronephrosis

41–88%

Ureteropelvic junction obstruction

10–30%

Vesicoureteral reflux

10–20%

Ureterovesical junction obstruction/
megaureters

5–10%

Multicystic dysplastic kidney

4–6%

Posterior urethral valve/urethral atresia

1–2%

Ureterocele/ectopic ureter/duplex system

5–7%

Others: prune-­belly syndrome, cystic kidney
disease, congenital ureteric strictures,
megalourethra

Uncommon

From Nguyen HT, Herndon CDA, Cooper C, et al. The Society for Fetal Urology consensus statement on the evaluation and management of antenatal hydronephrosis. J
Pediatr Urol. 2010;6:212–231. Table 5.

intermediate, and high (see Fig. 577.2). The panel recommended that all
seven urinary tract parameters be described in a written report.
For antenatal presentation, if the APRPD is 4-­7 mm at 16-­27 weeks
or 7-­10 mm at ≥28 weeks and there is central or no calyceal dilation,
the fetus is categorized as having UTD A1, Low Risk. In follow-­up
for UTD A1, the panel suggested one additional antenatal US at ≥32
weeks, and after birth, a renal US at >48 hours to 1 month of age and
a second renal US 6 months later. Genetic screening is not indicated
unless there are associated congenital malformations.
If the APRPD is ≥7 mm at 16-­27 weeks or ≥10 mm at ≥28 weeks,
with any peripheral calyceal dilation or any other upper urinary tract
abnormality, the fetus is classified as having UTD A2-­3, or Increased
Risk. The assigned risk is based on the most concerning feature. For
UTD A2-­3, the panel recommends a follow-­up US in 4-­6 weeks,
although with suspected posterior urethral valves (PUVs) or severe
bilateral hydronephrosis, more frequent follow-­up was recommended
until delivery. Following delivery, a renal US after 48 hours but before
1 month is suggested, again with more immediate evaluation if PUV
is suspected or there is significant bilateral hydronephrosis. In addition, specialist consultation with pediatric urology or nephrology is
recommended.
For postnatal presentation, at >48 hours an APRPD <10 mm is Normal.
If the APRPD is 10-­15 mm and there is central calyceal dilation, but all
other parameters are normal, the infant is classified as having UTD P1,
Low Risk. Society of Fetal Urology (SFU) hydronephrosis grades 1 and
2 correspond to UTD P1. The panel recommends a follow-­up renal US
in 1-­6 months. A voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) and antibiotic prophylaxis are optional and at the discretion of the clinician. A renal scan is not
recommended.
If the postnatal APRPD is ≥15 mm and there is peripheral calyceal
dilation and/or abnormal ureters, the infant is classified as having UTD
P2, Intermediate Risk. SFU hydronephrosis grade 3 corresponds to
UTD P2. The panel recommends a follow-­up renal US in 1-­3 months.

PRENATAL PRESENTATION
16−27 wk
AP RPD
4 to <7 mm

≥28 wk
AP RPD
7 to <10 mm

16−27 wk
AP RPD
≥7 mm

≥28 wk
AP RPD
≥10 mm

Central or no
calyceal dilation*

Peripheral
calyceal dilation*

Parenchymal
thickness normal

Parenchymal
thickness abnl

Parenchymal
appearance normal

Parenchymal
appearance abnl

Ureters
normal

Ureters
abnormal

Bladder
normal

Bladder
abnormal

No unexplained
oligohydramnios

Unexplained
oligohydramnios**

UTD A1:
LOW RISK

UTD A2-3:
INCREASED RISK

*Central and peripheral calyceal dilation may be difficult to evaluate
early in gestation
**Oligohydramnios is suspected to result from a GU cause

Fig. 577.1 Urinary tract dilation (UTD) risk stratification: prenatal pres-

entation for UTD A1 (low risk) and UTD A2-­3 (increased risk). Note: Classification is based on the presence of the most concerning feature. For
example, a fetus with an APRPD within the UTD A1 range but with peripheral calyceal dilation would be classified as UTD A2-­3. GU, Genitourinary. (From Nguyen HT, Benson CB, Bromley B, et al. Multidisciplinary
consensus on the classification of prenatal and postnatal urinary tract dilation [UTD classification system]. J Pediatr Urol. 2014;10:982–998. Fig. 3.)

VCUG, antibiotic prophylaxis, and a functional renal scan are optional
and at the discretion of the clinician.
If the APRPD is ≥15 mm and there is peripheral calyceal dilation, abnormal parenchymal thickness, abnormal parenchymal appearance, abnormal ureters, and/or abnormal bladder, the infant is classified as having
UTD P3, High Risk. SFU hydronephrosis grade 4 corresponds to UTD
P3. The panel recommends a follow-­up renal US in 1 month. A VCUG and
antibiotic prophylaxis are recommended. A functional renal scan is optional
and at the discretion of the clinician (but is virtually always recommended).

PHYSICAL FINDINGS

Urinary tract obstruction is often silent. In the newborn infant, a palpable
abdominal mass most commonly is a hydronephrotic or multicystic dysplastic kidney. With PUVs, which constitute an infravesical obstructive
lesion in males, a walnut-­sized mass representing the bladder is palpable
just above the pubic symphysis. A patent draining urachus also can suggest urethral obstruction. Urinary ascites in the newborn usually is caused
by renal or bladder urinary extravasation secondary to PUVs. Infection
and sepsis may be the first indications of an obstructive lesion of the urinary tract. The combination of infection and obstruction poses a serious
threat to infants and children and generally requires parenteral administration of antibiotics and drainage of the obstructed kidney. Renal US should
be performed in all children during the acute stage of an initial febrile UTI.

IMAGING STUDIES
Renal Ultrasound

Hydronephrosis is the most common characteristic of obstruction
(Fig. 577.3). Upper UTD is not diagnostic of obstruction and often

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 577 u Obstruction of the Urinary Tract

3277

POSTNATAL PRESENTATION
>48 hours
APRPD
10 to <15 mm

>48 hours
APRPD
≥15 mm

>48 hours
APRPD
≥15 mm

Central
calyceal dilation

Peripheral
calyceal dilation

Peripheral
calyceal dilation

Parenchymal
thickness normal

Parenchymal
thickness normal

Parenchymal
thickness abnl

Parenchymal
appearance normal

Parenchymal
appearance normal

Parenchymal
appearance abnl

Ureters
normal

Ureters
abnormal

Ureters
abnormal

Bladder
normal

Bladder
normal

Bladder
normal

UTD P1:
LOW RISK

UTD P2:
INTERMEDIATE RISK

UTD P3:
HIGH RISK

Fig. 577.2 Urinary tract dilation (UTD) risk stratification: postnatal presentation for UTD P1 (low risk), UTD P2 (intermediate risk), and UTD P3
(high risk). Note: Stratification is based on the most concerning ultrasound finding. For example, if the APRPD is in the UTD P1 range but there is
peripheral calyceal dilation, the classification is UTD P2. Similarly, the presence of parenchymal abnormalities (abnl) denotes a UTD P3 classification,
regardless of APRPD measurement. (From Nguyen HT, Benson CB, Bromley B, et al. Multidisciplinary consensus on the classification of prenatal and
postnatal urinary tract dilation [UTD classification system]. J Pediatr Urol. 2014;10:982–998. Fig. 6.)

Table 577.4  Society for Fetal Urology Grading System for
Hydronephrosis
RENAL IMAGE
GRADE OF
HYDRONEPHROSIS

CENTRAL RENAL
COMPLEX

RENAL
PARENCHYMAL
THICKNESS

0

Intact

Normal

1

Slight splitting

Normal

2

Evident splitting,
complex confined
within renal border

Normal

Fig. 577.3 US image of the left kidney with marked pelvic and cal-

3

Wide splitting, pelvis
dilated outside renal
border, calyces
uniformly dilated

Normal

persists after surgical correction of a significant obstructive lesion.
Dilation can result from vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), or it may be
a manifestation of abnormal development of the urinary tract, even
when there is no obstruction. Renal length, degree of caliectasis and
parenchymal thickness, and presence or absence of ureteral dilation
should be assessed. In addition to the UTD system, most pediatric
urologists also grade the severity of hydronephrosis from 1-­4 using
the SFU grading scale (Table 577.4). The clinician should ascertain
that the contralateral kidney is normal, and the bladder should be
imaged to see whether the bladder wall is thickened, the lower ureter
is dilated, and bladder emptying is complete. In acute or intermittent
obstruction, the dilation of the collecting system may be minimal,
and US may be misleading.

4

Further dilation of pelvis
and calyces (calyces
may appear convex)

Thin

yceal dilation (grade 4 hydronephrosis) in a newborn with ureteropelvic
junction obstruction.

Voiding Cystourethrogram

In neonates and infants with congenital grade 3 or 4 hydronephrosis
and in any child with ureteral dilation, a contrast VCUG should be
obtained, because the dilation is secondary to VUR in 15% of cases.

After Maizels M, Mitchell B, Kass E, et al. Outcome of nonspecific hydronephrosis in the
infant: a report from the registry of the Society for Fetal Urology. J Urol. 1994;152:2324–
2327.

In males, the VCUG also is performed to rule out urethral obstruction, particularly in cases of suspected PUVs. In older children, the
urinary flow rate can be measured noninvasively with a urinary
flowmeter. Decreased flow with a normal bladder contraction suggests infravesical obstruction (e.g., PUVs, urethral stricture). When
the urethra cannot be catheterized to obtain a VCUG, the clinician should suspect a urethral stricture or an obstructive urethral
lesion. Retrograde urethrography with contrast medium injected
into the urethral meatus helps delineate the anatomy of the urethral
obstruction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3278 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Radioisotope Studies

radionuclide from refluxing from the bladder into the dilated upper
tract, which would prolong the washout phase.

Renal scintigraphy is used to assess renal anatomy and function. The
two most commonly used radiopharmaceuticals are mercaptoacetyl
triglycine (MAG-­3) and technetium-­99m–­labeled dimercaptosuccinic
acid (DMSA). MAG-­3, which is excreted by renal tubular secretion,
is used to assess differential renal function, and when furosemide is
administered, drainage also can be measured. DMSA is a renal cortical
imaging agent and is used to assess differential renal function and to
demonstrate whether renal scarring is present. It is used infrequently
in children with obstructive uropathy.
In a MAG-­3 diuretic renogram, a small dose of technetium-­labeled
MAG-­3 is injected intravenously (Figs. 577.4 and 577.5). During the
first 2-­3 minutes, renal parenchymal uptake is analyzed and compared,
allowing computation of differential renal function.
Subsequently, excretion is evaluated. After 20 minutes, furosemide 1
mg/kg is injected intravenously, and the rapidity and pattern of drainage from the kidneys to the bladder are analyzed. If no obstruction is
present, half of the radionuclide should be cleared from the renal pelvis
within 10-­15 minutes, termed the half-­time (t1/2). If there is significant
upper tract obstruction, the t1/2 usually is longer than 20 minutes. A
t1/2 of 15-­20 minutes is indeterminate. An elevated t1/2 is suggestive but
not diagnostic of obstruction. The images generated usually provide
an accurate assessment of the site of obstruction. Numerous variables
affect the outcome of the diuretic renogram. Newborn kidneys are
functionally immature, and, in the first month of life, normal kidneys
might not demonstrate normal drainage after diuretic administration.
Patient dehydration prolongs parenchymal transit and can blunt the
diuretic response. As such, renal scintigraphy is usually performed
after 8 weeks of life in an appropriately hydrated infant. Giving an
insufficient dose of furosemide can result in slow drainage. If VUR
is present, continuous bladder drainage is mandatory to prevent the

Magnetic Resonance Urography

Magnetic resonance (MR) urography is also used to evaluate suspected
upper urinary tract pathology. The child is hydrated and given intravenous furosemide. Gadolinium-­diethylene tetrapentaacetic acid is
injected, and routine T1 weighted and fat-­suppressed fast spin-­echo
T2 weighted imaging is performed through the kidneys, ureters, and
bladder. This study provides superb images of the pathology, and methodology permits assessment of differential renal function and drainage
(Fig. 577.6). There is no radiation exposure; however, young children
need sedation or anesthesia. It is used primarily when renal US and
radionuclide imaging fail to delineate complex pathology.

Computed Tomography

In children with a suspected ureteral calculus (see Chapter 584), noncontrast, low-­dose spiral CT of the abdomen and pelvis is a standard
method of demonstrating whether a calculus is present, its location,
and whether there is significant proximal hydronephrosis. This study
may be ordered when a renal/bladder US is inconclusive. The disadvantage of CT is the significant radiation exposure, and it should be
used only when the results will direct management decisions.

Ancillary Studies

In unusual cases, an antegrade pyelogram (insertion of a percutaneous
nephrostomy tube and injection of contrast agent) can be performed
to assess the anatomy of the upper urinary tract. This procedure usually requires general anesthesia. In addition, an antegrade pressure-­
perfusion flow study (Whitaker test) may be performed, in which
fluid is infused at a measured rate, usually 10 mL/min. The pressures

cts/sec

Function

A

B

Time (min)

Fig. 577.4 MAG-­3 diuretic renogram of a 6-­wk-­old infant with severe right hydronephrosis. The right kidney is on the right side of the image. A,

Differential renal function: left kidney 70%, right kidney 30%. B, After administration of furosemide, drainage from the left kidney was normal and
drainage from the right kidney was slow, consistent with right UPJ obstruction. Pyeloplasty was performed on the right kidney.

cts/sec

Function

A

B

Time (min)

Fig. 577.5 A, MAG-­3 diuretic renogram at 14 mo of age shows equal function in the two kidneys. B, Prompt drainage after the administration of
furosemide.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 577 u Obstruction of the Urinary Tract

3279

Fig. 577.6 MR urogram in boy with distal ureterovesical obstruction.
in the renal pelvis and the bladder are monitored during this infusion,
and pressure differences exceeding 20 cm H2O suggest obstruction. In
other cases, cystoscopy with retrograde pyelography provides excellent
images of the upper urinary tract (Fig. 577.7).

SPECIFIC TYPES OF URINARY TRACT
­OBSTRUCTION AND THEIR TREATMENT
Hydrocalycosis

Hydrocalycosis refers to a localized dilation of the calyx caused by
obstruction of its infundibulum, termed infundibular stenosis. This
condition can be developmental in origin or secondary to inflammatory processes, such as UTI. It usually is discovered during evaluation
for pain or UTI. The diagnosis of infundibular stenosis is usually established by sonograph and CT scan or MR urography.

Ureteropelvic Junction Obstruction

UPJ obstruction is the most common obstructive lesion in childhood
and usually is caused by intrinsic stenosis (see Figs. 577.3-­577.5).
An accessory artery to the lower pole of the kidney can also cause
extrinsic obstruction. The typical appearance on US is grade 3 or 4
hydronephrosis without a dilated ureter and a clear transition point.
UPJ obstruction may present on antenatal sonography revealing fetal
hydronephrosis; as a palpable renal mass in a newborn or infant; as
abdominal, flank, or back pain; as a febrile UTI; or as hematuria after
minimal trauma. Approximately 60% of cases occur on the left side;
the male:female ratio is 2:1. UPJ obstruction is bilateral in only 10%
of cases. In kidneys with UPJ obstruction, renal function may be significantly impaired from pressure atrophy, but approximately half
of affected kidneys have relatively normal glomerular function. The
anomaly is corrected by performing a pyeloplasty, in which the stenotic segment is excised, and the normal ureter and renal pelvis are
reattached. Success rates are 91–98%. Pyeloplasty can be performed
using laparoscopic techniques, often robotic assisted using the da
Vinci robot.
Lesser degrees of UPJ narrowing might cause mild hydronephrosis,
which usually is nonobstructive, and typically these kidneys function
normally. The spectrum of UPJ abnormalities has been referred to as
anomalous UPJ. Another cause of mild hydronephrosis is fetal folds of
the upper ureter, which also are nonobstructive.
The diagnosis can be difficult to establish in an asymptomatic infant
in whom dilation of the renal pelvis is found incidentally in a prenatal US. After birth, the sonographic study is repeated to confirm the

Fig. 577.7 Retrograde pyelogram showing medial deviation of a dilated upper ureter to the level of the third lumbar vertebra (arrow), characteristic of a retrocaval ureter.

prenatal finding. A VCUG is necessary because 10–15% of patients
have ipsilateral vesicoureteral reflux. Because neonatal oliguria can
cause temporary decompression of a dilated renal pelvis, it is ideal to
perform the first postnatal US after the third day of life. Delaying the
US may be impractical. If no dilation is found on the initial US, a repeat
study should be performed at 1 month of age. If the kidney shows grade
1 or 2 hydronephrosis and the renal parenchyma appears normal, a
period of observation usually is appropriate, with sequential renal US
studies to monitor the severity of hydronephrosis, and the hydronephrosis usually disappears. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not indicated for
children with mild hydronephrosis. If the hydronephrosis is grade
3 or 4, spontaneous resolution is less likely, and obstruction is more
likely to be present, particularly if the renal pelvic diameter is 3 cm.
A diuretic renogram with MAG-­3 is performed at 4-­6 weeks of age.
If there is poor upper tract drainage or the differential renal function
is poor, pyeloplasty is recommended. After pyeloplasty the differential
renal function often improves, and improved drainage with furosemide
stimulation is expected.
If the differential function on renography is normal and drainage is
satisfactory, the infant can be followed with serial US studies, even with
grade 4 hydronephrosis. If the hydronephrosis remains severe with no
improvement, a repeat diuretic renogram after 6-­12 months can help
in the decision between continued observation and surgical repair.
Prompt surgical repair is indicated in infants with an abdominal mass,
bilateral severe hydronephrosis, a solitary kidney, or diminished function in the involved kidney. In unusual cases in which the differential
renal function is <10% but the kidney has some function, insertion of a
percutaneous nephrostomy tube allows drainage of the hydronephrotic
kidney for a few weeks to allow reassessment of renal function. In older
children who present with symptoms, the diagnosis of UPJ obstruction
usually is established by US and diuretic renography.
The differential diagnosis includes megacalycosis, a congenital nonobstructive dilation of the calyces without pelvic or ureteric dilation;
VUR with marked dilation and kinking of the ureter; midureteral or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3280 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
distal ureteral obstruction when the ureter is not well visualized on the
urogram; and retrocaval ureter.

Midureteral Obstruction

Congenital ureteral stenosis or a ureteral valve in the midureter is rare. It
is corrected by excision of the strictured segment and reanastomosis of
the normal upper and lower ureteral segments. A retrocaval ureter is an
anomaly in which the upper right ureter travels posterior to the inferior
vena cava. In this anomaly, the vena cava can cause extrinsic compression and obstruction. A retrograde pyelogram or MR urogram shows
the right ureter to be medially deviated at the level of the third lumbar
vertebra (see Fig. 577.7). Surgical treatment consists of transection of the
upper ureter, moving it anterior to the vena cava, and reanastomosing
the upper and lower segments. Repair is necessary only when obstruction is present. Retroperitoneal tumors, fibrosis caused by surgical procedures, inflammatory processes (as in chronic granulomatous disease),
and radiation therapy can cause acquired midureteral obstruction.

Ectopic Ureter

A ureter that drains outside the bladder is referred to as an ectopic
ureter. This anomaly is three times as common in females as in males
and usually is detected prenatally. The ectopic ureter typically drains
the upper pole of a duplex collecting system (two ureters).
In females, approximately 35% of these ureters enter the urethra at
the bladder neck; 35% enter the urethrovaginal septum; 25% enter the
vagina; and a few drain into the cervix, uterus, Gartner duct, or a urethral diverticulum. Often the terminal aspect of the ureter is narrowed,
causing hydroureteronephrosis. Apart from the ectopic ureter entering the bladder neck, in females an ectopic ureter causes continuous
urinary incontinence from the affected renal moiety. UTI is common
because of urinary stasis.
In males, ectopic ureters enter the posterior urethra (above the
external sphincter) in 47%, the prostatic utricle in 10%, the seminal
vesicle in 33%, the ejaculatory duct in 5%, and the vas deferens in 5%.
Consequently, in males, an ectopic ureter does not cause incontinence,
and most patients present with a UTI or epididymitis.
Evaluation includes a renal US, VCUG, and renal scan, which demonstrates whether the affected segment has significant function. The
US shows the affected hydronephrotic kidney or dilated upper pole and
ureter down to the bladder (Fig. 577.8). If the ectopic ureter drains
into the bladder neck (female), a VCUG usually shows reflux into the
ureter. Otherwise, there is no reflux into the ectopic ureter, but there
may be reflux into the ipsilateral lower pole ureter or contralateral collecting system.

Fig. 577.8 US image of the right dilated ureter (bottom arrows) ex-

tending behind and caudal to a nearly empty bladder (top arrow) in a
female with urinary incontinence and ectopic ureter draining into the
vagina.

Treatment depends on the status of the renal unit drained by the
ectopic ureter. If there is satisfactory function, ureteral reimplantation
into the bladder or ureteroureterostomy (anastomosing the ectopic
upper pole ureter into the normally inserting lower pole ureter) is
indicated. If function is poor, partial or total nephrectomy is indicated.
In many centers this procedure is done laparoscopically, often with
robotic assistance.

Ureterocele

A ureterocele is a cystic dilation of the terminal ureter and is obstructive because of a pinpoint ureteral orifice. Ureteroceles are much more
common in females than in males. Affected children usually are discovered by prenatal US, but some present with a febrile UTI. Ureteroceles may be ectopic, in which case the cystic swelling extends through
the bladder neck into the urethra, or orthotopic, in which case the
ureterocele is entirely within the bladder. Both orthotopic and ectopic
ureteroceles can be bilateral.
In females, ureteroceles nearly always are associated with ureteral
duplication (Fig. 577.9), whereas in 50% of affected males there is only
one ureter. When associated with a duplication anomaly, the ureterocele drains the upper renal moiety, which commonly functions poorly
or is dysplastic because of congenital obstruction. The lower pole ureter drains into the bladder superior and lateral to the upper pole ureter
and may reflux.
An ectopic ureterocele extends submucosally through the bladder neck into the urethra. Rarely, large ectopic ureteroceles can cause
bladder outlet obstruction and retention of urine with bilateral hydronephrosis. In females, the ureterocele can prolapse from the urethral
meatus. US is effective in demonstrating the ureterocele and whether
the associated obstructed system is duplicated or single. VCUG usually
shows a filling defect in the bladder, sometimes large, corresponding to
the ureterocele, and it often shows reflux into the adjacent lower pole
collecting system with typical findings of a “drooping lily” appearance
to the kidney. Nuclear renal scintigraphy is most accurate in demonstrating whether the affected renal moiety has significant function.
Treatment of ectopic ureteroceles depends on whether the upper
pole functions on renal scan and whether there is reflux into the
lower pole ureter. If there is nonfunction of the upper pole of the kidney and there is no reflux, treatment usually involves laparoscopic,
robotic, or open excision of the obstructed upper pole and most of
the associated ureter. If there is function in the upper pole or significant reflux into the lower pole ureter, or if the patient is septic from
infection of the hydronephrotic kidney, then transurethral incision
with cautery is appropriate initial therapy to decompress the ureterocele. Reflux into the incised ureterocele is common, and subsequent
excision of the ureterocele and ureteral reimplantation usually is necessary. An alternative method is to perform an upper-­to-­lower ureteroureterostomy, allowing the obstructed upper pole ureter to drain
through the normal lower ureter; this procedure often is performed
with minimally invasive laparoscopic (robotic) technique or through
a small incision.
Orthotopic ureteroceles are associated with duplicated or single
collecting systems, and the orifice is in the expected location in the
bladder (Fig. 577.10). These anomalies usually are discovered during
an investigation for prenatal hydronephrosis or a UTI. US is sensitive
for detecting the ureterocele in the bladder and hydroureteronephrosis. Transurethral incision of the ureterocele effectively relieves the
obstruction, but it can result in VUR, necessitating ureteral reimplantation later. Some prefer open excision of the ureterocele and reimplantation as the initial form of treatment. Small, simple ureteroceles
discovered incidentally without upper tract dilation generally do not
require treatment. Rarely, a large ureterocele occupying much of the
bladder lumen can result in bilateral hydronephrosis by obstructing
drainage of the contralateral ureteral orifice.

Megaureter

Table 577.5 presents a classification of megaureters (dilated ureter). Numerous disorders can cause ureteral dilation, and many are
nonobstructive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 577 u Obstruction of the Urinary Tract

A

3281

B

Fig. 577.9 A, Infant with ectopic ureterocele. US of the left kidney shows massive dilation of the upper pole and a normal lower pole. B, VCUG
shows large ureterocele, draining the left upper pole, in the bladder. No reflux is present.

On intravenous pyelogram or an MR urogram, the distal ureter is more
dilated in its distal segment and tapers abruptly at or above the junction
of the bladder (Fig. 577.11). The lesion may be unilateral or bilateral.
Significant hydroureteronephrosis suggests obstruction. Megaureter
predisposes to UTI, urinary stones, hematuria, and flank pain because
of urinary stasis. In most cases, diuretic renography and sequential
sonographic studies can reliably differentiate obstructed from nonobstructed megaureters. In most nonobstructed megaureters, the hydroureteronephrosis diminishes gradually (Fig. 577.12). Truly obstructed
megaureters require surgical treatment, with excision of the narrowed
segment, ureteral tapering, and reimplantation of the ureter. The results
of surgical reconstruction usually are good, but the prognosis depends
on preexisting renal function and whether complications develop.
If differential renal function is normal (>45%) and the child is
asymptomatic, it is safe to manage the patient with observation with
serial US and periodic diuretic renography to monitor renal function
and drainage. In children with grade 4 hydroureteronephrosis, prophylactic antimicrobial therapy should be prescribed, as these children
are prone to upper UTI. If renal function deteriorates, upper urinary
tract drainage slows, or UTI occurs, ureteral reimplantation is recommended. Approximately 25% of children with a nonrefluxing megaureter undergo ureteral reimplantation.

Prune-­Belly Syndrome

Fig. 577.10 Simple intravesical ureterocele. The excretory urogram
shows left hydronephrosis and a round filling defect (arrows) on the left
side of the bladder corresponding to a simple ureterocele causing left
ureteral obstruction. This lesion was treated by transurethral incision
and drainage of the ureterocele.

Megaureters usually are discovered during antenatal US or during
workup for postnatal UTI, hematuria, or abdominal pain. A careful
history, physical examination, and VCUG identify causes of secondary megaureters and refluxing megaureters, as well as the prune-­belly
syndrome. Primary obstructed megaureters and nonobstructed megaureters represent varying degrees of severity of the same anomaly.
The primary obstructed nonrefluxing megaureter results from
abnormal development of the distal ureter, with collagenous tissue
replacing the muscle layer. Normal ureteral peristalsis is disrupted, and
the proximal ureter widens. In most cases there is not a true stricture.

Prune-­belly syndrome, also called triad syndrome (lax abdominal
wall muscles, urinary tract distention, intrabdominal testis) or Eagle-­
Barrett syndrome, occurs in approximately 1 in 40,000 births; 95%
of affected children are male. The characteristic association occurs
in a wide spectrum with deficient (hypoplastic) abdominal muscles,
undescended testes, and urinary tract abnormalities (Fig. 577.13 and
Table 577.6). Oligohydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia are common complications in the perinatal period. Urinary tract abnormalities include massive (usually unobstructed) dilation of the ureters and
upper tracts and a very large hypotonic bladder, with a patent urachus
or a urachal diverticulum. Most patients have VUR. The prostatic urethra is usually dilated, and the prostate is hypoplastic. The anterior
urethra may be dilated, resulting in a megalourethra. In severe cases,
there is urethral stenosis or atresia. The kidneys show various degrees
of dysplasia, and the testes are typically intraabdominal. Malrotation of
the bowel is often present. Cardiac abnormalities occur in 10% of cases;
>50% have abnormalities of the musculoskeletal system, including
limb abnormalities and scoliosis. In the females, rare anomalies of the
urethra, uterus, and vagina usually are present. Pathogenic variants in
FLNA and possibly MYOCD or HNF1β have been reported; the disorder is usually sporadic, although rare instances of familial cases occur.
Many neonates with prune-­
belly syndrome have difficulty with
effective bladder emptying because the bladder musculature is poorly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3282 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 577.5  Classification of Megaureter
REFLUXING
PRIMARY

OBSTRUCTED
SECONDARY

NONREFLUXING AND NONOBSTRUCTED

SECONDARY

PRIMARY

PRIMARY

SECONDARY

Primary reflux

Neuropathic bladder

Intrinsic (primary
obstructed megaureter)

Neuropathic
bladder

Nonrefluxing,
nonobstructive

Diabetes insipidus

Megacystic-­megaureter
syndrome

Hinman syndrome

Ureteral valve

Hinman syndrome

Infection

Ectopic ureter

Posterior urethral
valves

Ectopic ureter

Posterior urethral
valves

Persistent after relief
of obstruction

Prune-­belly syndrome

Bladder diverticulum
Postoperative

Ectopic ureterocele

Ureteral calculus
Extrinsic
Postoperative

pseudoobstruction (see Table 378.11 and Figs. 378.6 and 378.7). The
abdominal muscles are normal, but abdominal distention is prominent. Associated pathogenic gene variants include ACTG2 (∼45%)
as well as MYH11, LOMD1, MYL9, and MYLK; ∼20% are unknown.
Hydronephrosis is common, and most patients are female.

Bladder Neck Obstruction

Bladder neck obstruction usually is secondary to ectopic ureterocele,
bladder calculi, or a tumor of the prostate (rhabdomyosarcoma). The
manifestations include difficulty voiding, urinary retention, UTI, and
bladder distention with overflow incontinence. Apparent bladder neck
obstruction is common in cases of PUVs, but it seldom has any functional significance. Primary bladder neck obstruction is extremely rare.

Posterior Urethral Valves

Fig. 577.11 Obstructed nonrefluxing megaureter. Excretory urogram

in a female with a history of a febrile UTI. The right side is normal. The
left side reveals hydroureteronephrosis with predominant dilation of the
distal ureter. Note the characteristic appearance of the distal ureter.
There was no vesicoureteral reflux. The diagnosis of obstruction was
confirmed by diuretic renography.

developed, and the urethra may be narrowed. When no obstruction
is present, the goal of treatment is the prevention of UTI with antibiotic prophylaxis. When obstruction of the ureters or urethra is demonstrated, temporary drainage procedures, such as a vesicostomy, can
help to preserve renal function until the child is old enough for surgical
reconstruction. Some children with prune-­belly syndrome have been
found to have classic or atypical PUVs. UTIs occur often and should be
treated promptly. Correction of the undescended testes by orchidopexy
can be difficult in these children because the testes are located high in
the abdomen and surgery is best accomplished in the first 6 months of
life. Reconstruction of the abdominal wall offers cosmetic and functional benefits.
The prognosis depends on the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia and
renal dysplasia. One third of children with prune-­belly syndrome are
stillborn or die in the first few months of life because of pulmonary
hypoplasia. As many as 30% of the long-­term survivors develop end-­
stage renal disease from dysplasia or complications of infection or
reflux and eventually require renal transplantation. Renal transplantation in these children offers good results.
Megacystis-­microcolon-­intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome
manifests with a dilated unobstructed bladder in the context of
the more dominant gastrointestinal manifestations of intestinal

The most common cause of severe obstructive uropathy in children is
PUVs, affecting 1 in 8,000 males. The urethral valves are tissue leaflets fanning distally from the prostatic urethra to the external urinary
sphincter. A slitlike opening usually separates the leaflets. Valves are of
unclear embryologic origin and cause varying degrees of obstruction.
Approximately 30% of patients experience end-­stage renal disease or
chronic renal insufficiency. The prostatic urethra dilates, and the bladder muscle undergoes hypertrophy. VUR occurs in 50% of patients,
and distal ureteral obstruction can result from a chronically distended
bladder or bladder muscle hypertrophy. Renal changes range from
mild hydronephrosis to severe renal dysplasia; their severity depends
on the severity of the obstruction and its time of onset during fetal
development. As in other cases of obstruction or renal dysplasia, there
may be oligohydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia.
Affected males with PUVs often are discovered prenatally when
maternal US reveals bilateral hydronephrosis, a distended bladder, and,
if the obstruction is severe, oligohydramnios. Prenatal bladder decompression by percutaneous vesicoamniotic shunt or open fetal surgery
has been reported. Experimental and clinical evidence of the possible
benefits of fetal intervention is lacking, and few affected fetuses are candidates. Prenatally diagnosed PUVs, particularly when discovered in
the second trimester, carry a poorer prognosis than those detected in
the third trimester following a normal second-­trimester fetal US. In the
male neonate, PUVs are suspected when there is a palpably distended
bladder and the urinary stream is weak. If the obstruction is severe
and goes unrecognized during the neonatal period, infants can present
later in childhood with failure to thrive because of uremia or sepsis
caused by infection in the obstructed urinary tract. With lesser degrees
of obstruction, children present later in life with difficulty in achieving
diurnal urinary continence or with UTI. The diagnosis is established
with a VCUG (Fig. 577.14) or by perineal US.
After the diagnosis is established, renal function and the anatomy
of the upper urinary tract should be carefully evaluated. In the healthy
neonate, a small polyethylene feeding tube (No. 5 or No. 8 French) is
inserted in the bladder and left for several days. Passing the feeding
tube may be difficult because the tip of the tube can coil in the prostatic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 577 u Obstruction of the Urinary Tract

A

B

3283

C

Fig. 577.12 Neonate with primary nonrefluxing megaureter. A, Renal US shows grade 4 hydronephrosis. B, Dilated ureter. Renal scan showed
equal function with the contralateral kidney and satisfactory drainage with diuresis stimulation. C, Follow-­up US at 10 mo shows complete resolution
of hydronephrosis.

Fig. 577.13 Abdominal wall features of prune-­belly syndrome, with increasing flaccidity and cutaneous wrinkles, including pot-­belly appearance
in older age. (From Lopes RI, Baker LA, Dénes FT. Modern management of and update on prune belly syndrome. J Pediatr Urol. 2021;17:548–554.
Fig. 1.)

urethra. A sign of this problem is that urine drains around the catheter
rather than through it. A Foley (balloon) catheter should not be used,
because the balloon can cause severe bladder spasm, which can produce severe ureteral obstruction.
If the serum creatinine level remains normal or returns to normal,
treatment consists of transurethral ablation of the valve leaflets, which
is performed endoscopically under general anesthesia. If the urethra
is too small for transurethral ablation, temporary vesicostomy is preferred, in which the dome of the bladder is exteriorized on the lower
abdominal wall. When the child is older, the valves may be ablated and
the vesicostomy closed.
If the serum creatinine level remains high or increases despite
bladder drainage by a small catheter, secondary ureteral obstruction,
irreversible renal damage, or renal dysplasia should be suspected. In
such cases, a vesicostomy should be considered. Cutaneous pyelostomy rarely affords better drainage compared with cutaneous vesicostomy, and the latter also allows continued bladder growth and gradual
improvement in bladder wall compliance.
In the septic and uremic infant, lifesaving measures must include
prompt correction of the electrolyte imbalance and control of the infection by appropriate antibiotics. Drainage of the upper tracts by percutaneous nephrostomy and hemodialysis may be necessary. After the patient’s
condition becomes stable, evaluation and treatment may be undertaken.
PUVs are diagnosed in some older males because of a poor stream, diurnal
incontinence, or a UTI; these males are treated by primary valve ablation.
Favorable prognostic factors include a normal prenatal US between
18 and 24 weeks of gestation, a serum creatinine level <0.8-­1.0 mg/dL
after bladder decompression, and visualization of the corticomedullary
junction on renal sonography. In several situations, a “popoff valve” can
occur during urinary tract development, which preserves the integrity

of one or both kidneys. For example, 15% of males with PUVs have
unilateral reflux into a nonfunctioning dysplastic kidney, termed the
VURD syndrome (valves, unilateral reflux, dysplasia). In these males,
the high bladder pressure is dissipated into the nonfunctioning kidney,
allowing normal development of the contralateral kidney. In newborn
males with urinary ascites, the urine leaks out from the obstructed
collecting system through the renal fornices, allowing normal development of the kidneys. Unfavorable prognostic factors include the
presence of oligohydramnios in utero, identification of hydronephrosis
before 24 weeks of gestation, a serum creatinine level >1.0 mg/dL after
bladder decompression, identification of cortical cysts in both kidneys,
and persistence of diurnal incontinence beyond 5 years of age.
The prognosis in the newborn is related to the child’s degree of
pulmonary hypoplasia and potential for recovery of renal function.
Severely affected infants often are stillborn. Of those who survive the
neonatal period, approximately 30% eventually require kidney transplantation, and 15% have renal insufficiency. In some series, kidney
transplantation in children with PUVs has a lower success rate than
does transplantation in children with normal bladders, presumably
because of the adverse influence of altered bladder function on graft
function and survival.
After valve ablation, antimicrobial prophylaxis is beneficial in preventing UTI, because hydronephrosis to some degree often persists
for many years. These males should be evaluated annually with a renal
US, physical examination including assessment of somatic growth and
blood pressure, urinalysis, and determination of serum levels of electrolytes. Many individuals have significant polyuria resulting from a
concentrating defect secondary to prolonged obstructive uropathy. If
these children acquire a systemic illness with vomiting and/or diarrhea, urine output cannot be used to assess their hydration status. They

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3284 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 577.6  The PBS RUBACE Severity Scoring Rubric
Eagle-Barrett syndrome PBS triad ("RUBAC") Max score: 16
No subcategory points are awarded for normal anatomy with absent pathology
Renal
Max score: 6

Ureteral
Max score: 3

Bladder/outlet
Max score: 3

Abdominal wall
Max score: 2

Cryptorchidism
Max score: 2

1 pt: G1-G2:
Structural damage
(dilation, dysplasia,
scarring) with
preserved GFR ≥
60

1 pt: Low grade
or absent VUR,
or distal ureter
4–10mm

1 pt: Urotherapy
required to empty
bladder, or bladder
size is 100–200%
of normal

1 pt: Can do "sit-up"
exercise before or
after abdominoplasty, musculature
mostly intact,
minimal laxity, or
mild/nonconvincing
prune appearance

2 pts: G3a-b:
Kidney damage
with decreased
GFR 30–59

2 pts: Persistent
high grade VUR
(no surgery), s/p
lower tract
ureteral
reconstruction, or
distal ureter 1–2
cm

2 pts: Urethralcatheterization or
pharm required to
empty, bladder
size >200%
normal, or patient
takes antibiotic
prophylaxis for
recurrent UTI

3 pts: Persistent
high grade VUR
despite surgery,
distal ureter 2+
cm girth, or
current diverting
ureterostomy or
nephrostomy

3 pts: Current
surgical diversion
(e.g., s/p tube,
vesicostomy,
APV), urethral
atresia, or
megalourethra
requiring repair

3 pts: G4: Severe
loss of kidney
function with GFR
15–29
4 pts: Renal
failure with GFR
<15, or on dialysis
or s/p renal
transplant

Additional points
for young age: If
patient is <2
years, add +2 pts
and if patient is
<13 years, add +1
pt

Extra-genitourinary manifestations ("E") Max score: 15
No subcategory points are awarded for normal anatomy with absent pathology
Neurologic
Max score: 3

Cardiac
Max score: 3

Gastrointestinal
Max score: 3

Musculoskeletal
Max score: 3

Respiratory
Max score: 2

1 pt: History of or
current unilateral
or palpable
undescended
testicle(s), or
patient is female

1 pt: Congenital
septal defects
(PDA, ASD, VSD)
which are
spontaneously
resolved

1 pt: Mild to
moderate
constipation,
managed with diet
or laxatives

1 pt: Mild facies,
abnormally shaped
fingers or toes (no
loss of function), or
rib flaring

1 pt: Minimal
respiratory
support at birth,
some difficulty
coughing, mild
intermittent
asthma, or mild
reactive airway
disease

2 pts: Severe
2 pts: History of or
abdominal laxity with current bilateral
nonpalpable testes
obvious thinning of
abdominal wall,
classic prune
appearance, or s/p
abdominoplasty +
cannot do a "sit-up"

2 pts: Small septal
defects which are
not spontaneously
resolved, minimal
L to R shunting, or
PDA requiring
surgical
management

2 pts:
MACE/cecostomy
required, or
malrotation s/p
Ladd's

2 pts: Scoliosis,
hip dysplasia, club
or rockerbottom
foot, genu valgum,
pectus excavatum
or carinum

2 pts: Persistent/
moderate asthma,
frequent
respiratory tract
infections
(3/year), or 2
hospitalizations
for pneumonia

PBS-plus or congenital/genetic syndrome or association
3 pts: Seizures,
tethered cord,
spina bifida,
hearing loss,
intellectual delay,
autism, or severe
neurologic
condition not
otherwise
specified

3 pts: Severe
congenital or
cyanotic heart
disease-Tetralogy
of Fallot, left-sided
obstructive lesions,
reversed shunt,
CHF or severe
cardiologic
conditions not
otherwise
specified

Total triad RUBAC score: ____________

3 pts: Required
surgical bowel
diversion (e.g.,
imperforate anus,
anal atresia),
gastrointestinal
malignancy (e.g.,
hepatoblastoma),
or severe GI
condition not
otherwise
specified

3 pts:
Arthrogryposis,
muscular
dystrophy, or
severe
musculoskeletal
malformation not
otherwise specified

3 pts:
Ventilatordependent >1
week,
tracheostomy,
history of
pneumothorax, or
severe asthma

Total E score: ____________

Total triad RUBAC score ____________ + Total E score ____________ = Total RUBACE score ____________

PBS, Prune-­belly syndrome; RUBACE, renal-­ureter-­bladder-­abdominal wall-­cryptorchidism-­extra GU anomalies.
From Wong DG, Arevalo MK, Passoni NM, et al. Phenotypic severity scoring system and categorization for prune belly syndrome: application to a pilot cohort of 50 living patients.
BJU Int. 2019;123:130–139. Table 1.

can become dehydrated quickly, and there should be a low threshold
for hospital admission for intravenous rehydration. Some of these
patients have renal tubular acidosis, requiring oral bicarbonate therapy.
If there is any significant degree of renal dysfunction, growth impairment, or hypertension, the child should be followed closely by a pediatric nephrologist. When VUR is present, expectant treatment and
prophylactic doses of antibacterial drugs are advisable. If breakthrough
UTI occurs, surgical correction should be undertaken.
After treatment, males with PUVs often do not achieve diurnal urinary continence as early as other males. Incontinence can result from
a combination of factors, including uninhibited bladder contractions,
poor bladder compliance, bladder atonia, bladder neck dyssynergia,
or polyuria. Often these males require urodynamic evaluation with
urodynamics or videourodynamics to plan therapy. Individuals with a
poorly compliant bladder are at significant risk for ongoing renal damage, even in the absence of infection. Overnight catheter drainage has
been shown to be beneficial in males with polyuria and can help preserve renal function. Urinary incontinence usually improves with age,
particularly after puberty. Meticulous attention to bladder compliance,
emptying, and infection can improve results in the future.

Urethral Atresia

Fig. 577.14 VCUG in an infant with posterior urethral values. Note
the dilation of the prostatic urethra and the transverse linear filling defect corresponding to the valves (arrows).

The most severe form of obstructive uropathy in males is urethral
atresia, a rare condition. In utero there is a distended bladder, bilateral hydroureteronephrosis, and oligohydramnios. In most cases, these
infants are stillborn or succumb to pulmonary hypoplasia. Rare males
with prune-­belly syndrome also have urethral atresia. If the urachus
is patent, oligohydramnios is unlikely, and the infant usually survives.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 578 u Anomalies of the Bladder
Urethral reconstruction is difficult, and most patients are managed
with continent urinary diversion.

Urethral Hypoplasia

Urethral hypoplasia is a rare form of obstructive uropathy in males
that is less severe than urethral atresia. In urethral hypoplasia, the
urethral lumen is extremely small. Neonates with urethral hypoplasia typically have bilateral hydronephrosis and a distended bladder. Passage of a small pediatric feeding tube through the urethra
is difficult or impossible. Usually a cutaneous vesicostomy must
be performed to relieve upper urinary tract obstruction, and the
severity of renal insufficiency is variable. The most severely affected
males have end-­stage renal disease. Treatment includes urethral
reconstruction, gradual urethral dilation, or continent urinary
diversion.

Urethral Stricture

Urethral strictures in males usually result from urethral trauma, either
iatrogenic (catheterization, endoscopic procedures, previous urethral
reconstruction) or accidental (straddle injuries, pelvic fractures).
Because these lesions can develop gradually, the decrease in force of
the urinary stream is seldom noticed by the child or the parents. More
commonly, the obstruction causes symptoms of bladder instability,
hematuria, or dysuria. Catheterization of the bladder usually is impossible. The diagnosis is made by a retrograde urethrogram, in which
contrast is injected toward the bladder through a catheter inserted
into the distal urethra. US also has been used to diagnose urethral
strictures. Endoscopy is confirmatory. Endoscopic treatment of short
strictures by direct vision urethrotomy is often successful initially and
results in a profoundly improved urinary stream, but strictures are
prone to recur. Longer strictures surrounded by periurethral fibrosis
often require urethroplasty. Repeated endoscopic procedures should
be avoided as they cause additional urethral damage. Noninvasive
measurement of the urinary flow rate and pattern is useful for diagnosis and follow-­up.
In females, true urethral strictures are rare because the female urethra is protected from trauma, particularly in childhood.

Anterior Urethral Valves and Urethral Diverticula in
the Male

Anterior urethral valves are rare. The obstruction is not obstructing valve leaflets, as occurs in the posterior urethra. Rather, it is
a urethral diverticulum in the penile urethra that expands during
voiding. Distal extension of the diverticulum causes extrinsic compression of the distal penile urethra, causing urethral obstruction.
There is usually a soft mass on the ventral surface of the penis at the
penoscrotal junction. In addition, the urinary stream is typically
weak, and the physical findings associated with PUVs are often
present. The diverticulum may be small and minimally obstructive
or, in other cases, may be severely obstructive and cause renal insufficiency. The diagnosis is suspected on physical examination and
is confirmed by VCUG. Treatment involves open excision of the
diverticulum or transurethral excision of the distal urethral cusp.
Urethral diverticula occasionally occur after extensive hypospadias
repair.
Fusiform dilation of the urethra or megalourethra can result from
underdevelopment of the corpus spongiosum and support structures
of the urethra. This condition is commonly associated with prune-­belly
syndrome.

3285

Chapter 578

Anomalies of the Bladder
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
BLADDER EXSTROPHY

Exstrophy of the urinary bladder occurs in approximately 1 in 35,000-­
40,000 births with a male:female ratio of 2:1. The severity ranges from
simple epispadias (in males) to complete exstrophy of the cloaca involving exposure of the entire hindgut and the bladder (cloacal exstrophy).
Considering the range of defects associated with exstrophy, prenatal
diagnosis is challenging. Accurately diagnosing exstrophy (and its subtypes) is paramount in properly counseling families. Proper prenatal
diagnosis allows for planning that may optimize postnatal medical and
surgical management. Classically, the diagnosis was suspected on prenatal ultrasound. For instances in which the diagnosis remains uncertain, as
for midline abdominal defects such as exstrophy versus gastroschisis or
omphalocele, fetal magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) may help elucidate
the correct diagnosis.

Clinical Manifestations

Anomalies of the bladder are hypothesized to result when the mesoderm
fails to invade the cephalad extension of the cloacal membrane; the timing
and extent of this failure determines the degree of the anomaly. In classic
bladder exstrophy (Fig. 578.1), the bladder protrudes from the abdominal
wall, and its mucosa is exposed. The umbilicus is displaced downward, the
pubic rami are widely separated in the midline, and the rectus muscles are
separated. In males, there is complete epispadias with dorsal chordee, and
the overall penile length is approximately half that of unaffected males. The
scrotum typically is separated slightly from the penis and is wide and shallow. Undescended testes and inguinal hernias are common. Females may
also have epispadias, with separation of the two halves of the clitoris and
wide separation of the labia. The anus is displaced anteriorly in both sexes,
and there may be rectal prolapse. The pubic rami are widely separated.
The consequences of untreated bladder exstrophy are total urinary
incontinence and an increased incidence of bladder cancer, usually
adenocarcinoma. The external and internal genital deformities cause
sexual disability in both sexes, particularly in males. The wide separation of the pubic rami causes a characteristic broad-­based gait but
no significant lasting disability. In classic bladder exstrophy, the upper
urinary tracts usually are normal at birth.

Male Urethral Meatal Stenosis

See Chapter 581 for information on urethral meatal stenosis in males.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 578.1 Classic bladder exstrophy in a newborn male. The bladder

is exposed in the midline, the umbilical cord is displaced caudad, the
penis is epispadiac, and the scrotum is broad.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3286 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Treatment

Management of bladder exstrophy should start at birth. The bladder
should be covered with plastic wrap to keep the bladder mucosa moist.
Saline may be gently irrigated as needed to moisten the bladder template.
Application of gauze or petroleum-­gauze to the bladder mucosa should be
avoided, because significant inflammation will result. The infant should
be transferred promptly to a center with pediatric urology and pediatric
anesthetic support for newborns with complex anomalies. These children are prone to latex allergy, and latex precautions should be practiced
from birth, both in the nursery and in the operating room.
There are two surgical approaches: staged reconstruction and total
single-­stage reconstruction. Most babies also undergo bilateral iliac
osteotomy, which allows the pubic symphysis to be approximated,
which supports the bladder closure. In a staged reconstruction, the initial stage is bladder closure, the second stage (in males) is epispadias
repair, and the final stage is bladder neck reconstruction. The single-­
stage reconstruction attempts to reconstruct the entire malformation in a single procedure. When this operation is performed in the
newborn, there is an increased risk of intraoperative penile injury and
postoperative hydronephrosis compared with the staged reconstruction. The complication rate is high with both approaches, and there is
no consensus on which is better.
Although bladder closure within the first 48 hours of life has been the
historical standard, many centers of excellence now defer the procedure
until 1-­2 weeks of life to ensure that the appropriate multidisciplinary
surgical and anesthetic teams are available. During bladder exstrophy
closure, the abdominal wall is mobilized and the pubic rami are brought
together in the midline following pelvic osteotomy. Early bladder closure
can be performed in almost all neonates with classic bladder exstrophy.
Treatment should be deferred in select situations including when surgical therapy would be excessively risky or complex, such as a premature
baby, or if performed by inexperienced surgeons. In the staged approach,
in males, epispadias repair usually is performed around age 1 or 2 years.
At this point the child has total urinary incontinence because there is no
functional external urinary sphincter. Most infants with bladder exstrophy
have vesicoureteral reflux and should receive antibiotic prophylaxis. Typically, the bladder capacity is monitored every 12-­24 months using cystoscopy with cystogram under anesthesia. The final stage of reconstruction
involves creation of a sphincter muscle for bladder control and correction
of vesicoureteral reflux. This is usually performed when the child is 3-­6
years old with a bladder capacity of at least 80-­90 mL, and the child must
have gained rectal sphincter control.
Total single-­stage reconstruction includes newborn closure of the
bladder and bladder neck narrowing, abdominal wall closure, and, in
males, correction of epispadias using a technique of penile disassembly.
This involves separating the two corpora cavernosa and the midline
urethra into three parts via radical mobilization. Postoperatively, the
infant’s upper urinary tract is monitored closely for possible development of hydronephrosis and infection. Comparison of outcomes
between the multistage and single-­stage approaches is ongoing.
At puberty pubic hair is often distributed to the sides of the external
genitals. A monsplasty can be performed during adolescence to provide a normal escutcheon.

Long-­Term Prognosis

Long-­term management of individuals born with bladder exstrophy
includes monitoring the upper urinary tract appearance and function
for any deterioration and infection, as well as assessing continence. As
these patients age, erectile function is assessed in males, and, later on
in adults, sexual function and fertility are evaluated.
The previously described plan of treatment has yielded a continence
rate of 60–70% in a few centers, with <15% risk of deterioration of the
upper urinary tract. This continence rate reflects not only successful
reconstruction but also the quality and size of the bladder. From a
functional standpoint, the reconstructed bladder neck does not relax
during voiding as in a normal child; instead the patient must void by
assisted techniques such as the Valsalva maneuver or Credé maneuver.
Children who remain incontinent for more than 1 year after bladder neck
reconstruction or those who are ineligible for bladder neck reconstruction

because of small bladder capacity are candidates for an alternative reconstructive procedure to achieve dryness. In select cases, cystoscopic injection of bulking agents such as dextranomer or polydimethylsiloxane
microspheres into the bladder neck can provide sufficient bladder neck
coaptation and resistance to establish continence. Alternatively, if the child
is not a candidate for endoscopic therapy, options include:
• Augmentation cystoplasty, in which the bladder is enlarged with a
patch of small or large bowel to increase its capacity.
• Creation of a neobladder out of a small or large bowel segment with
placement of a continent abdominal stoma through which clean,
intermittent catheterization can be performed.
• Placement of an artificial urinary sphincter, with possible combined
augmentation cystoplasty.
• Ureterosigmoidostomy, in which the ureters are detached from the
bladder and sutured to the sigmoid colon; individuals void urine
and stool from the rectum and rely on their anal sphincter for continence. This approach does not require many resources in surgical
technique or long-­term care (such as ostomy supplies).
• Mainz II procedure, in which the sigmoid colon is reconfigured into a
“bladder” into which the ureters are connected; the patient voids 3-­6
times daily through the rectum, and the stool tends to be more solid.
Ureterosigmoidostomy carries a significant risk of chronic pyelonephritis (see Chapter 575), upper urinary tract damage, metabolic acidosis resulting from absorption of hydrogen ion and chloride in the
intestine, and at least a 15–22% long-­term risk of colon carcinoma.
Patients from less-­developed countries often undergo the Mainz II
procedure because the continence rate is high and pyelonephritis and
upper tract changes are relatively uncommon.
Late follow-­up has shown that although adult males with exstrophy
have a penis that is half the normal length, they usually experience satisfactory sexual function. Fertility has been low, possibly because of iatrogenic injury to the secondary sexual organs during reconstruction. With
artificial reproductive technology, nearly all affected men can be fertile.
In adult females, fertility is not affected, but uterine prolapse during
pregnancy is a problem. In adult females who have undergone a continent urinary diversion, delivery by cesarean section is usually necessary.

OTHER EXSTROPHY ANOMALIES

More rarely, children have a more severe form of exstrophy, cloacal exstrophy, which occurs in 1 in 400,000 live births. In addition to an exposed
bladder, gastrointestinal manifestations typically include omphalocele, an
imperforate anus, and a short bowel, resulting in short bowel syndrome
(see Chapter 385.6). It is the most devastating anomaly managed by pediatric urologists. Approximately 50% of patients have an upper urinary
tract anomaly, and 50% have spina bifida (see Chapter 631.2). Children
with cloacal exstrophy do not achieve normal urine or stool continence.
Reconstructive techniques result in a satisfactory outcome in most patients
with permanent urinary diversion (either ileal conduit or continent urinary diversion) and a colostomy. Because the penis in males with cloacal exstrophy usually is diminutive, genital reconstruction in males with
cloacal exstrophy has been unsatisfactory. Until recently, many specialists
recommended assigning a female gender to such infants, but currently
there is debate as to whether these children, who have a 46,XY karyotype
and brain androgen imprinting in utero, can have a satisfactory female
gender identity (see Chapter 153). Decisions regarding gender assignment
should be made jointly by the physicians caring for the infant (surgical
team, pediatric endocrinologist, child psychiatrist, and ethicist) and the
family. Current practice by pediatric urologists is to reconstruct genitalia
in a manner congruent with the genotype when at all possible, and after
extensive counseling with the patient’s family.
Epispadias is at the less severe end of the spectrum of exstrophy
anomalies, affecting approximately 1 in 117,000 males and 1 in 480,000
females. In males, the diagnosis is obvious because the prepuce is distributed primarily on the ventral aspect of the penile shaft and the urethral meatus is on the dorsum of the penis. Distal epispadias in males
(Fig. 578.2) usually is associated with normal urinary control and
normal upper urinary tracts and should be repaired by 6-­12 months
of age. In females, the clitoris is bifid, and the urethra is split dorsally
(Fig. 578.3). In more severely affected males and in all females with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 578 u Anomalies of the Bladder

A

3287

B

Fig. 578.4 Six-­mo-­old male with abdominal mass. Ultrasound showed

a large fluid-­filled mass and normal kidneys. A, CT scan shows large bladder diverticulum on right side with ureter coursing between the diverticulum and the bladder. B, Voiding cystourethrogram demonstrates no reflux and large diverticulum on left side. Managed with diverticulectomy.

Patent urachus

Fig. 578.2 Adolescent male with penopubic epispadias.

Fig. 578.5 Patent urachus. Vesicourethrogram image of patent uraFig. 578.3 Female with complete epispadias. (From Gearhart JP, Rink
RC, Mouriquand PDE, eds. Pediatric Urology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2010.)

epispadias, there is total urinary incontinence because the sphincter is
incompletely formed along with a wide separation of the pubic rami.
These children require surgical reconstruction of the bladder neck,
similar to the final management stage in children with classic bladder
exstrophy.

BLADDER DIVERTICULA

Bladder diverticula develop as herniations of the bladder mucosa
between defects of bladder smooth muscle fibers. Primary bladder
diverticula usually develop at the ureterovesical junction and may
be associated with vesicoureteral reflux, because the diverticulum
interferes with the normal flap-­valve attachment between the ureter
and bladder. In rare circumstances, the diverticulum is so large that
it interferes with normal micturition by obstructing the bladder neck.
Bladder diverticula also commonly are associated with distal urethral
obstructions such as posterior urethral valves or neurogenic bladder
dysfunction. They occur commonly in children with connective tissue disorders, including Williams syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome,
and Menkes syndrome (Fig. 578.4). Small diverticula require no treatment other than that of the primary disease, whereas large diverticula
can contribute to inefficient voiding, residual urine, urinary stasis, and
urinary tract infections and should be excised.

chus in a newborn. Retrograde contrast filling of patent canal with contrast pooling in umbilicus. (From Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi
LR, Peters C., eds. Campbell-­Walsh Urology, 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021. Fig. 30-­7.)

URACHAL ANOMALIES

The urachus is an embryologic canal connecting the dome of the fetal
bladder with the allantois, a structure that contributes to the formation
of the umbilical cord. The lumen of the urachus is normally obliterated during embryonic development, transforming the urachus into
a solid cord. Urachal abnormalities are more common in males than
in females. A patent urachus can occur as an isolated anomaly, or it
may be associated with prune-­belly syndrome or posterior urethral
valves (see Chapter 577; Fig. 578.5). A patent urachus results in continuous urinary drainage from the umbilicus and treatment involves
excising the tract. Another urachal anomaly is the urachal cyst, which
can become infected. Typical symptoms and physical findings include
suprapubic pain, fever, irritative voiding symptoms, and an infraumbilical mass, which can be erythematous. Diagnosis is made by ultrasonography or CT (Fig. 578.6). Treatment is intravenous antibiotic
therapy and drainage and excision. Other urachal anomalies include
the vesicourachal diverticulum, which is a diverticulum of the bladder dome, and umbilical-­urachal sinus, which is a blind external sinus
that opens at the umbilicus. These lesions should be excised.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3288 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 579.1  Causes of Neuromuscular Dysfunction of the
Lower Urinary Tract
CONGENITAL
Neural tube defect
Occult forms of neural tube defect (lipomeningocele and other
spinal dysraphisms)
Sacral agenesis
Anorectal malformations
ACQUIRED
Extensive pelvic surgery
Central nervous system disorders
Cerebral palsy
Conditions of the brain (tumors, infarcts, encephalopathies)
Spinal cord insults
Trauma
Transverse myelitis

A

From Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CW, eds. Campbell-­Walsh
Urology, 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Box 34-­1.

(see Chapters 631.2, 631.3, and 631.4). Specialized medical centers in
the United States have performed antenatal myelomeningocele closure.
Long-­term results from one large clinical trial of in utero closure have
not shown a definite improvement in lower urinary tract function,
although some children have demonstrated nearly normal bladder
function. Overall, this trial has demonstrated a significant reduction in
the need for ventriculoperitoneal shunting and improved performance
on measures of self-­care, motor function, and mobility.

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

B
Fig. 578.6 A, CT scan demonstrating infected urachal abscess in an
8-­yr-­old child. The condition was managed by drainage and excision. B,
Cystoscopic view of 10-­yr-­old child with new-­onset daytime frequency
and incontinence secondary to infected urachal cyst.

Chapter 579

Neuropathic Bladder
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
Neuropathic bladder dysfunction in children is usually congenital,
generally resulting from neural tube defects or other spinal abnormalities (see Chapter 754). Acquired diseases and traumatic lesions of the
spinal cord are less common (see Chapter 751). Central nervous system tumors, sacrococcygeal teratoma, spinal abnormalities associated
with imperforate anus (see Chapter 392), and spinal cord trauma also
can result in abnormal innervation of the bladder and/or sphincter
(Table 579.1).

NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS

Neural tube defects, resulting from failure of the neural tube to close
spontaneously between the third and fourth week in utero, result in
abnormalities of the vertebral column that affect spinal cord function,
including spina bifida occulta, myelomeningocele, and meningocele

The most important urologic consequences of neuropathic bladder
dysfunction associated with neural tube defects are urinary incontinence (see Chapter 580), urinary tract infections (UTIs; see Chapter
575), and hydronephrosis from vesicoureteral reflux (see Chapter 576)
or detrusor-­sphincter dyssynergia (see Chapter 580). Pyelonephritis and renal functional deterioration (see Chapter 575) are common
causes of premature death in affected patients.
In the neonate, renal ultrasonography, assessment of postvoiding
residual urine volumes, and a voiding cystourethrogram are performed
after closure of the myelomeningocele as approximately 10–15% of
newborns with myelomeningocele have hydronephrosis, and renal
malformations are common; 25% have vesicoureteral reflux. A urodynamic study also should be performed. In this study, the bladder is
filled with saline, and the bladder volume, bladder pressure, abdominal
pressure, and sphincter tone are measured until the patient voids. During bladder filling, the bladder might show (1) uninhibited (premature)
contractions (termed hyperreflexia) at low volumes, (2) normal bladder volume with contraction at an appropriate volume, or (3) atonia
(lack of bladder contraction). Bladder compliance or elasticity also
may be abnormal (i.e., abnormally high bladder pressure during bladder filling). The sphincter can show (1) normal tonicity with relaxation
during bladder contraction, (2) reduced or absent tonicity, or (3) normal or increased tonicity that increases significantly during a bladder
contraction (termed detrusor-­sphincter dyssynergia; Fig. 579.1).

Renal Damage

Renal damage usually results from detrusor-­sphincter dyssynergia.
This dyssynergia causes functional obstruction of the bladder outlet,
leading to bladder muscle hypertrophy and trabeculation, high intravesical pressure, and transmission of this high pressure into the upper
urinary tracts, causing hydronephrosis (Fig. 579.2). Vesicoureteral
reflux and UTI compound this problem, but severe hydronephrosis can
result without reflux. Treatment includes reduction of bladder pressure with anticholinergic drugs (e.g., oxybutynin, 0.2 mg/kg/dose up
to three times per day) and clean intermittent catheterization every
3-­4 hours. If the child has vesicoureteral reflux or UTI, antimicrobial
prophylaxis also is prescribed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 579 u Neuropathic Bladder

A

B

C

D

Fig. 579.1 Grouping of neuropathic bladder dysfunction according to

the innervation, tonicity, and coordination of the detrusor and sphincters described by Guzman. This grouping is based on data from imaging studies, cystometrography, and electromyography of the sphincters.
Patients in group B are at risk of developing reflux and hydronephrosis.
For guidance in the treatment of incontinence, group A patients benefit from procedures that increase outlet resistance, group B patients
from anticholinergics or bladder augmentation surgery, and group C
patients from intermittent catheterization. Group D patients require
both increased outlet resistance and pharmacologic or surgical bladder enlargement. Most patients require intermittent catheterization to
empty. (Modified from Gonzalez R. Urinary incontinence. In Kelalis PK,
King LR, Belman AB, eds. Clinical Pediatric Urology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1992. p. 387.)

Temporary urinary diversion by cutaneous vesicostomy is an alternative in the newborn or infant with severe reflux, if intermittent catheterization is difficult, or if anticholinergic medications are not well
tolerated. Another option for treating the severely trabeculated bladder
is transurethral injection of botulinum toxin (Botox) into the detrusor muscle, which reduces bladder hypertonicity for approximately 6
months and often needs to be repeated. A different approach in these
children is to temporarily inactivate the tight sphincter by urethral
overdilation or transurethral injection of botulinum toxin into the
sphincter. In children with upper tract changes, continuous overnight
bladder drainage allows significant bladder relaxation and can reduce
bladder wall thickening and lessen hydronephrosis.
Clean intermittent catheterization and anticholinergic therapy cure
reflux in up to 80% of children with grade I or II reflux. Children with
more severe reflux often require subureteral endoscopic injection therapy (see Chapter 576) or open antireflux surgery followed by intermittent catheterization and anticholinergic drugs. In older children with
myelomeningocele with high-­grade reflux, UTI, and hydronephrosis,
augmentation enterocystoplasty (enlarging the bladder with a patch
of intestine) with intermittent catheterization may be necessary. This
intervention allows a normal-­capacity bladder with low bladder pressure and effective drainage of the bladder.

Urinary Incontinence

Incontinence in the child with neuropathic bladder can result from total or
partial denervation of the sphincter, bladder hyperreflexia, poor bladder
compliance, chronic urinary retention, or a combination of these factors.

3289

Fig. 579.2 Voiding cystourethrogram in an infant with myelodyspla-

sia shows a severely trabeculated bladder with multiple diverticula and
grade V (out of V) right vesicoureteral reflux. Evaluation showed severe
detrusor-­sphincter dyssynergia.

Incontinence is often addressed at 4-­5 years of age and is tailored
to the individual child. Nearly all children require clean intermittent
catheterization to stay dry. This technique allows efficient bladder
emptying with minimal risk of symptomatic UTI. The urinary tract
should be reevaluated with renal ultrasonography, a voiding cystourethrogram, and a urodynamic study (including bladder capacity) prior
to initiation of an intermittent catheterization regimen. If the external
sphincter tone is sufficient and the bladder has adequate compliance,
intermittent catheterization every 3-­4 hours is often successful in keeping the child socially dry. If there are unstable bladder contractions, an
anticholinergic medication such as oxybutynin chloride, hyoscyamine,
or tolterodine is prescribed to increase bladder capacity. If there is
sphincteric incompetence, α-­adrenergic medications are prescribed to
enhance outlet resistance. Bacteriuria is seen in up to 50% of children
using intermittent self-­catheterization, but it seldom causes symptoms.
In the absence of reflux, there seems to be little cause for concern. Performing intermittent catheterization with a new catheter (hydrophilic
or standard silicone) each time is also quite effective in preventing bacteriuria and avoids the need for antibiotic prophylaxis. With this treatment plan, 40–85% of patients are dry, depending on the definition of
continence; some children wear a pad in their underwear or a diaper
for security but feel that they are dry.
If there is persistent incontinence despite medical therapy, reconstructive urinary tract surgery nearly always provides complete or
satisfactory continence. If urethral resistance is low, bladder neck
reconstructive procedures such as a periurethral sling are often successful. Alternatively, implantation of an artificial sphincter is usually
successful. This sphincter consists of an inflatable cuff that is placed
around the bladder neck, a pressure-­regulating balloon implanted in
the extraperitoneal space, and a pump mechanism that is implanted
in the scrotum of boys and in the labia majora of girls. Squeezing the
pump 3-­4 times moves the fluid out of the inflatable urethral cuff, and
then the cuff slowly refills over the next 2-­3 minutes.
If the bladder capacity or bladder compliance is low, or if there are
persistent uninhibited contractions despite anticholinergic therapy,
enlargement of the bladder with a patch of small or large intestine,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3290 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
termed augmentation cystoplasty or enterocystoplasty, is effective.
These patients still need to perform clean intermittent catheterization.
If urethral catheterization is difficult, a continent urinary stoma may be
incorporated into the urinary tract reconstruction. A common method
is the Mitrofanoff procedure (appendicovesicostomy), in which the
appendix is isolated from the cecum on its vascular pedicle and is interposed between the bladder and abdominal wall to allow intermittent
catheterization through a dry stoma. An ileal conduit with a bag on the
abdominal wall is rarely used.

Complications of Augmentation Cystoplasty
Urinary Tract Infection

The urine may be colonized with gram-­negative bacteria, and attempts
to sterilize the urine for prolonged periods usually fail. There is no
evidence that chronic bacteriuria in patients who have had enterocystoplasty is associated with renal damage; therefore only symptomatic
UTIs should be treated.

Metabolic Acidosis

The enteric mucosal surface in contact with the urine absorbs ammonium, chloride, and hydrogen ions and loses potassium. Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis can result, possibly requiring medical treatment
(see Chapter 73). Chronic acidosis can compromise skeletal growth.
This condition is common with colocystoplasty but is uncommon with
ileocystoplasty. Metabolic acidosis is also common in patients with
compromised renal function. To overcome this limitation of enterocystoplasty in patients with chronic renal insufficiency, a composite
augmentation using the stomach and a small or large bowel gastric segment can be used. The stomach secretes chloride and hydrogen ions;
thus preexisting metabolic acidosis remains stable or improves. However, augmentation with a gastric segment remains rare.

Spontaneous Perforation

Perforation of the augmented bladder is a life-­threatening complication that results most often from acute or chronic overdistention
of the augmented bladder. Patients with this complication typically
present with severe abdominal pain and signs of peritonitis. Prompt
diagnosis and treatment with exploratory laparotomy and bladder
closure are necessary. Meticulous adherence to the prescribed program of intermittent catheterization to avoid bladder overdistention
is important.

Bladder Calculi

Bladder calculi have developed in as many as 70% of children followed
for 10 years after enterocystoplasty. The calculi develop in response to
mucus that accumulates in the bladder and serves as a nidus for stone
formation. This complication can be prevented by daily irrigation of
the bladder with sterile saline.

A

B

Malignant Neoplasm

Invasive transitional cell carcinoma has been reported in nearly 4.6% of
patients undergoing enterocystoplasty (compared with a 2.6% risk in spina
bifida patients without enterocystoplasty). The pathogenesis is uncertain,
but there is speculation that it is related to bacteriuria and the bowel-­
bladder contact. The risk is highest following gastrocystoplasty. The risk
increases 10 years following enterocystoplasty. Although there are no formal guidelines or recommendations regarding screening, it seems appropriate to advise yearly endoscopic examinations or urine cytologic studies
beginning in the tenth postoperative year.

ASSOCIATED DISORDERS
Constipation

Many patients with spina bifida also have bowel problems with constipation, and a vigorous bowel regimen is important. Some benefit from
the Malone antegrade continence enema (MACE) procedure, in
which the appendix is brought out to the skin to allow a catheter to be
inserted into the cecum for antegrade enema. The stoma is continent,
and an antegrade enema can be performed with tap water each day.
This form of management allows the patient to be continent of stool
and be more self-­sufficient. An alternative to the MACE procedure is
a percutaneous cecostomy, in which a button is placed into the cecum
to allow an antegrade flush. The MACE and percutaneous cecostomy
procedures can be performed laparoscopically.

Latex Allergy

Latex allergy is a very serious problem encountered by as many as
half of patients with spina bifida and other urologic conditions who
require clean intermittent catheterization and urinary tract reconstructive procedures. This immunoglobulin E–mediated allergy is
acquired and is secondary to repeated exposure to the latex allergen.
Latex allergy can manifest as watery eyes, sneezing, itching, hives, or
anaphylaxis when blowing up a balloon or if an examiner is using
latex gloves. Intraoperatively, a sensitized patient can experience anaphylactic shock. A latex-­free environment should be provided for all
children with spina bifida in the office, during hospitalization, and
during operative procedures. Affected children also should wear a
medical alert bracelet.

Occult Spinal Dysraphism

Approximately 1 in 4,000 patients have occult spinal dysraphism, a
category that includes lipomeningocele, intradural lipoma, diastematomyelia, tight filum terminale, dermoid cyst-­sinus, aberrant nerve roots,
anterior sacral meningocele, and cauda equina tumor. More than 90%
of patients have a cutaneous abnormality overlying the lower spine,
including a sacral dimple, tuft of hair, dermal vascular malformation,
or subcutaneous lipoma (Fig. 579.3). Often these children have high-­
arched feet, discrepancy in muscle size and strength between the legs,

C

Fig. 579.3 A, Buttocks of teenage boy with tethered cord secondary to lipomeningocele. Note sacral dimple and deviation of gluteal fold to the
left. B, Fat deposit over sacrum in girl with tethered cord secondary to lipomeningocele. C, Deep sacral pit in child with neuropathic bladder.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 580 u Enuresis and Voiding Dysfunction

3291

and a gait abnormality. Newborns and young infants often have a normal neurologic examination. Older children often have absent perineal
sensation and back pain. Lower urinary tract function is abnormal in
40% of patients, including incontinence, recurrent UTI, and fecal soiling.
The likelihood of a normal examination is inversely related to the child’s
age at surgical correction of the spinal lesion. In infants with abnormal
urodynamics, 60% revert to normal; in older children, only 27% become
normal. Management of the urinary tract in other children is similar to
that described earlier for neural tube defects.

At 2-­4 years, the child is developmentally ready to begin toilet training. To achieve conscious bladder control, several conditions must be
present: awareness of bladder filling, cortical inhibition (suprapontine
modulation) of reflex (unstable) bladder contractions, ability to consciously tighten the external sphincter to prevent incontinence, normal
bladder growth, and motivation by the child to stay dry. The transitional phase of voiding refers to the period when children are acquiring
bladder control. Females typically acquire bladder control before males,
and bowel control typically is achieved before bladder control.

Sacral Agenesis

DIURNAL INCONTINENCE

Sacral agenesis is defined as the absence of part or all of two or more lower
vertebral bodies. This condition is more common in the offspring of women
with diabetes. These children have a flattened buttock and a low, short gluteal cleft but usually have no orthopedic deformity, although some have
high-­arched feet. Palpation of the coccygeal area detects the absent vertebrae. Approximately 20% of cases are undetected until the age of 3-­4 years;
many are diagnosed after unsuccessful toilet training. Urodynamic studies
in these children show a variety of patterns, and most need clean intermittent catheterization and pharmacotherapy to stay dry.

Imperforate Anus

Approximately 30–45% of children with a high imperforate anus have
a neuropathic bladder, often because of sacral agenesis. Newborns with
imperforate anus should undergo a spinal ultrasound during their initial evaluation, and if these children have difficulty with toilet training,
complete urologic evaluation with upper and lower urinary tract imaging and urodynamics should be performed (see Chapter 392).

Cerebral Palsy

Children with cerebral palsy (see Chapter 638.1) often have reasonable
bladder control. However, they achieve continence at a later age than unaffected children. Overall, 25–50% are incontinent, and the risk is directly
related to the severity of physical impairment. Their upper urinary tracts
are usually normal. Urodynamic studies have shown that most have uninhibited bladder contractions. Timed voiding and anticholinergic therapy
are usually effective. Upper urinary tract deterioration is uncommon, and
clean intermittent catheterization is rarely necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 580

Enuresis and Voiding
Dysfunction
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
NORMAL VOIDING AND TOILET TRAINING

Fetal voiding occurs by reflex bladder contraction in concert with
simultaneous contraction of the bladder and relaxation of the sphincter.
Urine storage results from sympathetic and pudendal nerve-­mediated
inhibition of detrusor contractile activity accompanied by closure of
the bladder neck and proximal urethra with increased activity of the
external sphincter. The infant has coordinated reflex voiding as often as
15-­20 times/day. Over time, bladder capacity increases. In children up
to the age of 14 years, the mean bladder capacity in milliliters is equal
to the ([age (in years) + 2] times 30) (e.g., the bladder capacity of a 6
year old should be [6 + 2] × 30 or 240 mL).

Daytime incontinence not secondary to neurologic abnormalities is
common in children. At 5 years of age, 95% have been dry during the
day at some time and 92% are dry consistently. At 7 years of age, 96%
are dry, although 15% have significant urgency at times. At 12 years,
99% are dry consistently during the day. The most common causes of
daytime incontinence are overactive bladder (urge incontinence)
and bladder-­bowel dysfunction (BBD). Table 580.1 lists the causes of
diurnal incontinence in children; Table 580.2 categorizes four types of
voiding dysfunction.
The patient history should assess the pattern of incontinence,
including the frequency of voiding, frequency of day and night urinary
leakage, volume of urine lost during incontinent episodes, whether the
incontinence is associated with urgency or giggling, whether it occurs
after voiding, and whether the incontinence is continuous. In addition, whether the patient has a strong continuous urinary stream and
sensation of incomplete bladder emptying should be assessed. A diary
of when the child voids and whether the child is wet or dry is helpful. Other urologic problems, such as urinary tract infections (UTIs),
vesicoureteral reflux, neurologic disorders, or a family history of renal
duplication anomalies, should be assessed. Bowel habits also should
be evaluated because incontinence is common in children with constipation and/or encopresis. Diurnal incontinence can occur in children
with a history of sexual abuse or following bullying. Physical examination is directed at identifying signs of organic causes of incontinence.
Short stature, hypertension, enlarged kidneys and/or bladder, constipation, labial adhesion, ureteral ectopy, back or sacral anomalies (see
Fig. 579.4), and neurologic abnormalities should be documented.
Assessment tools include urinalysis, with culture if indicated; bladder diary (recorded times and volumes voided, whether wet or dry);
postvoid residual urine volume (generally obtained by bladder scan);
and the Dysfunctional Voiding Symptom Score (Fig. 580.1). An alternative to the Dysfunctional Voiding Symptom Score is the Vancouver
Nonneurogenic Lower Urinary Tract Dysfunction/Dysfunctional
Elimination Syndrome questionnaire. This questionnaire is a validated tool that consists of 14 questions scored on a 5-­point Likert scale
to assess lower urinary tract and bowel dysfunction. In most cases, a

Table 580.1  Causes of Urinary Incontinence in Childhood
Overactive bladder (urge incontinence or diurnal urge syndrome)
Infrequent voiding (underactive bladder)
Voiding postponement
Detrusor-­sphincter discoordination
Nonneurogenic neurogenic bladder (Hinman syndrome)
Vaginal voiding
Giggle incontinence
Cystitis
Bladder outlet obstruction (posterior urethral valves)
Ectopic ureter and fistula
Sphincter abnormality (epispadias, exstrophy; urogenital sinus
abnormality)
Neuropathic
Overflow incontinence
Traumatic
Iatrogenic
Behavioral
Combinations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3292 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 580.2  Symptoms and Signs of Four Main Subtypes of Lower Urinary Tract Dysfunction
SYMPTOMS

SIGNS

Overactive bladder

(Cystometric) detrusor overactivity, frequency, voiding
urgency, incontinence, constipation, enuresis

Holding maneuvers, normal flow pattern, thick bladder
wall, low-­volume voids

Dysfunctional voiding

Failure to relax the sphincter during voiding, normal
micturition frequency, incontinence, constipation,
urinary tract infections, enuresis

Post-­void residue, staccato or interrupted flow pattern,
normal frequency of voids

Underactive bladder

(Cystometric) weak detrusor contractions, low
micturition frequency incontinence, constipation,
urinary tract infections

Post-­void residue, staccato or interrupted flow pattern,
frequent large volume voids

Voiding postponement

Low micturition frequency, incontinence

Normal flow pattern

Classification of daytime lower urinary tract dysfunction, assessment, and documentation should be based on the following parameters: incontinence (presence or absence and
symptom frequency), voiding frequency, voiding urgency, voided volumes, and fluid intake.
From Nieuwhof-­Leppink AJ, Schroeder RPJ, van de Putte EM, et al. Daytime urinary incontinence in children and adolescents. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2019;3:492–500.

Patient name:
Hospital number:
Reason for referral:
Date:
Almost
never

Less than
half the
time

About half
the time

Almost
every
time

Not
available

0

1

2

3

NA

0
0

1
1

2
2

3
3

NA
NA

0

1

2

3

NA

0

1

2

3

NA

0

1

2

3

NA

7. When I have to pee, I cannot wait.
8. I have to push to pee.

0
0

1
1

2
2

3
3

NA
NA

9. When I pee it hurts.
10. Parents to answer. Has your child experienced
something stressful like the example below?

0

1

2

3

Over the last month
1. I have had wet clothes or wet underwear
during the day.
2. When I wet myself, my underwear is soaked.
3. I miss having a bowel movement every day.
4. I have to push for my bowel movements to
come out.
5. I only go to the bathroom one or two times
each day.
6. I can hold onto my pee by crossing my legs,
squatting or doing the “pee dance.”

No (0)

NA
Yes (3)

Total*
• New baby.
• New home.
• New school.
• School problems.
• Abuse (sexual/physical).
• Home problems (divorce/death).
• Special events (birthday).
• Accident/injury.
• Others.

*Females with a score t6 and males with a score t9 are most likely to
have dysfunctional voiding.

Fig. 580.1 Dysfunctional Voiding Symptom Score questionnaire. (From Farhat W, Bagli DJ, Capolicchio G, et al. The dysfunctional voiding scoring
system: quantitative standardization of dysfunctional voiding symptoms in children. J Urol. 2000;164:1011–1015.)

uroflow study with electromyography (noninvasive assessment of urinary flow pattern and measurement of external sphincter activity) is
indicated. Another item that may be useful in children older than age
5 years is the Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC), a brief screening
questionnaire that may reveal psychosocial stressors contributing to
incontinence (see Chapter 32).
Bowel function should also be assessed. The Bristol Stool Form
Score (Fig. 580.2) should be recorded. In addition, the clinician should
utilize the Rome III diagnostic criteria, which classify functional gastrointestinal disorders that do not have underlying structural or tissue-­
based causes. Children 4 years of age or older are diagnosed as being
constipated if they fulfill two or more of the following criteria over a
period of 2 months: two or fewer defecations in the toilet per week, at

least one episode of fecal incontinence per week, a history of retentive
posturing or excessive volitional stool retention, a history of painful
or hard bowel movements, the presence of a large fecal mass in the
rectum, and a history of large-­diameter stools that obstruct the toilet.
Imaging (renal-­bladder ultrasound with or without a voiding cystourethrogram) is indicated in children with diurnal incontinence who
have significant physical findings, those who have a family history of
urinary tract anomalies or UTIs, and those who do not respond to
therapy appropriately. Urodynamics should be performed if there is
evidence of neurologic disease and may be helpful if empirical therapy
is ineffective. If there is any evidence of a neurologic disorder or if there is
a sacral abnormality on physical examination, an MRI of the lower spine
should be obtained.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 580 u Enuresis and Voiding Dysfunction

3293

Bristol Stool Chart

Type 1

Separate hard lumps, like nuts
(hard to pass)

Type 2

Sausage-shaped but lumpy

Type 3

Like a sausage but with cracks
on its surface

Type 4

Like a sausage or snake,
smooth and soft

Type 5

Soft blobs with clear-cut edges
(passed easily)

Type 6

Fluffy pieces with ragged edges,
a mushy stool

Type 7

Watery, no solid pieces.
Entirely Liquid

Fig. 580.2 Bristol Stool Chart for evaluating bowel function.

OVERACTIVE BLADDER (DIURNAL URGE
SYNDROME)

Children with an overactive bladder typically exhibit urinary frequency, urgency, and urge incontinence. Often a female will squat
down on her foot to try to prevent incontinence (termed Vincent’s
curtsy). The bladder in these children is functionally, but not anatomically, smaller than normal and exhibits strong uninhibited contractions. Approximately 25% of children with nocturnal enuresis also
have symptoms of an overactive bladder. Many children indicate they
do not feel the need to urinate, even just before they are incontinent.
In females, a history of recurrent UTI is common, but incontinence
can persist long after infections are brought under control. It is unclear
if the voiding dysfunction is a sequela of the UTIs or if the voiding
dysfunction predisposes to recurrent UTIs. In some females, voiding
cystourethrography shows a dilated urethra (spinning-­top deformity;
Fig. 580.3) and narrowed bladder neck with bladder wall hypertrophy.
The urethral finding results from inadequate relaxation of the external
urinary sphincter.
The overactive bladder nearly always resolves, but the time to resolution is highly variable, occasionally not until the teenage years. Initial
therapy is timed voiding, every 1.5-­2 hours. Treatment of constipation
and UTIs is important. Another treatment is biofeedback, in which
children are taught pelvic floor exercises (Kegel exercises), because
daily performance of these exercises can reduce or eliminate unstable
bladder contractions. Biofeedback often consists of 8-­10 1-­hour sessions and may include participation with animated computer games.
Biofeedback also may include periodic uroflow studies with sphincter
electromyography to be certain that the pelvic floor relaxes during voiding, and assessment of postvoid residual urine volume by sonography.
Anticholinergic therapy often is helpful if bowel function is normal.
Oxybutynin chloride and tolterodine are the only U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-­approved medications in children, but hyoscyamine, trospium, solifenacin, and mirabegron have also demonstrated
safety in this population; these medications reduce bladder overactivity
and may help the child achieve dryness. Adequate hydration should be
emphasized to combat constipation as oxybutynin can induce constipation in some patients. Treatment with an α-­adrenergic blocker such as

Fig. 580.3 Spinning-­top deformity. Voiding cystourethrogram demonstrating dilation of the urethra with distal urethral narrowing and contraction of the bladder neck.

terazosin or doxazosin can aid in bladder emptying by promoting bladder neck relaxation; these medications also have mild anticholinergic
properties. If pharmacologic therapy is successful, the dosage should
be tapered periodically to determine its continued need. Children who
do not respond to therapy should be evaluated with urodynamic studies to rule out other possible forms of bladder or sphincter dysfunction.
In refractory cases, other procedures such as sacral neuromodulation
(InterStim), percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation, and intravesical botulinum toxin injection have been effective in children.
If the child has constipation based on the criteria described earlier,
treatment generally is initiated with polyethylene glycol powder, which
has been shown to be safe in children and is generally more effective
than other laxative preparations (see Chapter 378.3).

NONNEUROGENIC NEUROGENIC BLADDER
(HINMAN SYNDROME)

Hinman syndrome is a very serious but uncommon disorder involving failure of the external sphincter to relax during voiding in children
without neurologic abnormalities. Children with this syndrome, also
called nonneurogenic neurogenic bladder, typically exhibit a staccato stream, day and night wetting, recurrent UTIs, constipation, and
encopresis. Evaluation of affected children often reveals vesicoureteral
reflux, a trabeculated bladder, and a decreased urinary flow rate with
an intermittent pattern (Fig. 580.4). In severe cases, hydronephrosis,
renal insufficiency, and end-­stage renal disease can occur. The pathogenesis of this syndrome is thought to involve learning abnormal voiding habits during toilet training; the syndrome is rarely seen in infants.
Urodynamic studies and MRI of the spine are indicated to rule out a
neurologic cause for the bladder dysfunction.
The treatment usually is complex and can include anticholinergic
and α-­adrenergic blocker therapy, timed voiding, treatment of constipation, behavioral modification, and encouragement of relaxation during voiding. Biofeedback has been used successfully in older children
to teach relaxation of the external sphincter. Botulinum toxin injection
into the external sphincter can provide temporary sphincteric paralysis and thereby reduce outlet resistance. In severe cases, intermittent
catheterization is necessary to ensure bladder emptying. In selected
patients, external urinary diversion is necessary to protect the upper
urinary tract. These children require long-­term treatment and careful
follow-­up.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3294 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children

A

B

Fig. 580.5 A, Labial adhesion. Note the inability to visualize the ure-

thral meatus and vagina. B, Normal female external genitals following
lysis of labial adhesion.

Fig. 580.4 Voiding cystourethrogram demonstrating severe bladder
trabeculation and vesicoureteral reflux in a 12-­yr-­old male with Hinman
syndrome. The patient presented with day and night incontinence, had
chronic renal failure, and underwent kidney transplantation.

INFREQUENT VOIDING (UNDERACTIVE BLADDER)

Infrequent voiding is a common disorder of micturition. Affected children, usually females, often void only 1-­2 times a day rather than the
normal 4-­7 times. Poor detrusor contraction strength and/or duration
lead to bladder overdistention and prolonged retention of urine and
ultimately bacterial growth that can lead to recurrent UTIs. Some of
these children are constipated. Some also have occasional episodes of
incontinence from overflow or urgency. The disorder is behavioral. If
the child has UTIs, treatment includes antibacterial prophylaxis and
encouragement of frequent voiding and complete emptying of the
bladder by double voiding until a normal pattern of micturition is
re­established.

VAGINAL VOIDING

In females with vaginal voiding, incontinence typically occurs after
urination after the female stands up. The volume is usually minimal,
about 5-­10 mL, and characterized as dribbling. One of the most common causes is labial adhesion (Fig. 580.5). This lesion, typically seen
in young females, can be managed either by topical application of
estrogen or steroid cream to the adhesion or manual separation (this
should only be done after ensuring adequate anesthesia and potentially
sedation; see Chapter 586). Some females experience vaginal voiding
because they do not separate their legs widely during urination. These
females typically are overweight and/or do not pull their underwear
down to their ankles when they urinate. Management involves encouraging the female to separate the legs as widely as possible during urination. The most effective way to do this is to have the child sit backward
on the toilet seat during micturition.

OTHER CAUSES OF INCONTINENCE IN FEMALES

Ureteral ectopia, usually associated with a duplicated collecting system in females, refers to a ureter that drains outside the bladder, often
into the vagina or distal urethra. It can produce urinary incontinence
characterized by constant urinary dribbling all day, even though the
child voids regularly. Sometimes the urine production from the renal
segment drained by the ectopic ureter is small, and urinary drainage
is confused with watery vaginal discharge. Children with a history of
vaginal discharge or incontinence and an abnormal voiding pattern
require careful study. The ectopic orifice is usually difficult to find. On
ultrasonography or intravenous urography, one may suspect duplication of the collecting system (Fig. 580.6), but the upper collecting system drained by the ectopic ureter usually has poor or delayed function.

Fig. 580.6 Duplication of the right collecting system with ectopic

ureter. Excretory urogram in a female presenting with a normal voiding pattern and constant urinary dribbling. The left kidney is normal,
and the right side, well visualized, is the lower collecting system of a
duplicated kidney. On the upper pole opposite the first and second
vertebral bodies, note the accumulation of contrast material (arrows)
corresponding with a poorly functioning upper pole drained by a ureter
opening in the vestibule.

CT scanning of the kidneys or an MR urogram should demonstrate
subtle duplication anomalies. Examination under anesthesia for an
ectopic ureteral orifice in the vestibule or the vagina may be necessary
(Fig. 580.7). Treatment in these cases is either partial nephrectomy,
with removal of the upper pole segment of the duplicated kidney and
its ureter down to the pelvic brim, or ipsilateral ureteroureterostomy,
in which the upper pole ectopic ureter is anastomosed to the normally
positioned lower pole ureter. These procedures often are performed by
minimally invasive laparoscopy with or without robotic assistance.
Giggle incontinence typically affects females 7-­15 years of age. The
incontinence occurs suddenly during giggling, and the entire bladder
volume is lost. The pathogenesis is thought to be sudden relaxation of
the urinary sphincter. Anticholinergic medication and timed voiding
occasionally are effective. The most effective treatment is low-­dose
methylphenidate, which seems to stabilize the external sphincter.
Total incontinence in females may be secondary to epispadias (see
Fig. 578.2). This condition, which affects only 1 in 480,000 females,
is characterized by separation of the pubic symphysis, separation of
the right and left sides of the clitoris, and a patulous urethra. Treatment is bladder neck reconstruction; an alternative surgical therapy is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 580 u Enuresis and Voiding Dysfunction

3295

Table 580.3  Nocturnal Enuresis
CAUSES
Delayed maturation of the cortical mechanisms that allow voluntary
control of the micturition reflex
Defective sleep arousal
Reduced antidiuretic hormone production at night, resulting in an
increased urine output (nocturnal polyuria)
Genetic factors, with chromosomes 12 and 13q the likely sites of the
gene for enuresis
Bladder factors (lack of inhibition, reduced capacity, overactive)
Constipation
Organic factors, such as urinary tract infection, obstructive uropathy,
or sickle cell anemia nephropathy
Sleep disorders
Sleep-­disordered breathing secondary to enlarged adenoids
Psychologic factors more often implicated in secondary enuresis

Fig. 580.7 An ectopic ureter entering the vestibule next to the urethral meatus. The thin ureteral catheter with transverse marks has been
introduced into this ectopic ureter. This female had a normal voiding
pattern and constant urinary dribbling.

placement of an artificial urinary sphincter to repair the incompetent
urethra.
A short, incompetent urethra may be associated with certain urogenital sinus malformations. The diagnosis of these malformations
requires a high index of suspicion and a careful physical examination
of all incontinent females. In these cases, urethral and vaginal reconstruction often restores continence.

VOIDING DISORDERS WITHOUT INCONTINENCE

Some children have abrupt onset of severe urinary frequency, voiding as often as every 10-­15 minutes during the day, without dysuria,
UTI, daytime incontinence, or nocturia. The most common age for
these symptoms to occur is 4-­6 years, after the child is toilet trained;
males are more often affected. This condition is termed the daytime
frequency syndrome of childhood, or pollakiuria. The condition is
functional without associated anatomic problems. Often the symptoms
occur just before a child starts kindergarten or if the child is having
emotional family stress-­related problems. These children should be
checked for UTIs, and the clinician should ascertain that the child is
emptying the bladder satisfactorily. Another contributing cause is constipation. Occasionally, pinworms cause these symptoms. The condition is self-­limited, and symptoms generally resolve within 2-­3 months.
Anticholinergic therapy is rarely effective.
Some children have dysuria-­hematuria syndrome, in which the
child has dysuria without UTI but with microscopic or total gross
hematuria (blood throughout the stream). This condition affects children who are toilet-­trained and is often secondary to hypercalciuria.
A 24-­hour urine sample should be obtained and calcium and creatinine excretion assessed. A 24-­hour calcium excretion of >4 mg/kg is
abnormal and deserves treatment with thiazides, because some of these
children are at risk for urolithiasis. Terminal hematuria (blood at the
end of the stream) occurs in males and typically is secondary to BBD or
urethral meatal stenosis. Cystoscopy is not indicated, and the condition
usually resolves with treatment for constipation.

NOCTURNAL ENURESIS

By 5 years of age, 90–95% of children are nearly completely continent
during the day, and 80–85% are continent at night. Nocturnal enuresis
refers to the occurrence of involuntary voiding at night after 5 years
old, the age when volitional control of micturition is expected. Enuresis

OTHER FEATURES
Enuresis can occur in any stage of sleep (but usually non–rapid eye
movement sleep)
All children are most difficult to arouse in the first third of the night
and easiest to awaken in the last third, but enuretic children are
more difficult to arouse than those with normal bladder control
Enuretic children often are described as “soaking the bed”
Family history in enuretic children often positive for enuresis
Risk increased with developmental delay, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorders

may be primary (estimated 75–90% of children with enuresis; nocturnal urinary control never achieved) or secondary (10–25%; the child
was dry at night for at least a few months and then enuresis developed).
Overall, 75% of children with enuresis are wet only at night, and 25%
are incontinent day and night. This distinction is important, because
children with both forms are more likely to have an abnormality of the
urinary tract. Monosymptomatic enuresis is more common than polysymptomatic enuresis (associated urgency, hesitancy, frequency, daytime
incontinence).

Epidemiology

Approximately 60% of children with nocturnal enuresis are males. The
family history is positive in 50% of cases. Although primary nocturnal
enuresis may be polygenetic, candidate genes have been localized to
chromosomes 6, 12, and 13. If one parent was enuretic, each child has
a 44% risk of enuresis; if both parents were enuretic, each child has a
77% likelihood of enuresis. Nocturnal enuresis without overt daytime
voiding symptoms affects up to 20% of children at the age of 5 years; it
ceases spontaneously in approximately 15% of involved children every
year thereafter. Its frequency among adults is <1%.

Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of primary nocturnal enuresis (normal daytime voiding habits) is multifactorial (Table 580.3).

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

A careful history should be obtained, especially with respect to fluid
intake at night and the pattern of nocturnal enuresis. Children with
diabetes insipidus (see Chapter 596), diabetes mellitus (see Chapter
629), and chronic renal disease (see Chapter 572) can have a high
obligatory urinary output and a compensatory polydipsia. The family
should be asked whether the child snores loudly at night. Many children with enuresis sleepwalk or talk in their sleep. A complete physical
examination should include palpation of the abdomen and possibly a
rectal examination after voiding to assess the possibility of a chronically
distended bladder and constipation. The child with nocturnal enuresis
should be examined carefully for neurologic and spinal abnormalities. There is an increased incidence of bacteriuria in enuretic females,
and, if found, it should be investigated and treated (see Chapter 575),
although this does not always lead to resolution of bed-­wetting. A
urine sample should be obtained after an overnight fast and evaluated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3296 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
for specific gravity or osmolality to exclude polyuria as a cause of frequency and incontinence and to ascertain that the concentrating ability is normal. The absence of glycosuria should be confirmed. If there
are no daytime symptoms, the physical examination and urinalysis are
normal, and the urine culture is negative, further evaluation for urinary tract pathology generally is not warranted. A renal ultrasound is
reasonable in an older child with enuresis or in children who do not
respond appropriately to therapy.

Treatment

The best approach to treatment is to reassure the child and parents
that the condition is self-­limited and to avoid punitive measures that
can affect the child’s psychologic development adversely. Fluid intake
should be restricted to 2 oz after 6 or 7 pm. The parents should be certain that the child voids at bedtime. Avoiding extraneous sugar and
caffeine after 5 pm is also beneficial. If the child snores and the adenoids
are enlarged, referral to an otolaryngologist should be considered,
because adenoidectomy can cure the enuresis in some cases.
Active treatment should be avoided in children younger than 6
years of age, because enuresis is extremely common in younger children. Treatment is more likely to be successful in children approaching puberty compared with younger children. In addition, treatment
is most likely to be effective in children who are motivated to stay dry
and is less successful in children who are overweight. Treatment should
be viewed as a facilitator that requires active participation by the child
(e.g., a coach and an athlete).
The simplest initial measure is motivational therapy and includes
a star chart for dry nights. Waking children a few hours after they go
to sleep to have them void often allows them to awaken dry, although
this measure is not curative. Some have recommended that children
try holding their urine for longer periods during the day, but there is
no evidence that this approach is beneficial. Conditioning therapy
involves use of a loud auditory or vibratory alarm attached to a moisture sensor in the underwear. The alarm activates when voiding occurs
and is intended to awaken children and alert them to void. This form
of therapy has a reported success of 30–60%, although the relapse rate
is significant. Often the auditory alarm wakes up other family members and not the enuretic child; persistent use of the alarm for several months often is necessary to determine whether this treatment
is effective. Conditioning therapy tends to be most effective in older
children. Another form of therapy to which some children respond is
self-­hypnosis. The primary role of psychologic therapy is to help the
child deal with enuresis psychologically and help motivate the child to
void at night if he or she awakens with a full bladder.
Pharmacologic therapy is intended to treat the symptom of enuresis and thus is regarded as second line and is not curative. Direct comparisons of the moisture alarm with pharmacologic therapy favor the
former because of lower relapse rates, although initial response rates
are equivalent.
One form of pharmacologic treatment is desmopressin acetate, a
synthetic analog of antidiuretic hormone that reduces urine production overnight. This medication is FDA-­approved in children and is
available as a tablet, with a dosage of 0.2-­0.6 mg orally 2 hours before
bedtime. A nasal spray formulation is available but is no longer recommended for nocturnal enuresis due to increased risk of hyponatremia and convulsions. Hyponatremia has not been reported in children
using oral tablets. Fluid restriction at night is important, and the drug
should not be used if the child has a systemic illness with vomiting or
diarrhea or if the child has polydipsia. Desmopressin acetate is effective
in as many as 40% of children and is most effective in those approaching puberty. If effective, it should be used for 3-­6 months, and then an
attempt should be made to taper the dosage. Some families use it intermittently (sleepovers, school trips, vacations) with success. If tapering
results in recurrent enuresis, the child should return to the higher dosage. Few adverse events have been reported with the long-­term use of
desmopressin acetate.
For therapy-­resistant enuresis or children with symptoms of an overactive bladder, anticholinergic therapy is indicated. Oxybutynin 5 mg
or tolterodine 2 mg at bedtime is often prescribed. If the medication is

ineffective, the dosage may be doubled. The clinician should monitor
constipation as a potential side effect.
A third-­line treatment is imipramine, which is a tricyclic antidepressant. This medication has mild anticholinergic and α-­adrenergic
effects, reduces the urine output slightly, and might alter the sleep
pattern. The dosage of imipramine is 25 mg in children age 6-­8 years,
50 mg in children age 9-­12 years, and 75 mg in teenagers. Reported
success rates are 30–60%. Side effects include anxiety, insomnia, dry
mouth, and heart rhythm changes. If there is any history of palpitations or syncope in the child, or sudden cardiac death or unstable
arrhythmia in the family, long QT syndrome in the patient needs to be
excluded prior to prescribing imipramine. The drug is one of the most
common causes of poisoning by prescription medication, so it is also
important to emphasize safe storage.
In unsuccessful cases, combining therapies often is effective. Alarm
therapy plus desmopressin is more successful than either alone. The
combination of oxybutynin chloride and desmopressin is more successful than a single agent. Desmopressin and imipramine also may
be combined.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 581

Anomalies of the Penis
and Urethra
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
HYPOSPADIAS

Hypospadias is a urethral opening on the ventral surface of the
penile shaft affecting 1 in 200 male newborns. Typically an isolated defect, its incidence is increased in many males with chromosomal abnormalities, anorectal malformation, and congenital
heart disease. Usually, there is incomplete development of the prepuce, called a dorsal hood, in which the foreskin is on the sides and
dorsal aspect of the penile shaft and deficient or absent ventrally.
Some males with hypospadias, particularly those with proximal
hypospadias, have chordee, in which there is ventral penile curvature during erection. The incidence of hypospadias appears to be
increasing, possibly because of in utero exposure to estrogenic or
antiandrogenic endocrine-­disrupting chemicals (e.g., polychlorobiphenyls, phytoestrogens).

Clinical Manifestations

Hypospadias is classified according to the position of the urethral
meatus after considering whether chordee is present (Fig. 581.1). The
deformity is described as distal (further broken down into glanular
[on the glans penis], coronal, or subcoronal), midpenile (distal penile,
midshaft, or proximal penile), or proximal (penoscrotal, scrotal, or
perineal). Approximately 65% of cases are distal, 25% are subcoronal
or midpenile, and 10% are proximal. In the most severe cases, the scrotum is bifid, and sometimes there is moderate penoscrotal transposition. As many as 10% of affected males have a megameatal variant
of hypospadias in which the foreskin is developed normally (megameatus intact prepuce variant), and there is either glanular or subcoronal hypospadias with a “fish mouth” meatus. These cases might not be
diagnosed until after a circumcision is performed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 581 u Anomalies of the Penis and Urethra

A

B

C

D

E

3297

F

Fig. 581.1 Varying forms of hypospadias. A, Glanular hypospadias. B, Subcoronal hypospadias. Note the dorsal hood of foreskin. C, Penoscrotal
hypospadias with chordee. D, Perineal hypospadias with chordee and partial penoscrotal transposition. E, Megameatal variant of hypospadias diagnosed following circumcision; note absence of hooded foreskin. F, Complete penoscrotal transposition with scrotal hypospadias.

Approximately 10% of males with hypospadias have an undescended
testis; inguinal hernia(s) also are common. In the newborn, the differential diagnosis of midpenile or proximal hypospadias associated
with an undescended testis should include forms of a disorder of sex
development, particularly mixed gonadal dysgenesis, partial androgen
insensitivity, true hermaphroditism, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia in a female (see Chapter 616). In the latter condition, neither gonad
is palpable. A karyotype should be obtained in patients with midpenile or
proximal hypospadias and cryptorchidism (see Chapter 628). In males
with proximal hypospadias, a voiding cystourethrogram should be
considered because 5–10% of these children have a dilated prostatic
utricle, which is a remnant of the müllerian system (see Chapter 591).
The incidence of upper urinary tract abnormalities is low unless there
are abnormalities of other organ systems.
Complications of untreated hypospadias include deformity of the
urinary stream, typically ventral deflection or severe splaying; sexual
dysfunction secondary to penile curvature; infertility if the urethral
meatus is proximal; meatal stenosis (congenital), which is uncommon;
and cosmetic appearance. The goal of hypospadias surgery is to correct
the functional and cosmetic deformities. Whereas hypospadias repair
is recommended for all males with midpenile and proximal hypospadias, some males with distal hypospadias have no functional abnormality and do not need surgical correction.

Treatment

Management begins in the newborn period. Circumcision should be
avoided because the foreskin often is used in the repair in most cases.
The ideal age for repair in a healthy infant is 6-­12 months because the
risk of general anesthesia at this age is similar to older children; penile
growth over the next several years is slow; the child does not remember
the surgical procedure; and postoperative analgesic needs are less than
in older children. With the exception of proximal hypospadias, virtually all cases are repaired in a single operation on an ambulatory basis.
The most common repair involves tubularization of the urethral plate
distal to the urethral meatus, with coverage by a vascularized flap from
the foreskin, termed a tubularized incised plate repair. Proximal cases
might require a two-­stage repair.
The complication rate parallels severity: 5% for distal hypospadias,
10% for midpenile hypospadias, and 40% for proximal hypospadias.
The most common complications include urethrocutaneous fistula and
meatal stenosis. Other complications include a deformed urinary stream,
persistent or recurrent penile curvature, and dehiscence of the hypospadias repair. Treatment of these complications generally is straightforward. In complex cases, a buccal mucosa graft from the mouth is used to
create urethral mucosa. Repair of hypospadias is a technically demanding operation and should be performed by a surgeon with specialty training in pediatric urology and extensive experience.

CHORDEE WITHOUT HYPOSPADIAS

In some males, there is mild or moderate ventral penile curvature
(chordee) and incomplete development of the foreskin (dorsal hood),
but the urethral meatus is at the tip of the glans (Fig. 581.2). In most

A

B

Fig. 581.2 A and B, Two examples of chordee without hypospadias.
Note hooded foreskin and normal location of urethral meatus.

of these males, the urethra is normal, but there is insufficient ventral
penile skin or prominent, inelastic ventral bands of dartos fascia that
prevent a straight erection. In some cases, the urethra is hypoplastic,
and a formal urethroplasty is necessary for repair. The only sign of this
anomaly in the neonate may be the hooded foreskin, and delayed repair
under general anesthesia after 6 months of age is recommended. Lateral penile curvature usually is caused by overgrowth or hypoplasia of
a corporal (erectile) body and usually is congenital. Surgical repair is
also recommended at age 6-­12 months.

PHIMOSIS AND PARAPHIMOSIS

Phimosis refers to the inability to retract the prepuce. At birth, phimosis is physiologic. Over time, the adhesions between the prepuce
and glans lyse and the distal phimotic ring loosens. In 80% of uncircumcised males, the prepuce becomes retractable by 3 years of age.
Accumulation of epithelial debris under the infant’s prepuce is physiologic and does not mandate circumcision. In older males, phimosis
may be physiologic or may be pathologic from lichen sclerosus (balanitis xerotica obliterans) at the tip of the foreskin (Fig. 581.3A) and
can also affect the meatus (see Fig. 581.3B). The prepuce might have
been retracted forcefully on one or two occasions in the past, which
can result in a cicatricial scar that prevents subsequent retraction of the
foreskin. In males with persistent physiologic or pathologic phimosis,
application of corticosteroid ointment to the tip of the foreskin twice
daily for 1 month loosens the phimotic ring in two thirds of cases. If
there is ballooning of the foreskin during voiding or phimosis beyond 10
years of age and topical corticosteroid therapy is ineffective, circumcision
is recommended.
Paraphimosis occurs when the foreskin is retracted proximal to the
coronal sulcus and the prepuce cannot be pulled back over the glans
(Fig. 581.4). Painful venous stasis in the retracted foreskin results, with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3298 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children

A

B

Fig. 581.3 A, Balanitis xerotica obliterans. Note whitish cicatricial
plaque. B, Involvement of the urethral meatus necessitated a meatoplasty.

months, but there is an increased risk of UTI until at least 5 years of age,
or age of completion of toilet training. Many recommend circumcision
in infants who are predisposed to UTI, such as those with congenital
hydronephrosis and vesicoureteral reflux. Circumcision reduces the
risk of sexually transmitted infections in adults (see Chapter 163), in
particular HIV (see Chapter 322). There have been only a handful of
reports of adult males who were circumcised at birth and subsequently
acquired penile carcinoma, but in Scandinavian countries, where few
males are circumcised and hygiene is good, the incidence of penile cancer is low.
Circumcision should be performed by trained providers under sterile conditions. When performing a neonatal circumcision, local analgesia, such as a dorsal or penile ring block or application of EMLA
(eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) cream (lidocaine 2.5% and
prilocaine 2.5%) is recommended. Early and late complications after
neonatal circumcision include bleeding, wound infection, meatal
stenosis, secondary phimosis, removal of insufficient foreskin, and
fibrous penile adhesions (skin bridge; Fig. 581.5); 0.2–3.0% of patients
undergo a subsequent operative procedure. Males with a large hydrocele or hernia are at particular risk for secondary phimosis because the
scrotal swelling tends to displace the penile shaft skin over the glans.
Serious complications of newborn circumcision include sepsis, amputation of the distal part of the glans, removal of an excessive amount
of foreskin, and urethrocutaneous fistula. Circumcision should not be
performed in neonates with hypospadias, chordee without hypospadias, or a dorsal hood deformity (relative contraindication) or in those
with a small penis (Fig. 581.6). In males with a “wandering raphe,” in
which the median raphe deviates to one side, there may be underlying
penile torsion or hypospadias, and evaluation by a pediatric urologist
is suggested before performing a circumcision.

PENILE TORSION

Penile torsion, a rotational defect of the penile shaft, usually occurs in a
counterclockwise direction, usually to the left side (see Fig. 581.6D). In
most cases, penile development is normal, and the condition is unrecognized until circumcision is performed or the foreskin is retractable.
In many cases, the midline raphe of the penile shaft is deviated. Penile
torsion also occurs in some males with hypospadias. The defect has
primarily cosmetic significance, and correction is unnecessary if the
rotation is <60 degrees from the midline. The severity of penile torsion
may lessen during infancy.
Fig. 581.4 Paraphimosis. The foreskin has been retracted proximal to

the glans penis and is markedly swollen secondary to venous congestion.

edema leading to severe pain and inability to reduce the foreskin (pull
it back over the glans). Treatment includes lubricating the foreskin and
glans and then simultaneously compressing the glans and placing distal
traction on the foreskin to try to push the phimotic ring past the coronal sulcus. Topical application of granulated sugar has been reported
to aid in reduction of edema by creation of an osmotic gradient, facilitating reduction of paraphimosis. In addition, injection of hyaluronidase into the edematous skin has been reported to result in immediate
reduction in swelling. In rare cases, emergency circumcision under
general anesthesia is necessary.

CIRCUMCISION

In the United States, circumcision usually is performed for cultural
reasons, but several health benefits have been identified that may outweigh the risks of the procedure. Specific benefits include prevention
of urinary tract infections (UTIs) and penile cancer and reducing the
risk and transmission of some sexually transmitted infections, including HIV.
UTIs are 10-­15 times more common in uncircumcised infant males
than in circumcised infants, with the urinary pathogens arising from
bacteria that colonize the space between the prepuce and glans. The
risk of febrile UTI (see Chapter 575) is highest between birth and 6

INCONSPICUOUS PENIS

The term inconspicuous penis refers to a penis that appears to be small.
A webbed penis is a condition in which the scrotal skin extends onto
the ventral penile shaft. This deformity represents an abnormality of
the attachment between the penis and scrotum. Although the deformity might appear mild, if a routine circumcision is performed, the
penis can retract into the scrotum, resulting in secondary phimosis
(trapped penis). The concealed (hidden or buried) penis is a normally developed penis that is camouflaged by the suprapubic fat pad
(Fig. 581.7). This anomaly may be congenital, iatrogenic after circumcision, or a result of obesity. Surgical correction is indicated for cosmetic reasons or if there is a functional abnormality with a splayed
stream.
A trapped penis is an acquired form of inconspicuous penis and
refers to a phallus that becomes embedded in the suprapubic fat pad after
circumcision (Fig. 581.8). This deformity can occur after neonatal circumcision in an infant who has significant scrotal swelling from a large
hydrocele or inguinal hernia or after routine circumcision in an infant
with a webbed penis. This complication can predispose to UTIs and
can cause urinary retention. Initial treatment of a trapped penis should
include topical corticosteroid cream, which often loosens the phimotic
ring. In some cases, secondary repair is necessary at 6-­9 months.

MICROPENIS

Micropenis is defined as a normally formed penis that is at least 2.5
standard deviations (SD) below the mean in size (Fig. 581.9). Typically,
the ratio of the length of the penile shaft to its circumference is normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 581 u Anomalies of the Penis and Urethra

A

B

C

3299

D

Fig. 581.5 Complications of circumcision. A, Denuded penile shaft. With local care, the penis healed and appeared normal. B, Midline epithelial
inclusion cyst. C and D, Fibrous penile skin bridges.

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 581.6 Examples of congenital deformities in which neonatal circumcision is contraindicated. A and B, Hidden penis. C, Megaprepuce. D,
Penile torsion to left side; note “wandering raphe.” E, Webbed penis; note scrotal attachment to penile shaft. F, Same patient as in E following
reconstruction at 6 mo.

A

B

Fig. 581.7 Concealed penis (A), which may be visualized by retract-

ing skin lateral to penile shaft (B). (From Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick
AC, et al., eds. Campbell-­
Walsh Urology, 9th ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2007: Fig. 126-­4, p. 2339.)

The pertinent measurement is the stretched penile length, which is
measured by stretching the penis and measuring the distance from the
penile base under the pubic symphysis to the tip of the glans. The mean
length of the term newborn penis is 3.5 ± 0.7 cm and the diameter is
1.1 ± 0.2 cm. The diagnosis of micropenis in a male newborn is if the
stretched length is <1.9 cm.
Micropenis usually results from a hormonal abnormality that
occurs after the 14th week of gestation. Common causes include
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (primary testicular failure), and idiopathic micropenis. If growth
hormone deficiency is also present, neonatal hypoglycemia can occur.
The most common cause of micropenis is failure of the hypothalamus
to produce an adequate amount of gonadotropin-­releasing hormone,
as typically occurs in Kallmann syndrome (see Chapter 623), Prader-­
Willi syndrome (see Chapter 99), and Lawrence-­Moon-­Bardet-­Biedl

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3300 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
PRIAPISM

A

B

Fig. 581.8 A, Trapped (concealed) penis resulting from circumcision.
B, Same patient after revision of circumcision. (From Wein AJ, Kavoussi
LR, Novick AC, et al., eds. Campbell-­Walsh Urology, 9th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2007: Fig. 126-­2, p. 2340.)

Fig. 581.9 Micropenis secondary to hypopituitarism in an 8-­yr-­old

male. (From Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, et al., eds. Campbell-­
Walsh Urology, 9th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2007: Fig. 126-­5a,
p. 2341.)

syndrome. In some cases, there is growth hormone deficiency. Primary
testicular failure can result from gonadal dysgenesis or rudimentary
testes syndrome and also occurs in Robinow syndrome (characterized
by hypoplastic genitals, shortening of the forearms, frontal bossing,
hypertelorism, wide palpebral fissures, short broad nose, long philtrum, small chin, brachydactyly, and a normal karyotype).
A pediatric endocrinologist, geneticist, and pediatric urologist
should examine all children with these syndromes, with participation
by medical ethics. Evaluation includes a karyotype, assessment of anterior pituitary function and testicular function, and MRI to determine
the anatomic integrity of the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary
gland as well as the midline structure of the brain. One of the difficult
questions is whether androgen therapy is essential during childhood,
because androgenic stimulation of penile growth in a prepubertal male
can limit the growth potential of the penis in puberty. Studies of small
groups of men with micropenis suggest that many, although not all,
have satisfactory sexual function. Consequently, a decision for gender
surgery in infancy is infrequently made.

Priapism is a persistent penile erection at least 4 hours in duration that
continues beyond, or is unrelated to, sexual stimulation. Typically, only
the corpora cavernosa is affected. There are three subtypes:
• Ischemic (venoocclusive, low-­flow) priapism is characterized by little or no cavernous blood flow, and cavernous blood gases are hypoxic, hypercapnic, and acidotic. The corpora are rigid and tender
to palpation. Immediate intervention is warranted.
• Nonischemic (arterial, high-­flow) priapism is caused by unregulated
cavernous arterial inflow. Typically, the penis is neither fully rigid
nor painful. There is often a history of antecedent trauma resulting
in a cavernous artery–corpora cavernosa fistula. Most cases resolve
without intervention and expectant management is typical.
• Stuttering (intermittent) priapism is a recurrent form of ischemic priapism with painful erections with intervening periods of detumescence.
The most common cause of priapism in children is sickle cell disease,
which is characterized by a predominance of sickle cell hemoglobin (see
Chapter 511.1). As many as 29% of male patients with sickle cell disease
develop priapism. The priapism is generally related to a low-­flow state, secondary to sickling of red blood cells within the sinusoids of the corpora
cavernosa during normal erection, resulting in venous stasis. This situation results in decreased local oxygen tension and pH, which potentiates
further stasis and sickling. Priapism typically occurs during sleep, when
mild hypoventilatory acidosis depresses oxygen tension and pH in the corpora. There is typically significant corporal engorgement with sparing of
the glans penis. If the spongiosum is involved, voiding may be impaired.
Evaluation may include a complete blood count. If the sickle cell status
is unknown, hemoglobin electrophoresis should be performed. Corporal
blood gas can help distinguish between a high-­flow and low-­flow state;
ultrasound may also be used to differentiate these diagnoses. Other causes
of low-­flow priapism include sildenafil ingestion and leukemia.
In priapism secondary to sickle cell disease, medical therapy includes
intravenous hydration, oxygen, alkalinization, and pain management
with morphine. The American Urological Association guideline on
priapism recommends concurrent intracavernous treatment beginning
with corporal aspiration and irrigation with a sympathomimetic agent,
such as phenylephrine. For patients with sickle cell disease, exchange
transfusion may be considered but often takes several hours to arrange;
therefore it is used when intracavernous treatment is not successful. If
priapism has been present for >48 hours, ischemia and acidosis impair
the intracavernous smooth muscle response to sympathomimetics.
If irrigation and medical therapy are unsuccessful, a corporoglanular
shunt should be considered. For stuttering priapism, administration of
an oral α-­adrenergic agent (pseudoephedrine) once or twice daily is
first-­line therapy. If this treatment is unsuccessful, an oral β-­agonist
(terbutaline) is recommended; a gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone
analog plus flutamide is recommended as third-­line therapy. Long-­
term follow-­up of adults treated for sickle cell disease as children shows
that satisfactory erectile function is inversely related to the patient’s age
at the onset of priapism and duration of priapism.
Nonischemic (high-­flow) priapism most commonly follows perineal
trauma, such as a straddle injury, that results in laceration of the cavernous
artery. Typically, the aspirated blood is bright red, and the aspirate is similar to arterial blood. Color Doppler ultrasonography often demonstrates
the fistula. The priapism spontaneously resolves in most cases. If it does
not, angiographic embolization is indicated.

OTHER PENILE ANOMALIES

Aphallia (agenesis of the penis) affects approximately 1 in 10 million
males. The karyotype is almost always 46, XY, and the usual appearance is that of a well-­developed scrotum with descended testes and an
absent penile shaft. Upper urinary tract abnormalities are common. In
most cases, gender assignment surgery is recommended in the newborn period. Diphallia (duplication of the penis) ranges from a small
accessory penis to complete duplication.

MEATAL STENOSIS

Meatal stenosis is a condition that almost always is acquired and occurs
after neonatal circumcision. It most likely results from inflammation of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 581 u Anomalies of the Penis and Urethra

3301

the denuded glans and is difficult to prevent. If the meatus is pinpoint,
males void with a forceful, fine stream that goes a great distance. These
males can experience dysuria, frequency, hematuria, or a combination
of these conditions, typically around age 3-­8 years. UTI is uncommon.
Other males have dorsal deflection of the urinary stream. Although the
meatus may be small, hydronephrosis or voiding difficulty is extremely
rare unless there is associated balanitis xerotica obliterans (see Fig.
581.3; chronic dermatitis of unknown etiology, generally involving the
glans and prepuce, occasionally extending into the urethra). Treatment
is meatoplasty, in which the urethral meatus is opened surgically; this
procedure can be performed either under anesthesia as an outpatient
or in the office using local anesthesia (EMLA cream) with or without
sedation. Routine cystoscopy is unnecessary.

OTHER MALE URETHRAL ANOMALIES

Parameatal urethral cyst manifests as an asymptomatic small cyst on
one side of the urethral meatus. Treatment is excision under anesthesia.
Congenital urethral fistula is a rare deformity in which a fistula is present
from the penile urethra. It usually is an isolated abnormality. Treatment is
fistula closure. Megalourethra is a large urethra that usually is associated
with abnormal development of the corpus spongiosum. This condition is
most commonly associated with prune-­belly syndrome (see Chapter 577).
Urethral duplication is a rare condition in which the two urethral channels lie in the same sagittal plane. There are many variations with complete and incomplete urethral duplication. These males often have a double
stream. Most commonly, the dorsal urethra is small, and the ventral urethra is of normal caliber. Treatment involves excision of the small urethra.
Urethral hypoplasia is a rare condition in which the entire male urethra is
extremely small but patent. In some cases, a temporary cutaneous vesicostomy is necessary for satisfactory urinary drainage. Either gradual enlargement of the urethra or major urethroplasty is necessary. Urethral atresia
refers to maldevelopment of the urethra and nearly always is fatal unless
the urachus remains patent throughout gestation.

Fig. 581.11 Paraurethral cyst in a newborn female.

URETHRAL PROLAPSE (FEMALE)

Urethral prolapse occurs predominantly in females 1-­9 years of
age. The most common signs are bloody spotting on the underwear
or diaper, although dysuria or perineal discomfort also can occur
(Fig. 581.10). An inexperienced examiner can mistake the finding

Fig. 581.12 Prolapsed ectopic ureterocele in a female infant. She

had a nonfunctioning upper pole collecting system connected to the
ureterocele.

for sexual abuse. Initial therapy consists of application of estrogen
cream 2-­3 times daily for 3-­4 weeks and sitz baths. Surgical repair
is recommended for females that fail medical therapy and is curative. In some cases, this can be performed in the office under local
anesthesia.

OTHER FEMALE URETHRAL LESIONS

Fig. 581.10 Urethral prolapse in a 4-­yr-­old female who had bloody
spotting on her underwear.

Paraurethral cyst results from retained secretions in the Skene glands
secondary to ductal obstruction (Fig. 581.11). These lesions are present
at birth, and most regress in size during the first 4-­8 weeks, although
occasionally incision and drainage is necessary. A prolapsed ectopic
ureterocele appears as a cystic mass protruding from the urethra and
is a presenting symptom in 10% of females with a ureterocele, which is
a cystic swelling of the terminal ureter (Fig. 581.12). Ultrasonography
should be performed to visualize the upper urinary tracts to confirm
the diagnosis. Usually, either the ureterocele is incised or an upper urinary tract reconstructive procedure is necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3302 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children

Chapter 582

Disorders and Anomalies
of the Scrotal Contents
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
UNDESCENDED TESTIS (CRYPTORCHIDISM)

The absence of a palpable testis in the scrotum indicates that the testis
is undescended, absent, atrophic, or retractile.

Epidemiology

An undescended (cryptorchid) testis is the most common congenital
genitourinary tract disorder in males. At birth, approximately 4.5% of
males have an undescended testis. Because testicular descent occurs
at 7-­8 months of gestation, 30% of premature male infants have an
undescended testis; the incidence is 3.4% at term. As many as 50% of
congenital undescended testes descend spontaneously during the first 3
months of life, and by 6 months the incidence decreases to 1.5%. Spontaneous descent occurs secondary to a temporary testosterone surge
(termed a minipuberty) during the first 2 months, which also results in
significant penile growth. If the testis has not descended by 4 months, it
will remain undescended. Cryptorchidism is bilateral in 10% of cases.
There is some evidence that the incidence of cryptorchidism is increasing; this is attributed to increase in utero exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals. Although cryptorchidism usually is considered to
be congenital, some older males have a scrotal testis that “ascends” to a
low inguinal position and therefore requires an orchiopexy. In addition,
1–2% of neonatal and young males undergoing hernia repair develop
secondary cryptorchidism from scar tissue along the spermatic cord.

Pathogenesis

The process of testicular descent is regulated by an interaction among
genetic, hormonal, and mechanical factors, including testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, müllerian-­inhibiting factor, the gubernaculum, intraabdominal pressure, and the genitofemoral nerve (Table 582.1). The testis
develops in the abdomen at 7-­8 weeks of gestation. Insulin-­like factor
3 controls the transabdominal phase. At 10-­11 weeks, the Leydig cells
produce testosterone, which stimulates differentiation of the Wolffian
(mesonephric) duct into the epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicle,
and ejaculatory duct. At 32-­36 weeks, the testis, which is anchored at the
internal inguinal ring by the gubernaculum, begins its process of descent
and is controlled in part by a calcium gene-­related peptide produced by
the genitofemoral nerve. The gubernaculum descends the inguinal canal
and guides the testis into the scrotum. Following testicular descent, the
patent processus vaginalis (hernia sac) normally closes.

Clinical Manifestations

Undescended testes are classified as abdominal (which are nonpalpable), peeping (abdominal but can be pushed into the upper part of
the inguinal canal), inguinal, gliding (can be pushed into the scrotum
but retracts immediately to the pubic tubercle), and ectopic (superficial
inguinal pouch or, rarely, perineal). Most undescended testes are palpable just distal to the inguinal canal over the pubic tubercle.
A disorder of sex development should be suspected in a newborn
phenotypic male with bilateral nonpalpable testes, as the child could
be a virilized female with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter
616). In a male with midpenile or proximal hypospadias and a palpable
undescended testis, the risk of a disorder of sexual development is 15%;
the risk is 50% if the testis is nonpalpable.
The potential consequences of cryptorchidism include poor testicular growth, infertility, testicular malignancy, associated hernia, torsion of the cryptorchid testis, and the possible psychologic effects of an
empty scrotum.

The undescended testis is normal at birth histologically with a plethora of germ cells, but pathologic changes occur by 6-­12 months of age.
Delayed germ cell maturation, germ cell depletion, hyalinization of the
seminiferous tubules, and reduced Leydig cell number are typical; these
changes are progressive over time if the testis remains undescended.
At puberty, an undescended testis has no viable sperm components.
Although less severe, changes may occur in the contralateral descended
testis after 4-­7 years. After treatment for a unilateral undescended testis,
85% of patients are fertile, which is slightly less than the 90% rate of fertility in an unaffected population of adult males. In contrast, following
bilateral orchiopexy, only 50–65% of patients are fertile.
The risk of a germ cell malignancy (see Chapter 552) developing in
an undescended testis is four times higher than in the general population and is approximately 1 in 80 with a unilateral undescended testis and 1 in 40-­50 for bilateral undescended testes. Testicular tumors
are less common if orchiopexy is performed before 10 years of age,
but they still occur, and adolescents should be instructed in testicular self-­examination. The peak age for developing a malignant testis
tumor is 15-­45 years of age. The most common tumor developing in
an undescended testis in an adolescent or adult is a seminoma (65%);
after orchiopexy, nonseminomatous tumors represent 65% of testis
tumors. Orchiopexy seems to reduce the risk of testicular cancer; it is
uncommon for testis tumors to occur if the orchiopexy was performed
before the age of 2 years. The contralateral scrotal testis may also be at
a slightly increased risk for malignancy.
An indirect inguinal hernia usually accompanies a congenital undescended testis but rarely is symptomatic. Torsion and infarction of the
cryptorchid testis also are uncommon but can occur because of excessive mobility of undescended testes. Consequently, inguinal pain and/
or swelling in a male with an undescended testis should raise the suspicion of an inguinal hernia or torsion of the undescended testis.
An acquired or ascending undescended testis occurs when a male
has a descended testis at birth, but during childhood, usually between
ages 4-­10 years, the testis does not remain in the scrotum. Such males
often have a history of a retractile testis. With testicular ascent on physical examination, the testis can often be manipulated into the upper scrotum, but there is obvious tension on the spermatic cord. This condition is
speculated to result from incomplete involution of the processus vaginalis, restricting spermatic cord growth and resulting in the testis gradually
moving out of its scrotal position during a male’s somatic growth.
On physical examination of the scrotum, the child should be encouraged to relax. Careful consideration of a hypoplastic ipsilateral scrotum
may clue the examiner in to a diagnosis of an undescended testicle.
The examiner should examine the patient’s scrotum and inguinal canal
using their dominant hand. The nondominant hand is positioned over
the pubic tubercle and is pushed inferiorly toward the scrotum. The
examiner’s dominant hand is used to try to palpate the testis. If the
testis is nonpalpable, the soap test often is useful; soap is applied to the
inguinal canal and the examiner’s hand, significantly reducing friction
and facilitating identification of an inguinal testis. In addition, pulling
on the scrotum can pull a high inguinal testis into a palpable position.
One soft sign that a testis is absent is contralateral testicular hypertrophy, but this finding is not 100% diagnostic.
Retractile testes may be misdiagnosed as undescended testes. Males
older than 1 year of age often have a brisk cremasteric reflex, and if the
child is anxious or ticklish during scrotal examination, the testis may be
difficult to manipulate into the scrotum. Males should be examined with
their legs in a relaxed frog-­leg position, and if the testis can be manipulated into the scrotum comfortably, it is probably retractile. It should be
monitored every 6-­12 months with follow-­up physical examinations,
because it can become an acquired undescended testis. Overall, as many
as one third of males with a retractile testis develop an acquired undescended testis requiring orchiopexy, and males younger than 7 years of
age at diagnosis of a retractile testis are at greatest risk. Although definitive data are not available, it is generally thought that males with a retractile testis are not at increased risk for infertility or malignancy.
Approximately 10% of undescended testes are nonpalpable testes.
Of these, 50% are viable testes in the abdomen or high in the inguinal
canal, and 50% are atrophic or absent, almost always in the scrotum,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 582 u Disorders and Anomalies of the Scrotal Contents

3303

Table 582.1  Conditions Associated with Cryptorchidism
DISEASES OR SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH DECREASED ANDROGEN LEVELS
Disorders of Sex Development (DSD)
Sex chromosome DSD
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome and variants)
45,X/46,XY (mixed gonadal dysgenesis)
46,XX/46,XY (chimerism)
46,XY DSD
Disorders of testicular development
Complete or partial gonadal dysgenesis
Variations in ARX, ATRX, CBX2, DAX1 (NROB1), DHH, DHX37, DMRT1, EMX2, ESR2, FGFR2, GATA4, HHAT, MAP3K1, NR5A1, SF1, SOX9, SRY,
TSPYL1, WNT4, WT1(WAGR syndrome, Denys-­Drash syndrome, Frasier syndrome), ZFPM2, and ZNRF3 genes
Disorders in androgen synthesis or action
Androgen biosynthetic defect
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Abnormal LH (LHB)
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR deficiency) (STAR)
7-­Dehydro-­cholesterol desmolase deficiency (Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome)
Cholesterol desmolase deficiency (CYP11A1)
3β -­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 deficiency (HSD3B2)
17,20-­lyase deficiency or combined 17 hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase deficiency (CYP17A1)
P450-­oxidoreductase deficiency (POR)
17β -­Hydroxysteroid-­dehydrogenase type 3 (HSD17B3)
5-­α reductase type 2 enzyme deficiency (SRD5A2)
Cytochrome b5 deficiency (CYB5A)
Backdoor steroidogenetic enzyme deficiency (AKR1C2, AKR1C4)

Defect in androgen action

• Partial androgen insensitivity (AR)
• Infantile onset X-­linked spinal muscular atrophy

LH receptor defects

• Inactivating mutation of LH receptor gene (LHCGR) (Leydig cell hypoplasia, aplasia)

46,XX DSD
Ovotesticular DSD
Testicular DSD (e.g. SRY+, dup SOX9, RSP01)
46,XX male
Congenital Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism in 46,XY
Isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with anosmia (Kallmann syndrome)
KAL1, FGFR1/FGF8, PROK2/PROKR2, KAL1, NELF, HS6ST1, WDR11, and SEMA3A
gene variants
CHD7 gene variant (CHARGE syndrome)
Normosmic isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Variants in KISS1, GPR54, LEP, LEPR, TAC3/TACR3, and GNRH1/GNRHR genes (also reported variants in FGFR1/FGF8, PROKR2, CHD7, and
WDR11 genes)
Multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies
Variants in PROP1 genes, HESX1 gene (septo-­optic dysplasia)
Congenital Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism
Down syndrome
Noonan syndrome
Syndromes Associated with Both Primary and Secondary Hypogonadism
Prader-­Willi syndrome
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH DECREASED INSL3 OR AMH LEVELS OR ACTIONS
INSL3 or RXFP2 variants
Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome: AMH and AMH receptor (AMH, AMHR2)
OTHER CONDITIONS RELATED WITH CRYPTORCHIDISM
Multiple syndromes not specifically involving pituitary-­gonadal development or function
AMH, anti-­Müllerian hormone; CHARGE, coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanal, growth restriction, genital abnormalities, ear abnormalities; INSL3, insulin like peptide 3;.LH,
luteinizing hormone.
Modified from Rodprasert W, Virtanen HE, Mäkekä JA, Toppari J: Hypogonadism and cryptorchidism. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2020;10:906.

secondary to spermatic cord torsion in utero (vanishing testis). If the
nonpalpable testis is abdominal, it will not descend after 3 months of
age. Although sonography often is performed to try to identify whether
the testis is present, it rarely changes clinical management, because the
abdominal testis and atrophic testis are not identified on sonography.
Inguinal/scrotal sonography might be beneficial in obese males with a

nonpalpable testis; in this clinical setting, the undescended testis often
is nonpalpable, and an inguinal/scrotal sonogram can be beneficial in
surgical planning. Computed tomographic imaging is relatively accurate in demonstrating the presence of the testis, but the radiation exposure is significant. MRI is even more accurate, but the disadvantage is
that general anesthesia or sedation is necessary in most young children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3304 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
None of these imaging studies are 100% accurate and in general do not
add significantly to clinical decision-­making by the pediatric urologist
or pediatric surgeon. Consequently, routine use of imaging is discouraged. A diagnostic approach is noted in Figure 582.1.

Treatment

The congenital undescended testis that does not descend by 6 months
(corrected for gestational age) should be treated surgically within the
next 12 months. Most testes can be brought down to the scrotum with
an orchiopexy, which involves an inguinal incision, mobilization of the
testis and spermatic cord, and correction of an indirect inguinal hernia.
The procedure is typically performed on an outpatient basis and has a
success rate of 98%. In some males with a testis that is close to the scrotum, a prescrotal orchiopexy can be performed. In this procedure, the
entire operation is performed through a high scrotal incision. Often
the associated inguinal hernia also can be corrected through this incision. Advantages of this approach over the inguinal approach include
shorter operative time and less postoperative discomfort.
In males with a nonpalpable testis, an exam under anesthesia should
be done to reassess for palpability; if testes are still nonpalpable, diagnostic laparoscopy is performed in most centers. This procedure allows
safe and rapid assessment of whether the testis is intraabdominal. In

Fig. 582.1 Management algorithm for

undescended testis. aIf blind-­
ending vas
deferens vessels are unequivocally identified, then there is no need for further
exploration. bBaseline FSH and LH levels
are elevated if values are 3 SD above the
mean. c, Increased suspicion of anorchia
with elevated baseline FSH and LH levels;
however, exploration is still warranted.
d, Testicular remnant tissue may be present despite a negative hCG stimulation
test; therefore exploration for testicular
remnant tissue should still be performed.
(From Bowlin PR, Lorenzo AJ. Undescended testes and testicular tumors. In: Holcomb III GW, Murphy JP, St. Peter SD, eds.
Holcomb and Ashcraft’s Pediatric Surgery,
7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig.
51-­2, p. 808.)

most cases, orchiopexy of the intraabdominal testis located adjacent
to the internal inguinal ring is successful, but orchiectomy should be
considered in more difficult cases or when the testis appears to be
atrophic. A two-­stage orchiopexy sometimes is needed in males with a
high abdominal testis. Males with abdominal testes are managed with
laparoscopic techniques at many institutions. Testicular prostheses are
available for older children and adolescents when the absence of the
gonad in the scrotum might have an undesirable psychologic effect.
The FDA has approved a saline testicular implant. Solid silicone “carving block” implants also are used (Fig. 582.2). Placement of testicular
prostheses early in childhood is recommended for males with anorchia
(absence of both testes).
The American Urological Association guidelines for the evaluation
and treatment of males with an undescended testis are summarized in
Table 582.2.

SCROTAL SWELLING

Scrotal swelling may be acute or chronic and painful or painless (Table
582.3). Abrupt onset of painful scrotal swelling necessitates prompt
evaluation because some conditions, such as testicular torsion and
incarcerated inguinal hernia, require emergency surgical management.
Tables 582.4 and 582.5 show the differential diagnosis.

Unilateral
palpable

Unilateral
nonpalpable

Bilateral
nonpalpable

Dartos pouch
orchiopexy

Laparoscopy

Baseline gonadotropins

Blind-ending
vesselsa

Intraabdominal
testis

No further
exploration

Vessels
exiting
internal ring

Increased
baseline
FSH, LHb

Normal
baseline
FSH, LH

Inguinal
exploration

Suspect
anorchiac

hCG stimulation

Increased
testosterone
Staged
orchiopexy
(Fowler–Stephens)

Orchiopexy

Orchiectomy
Laparoscopy
+/ exploration

Fig. 582.2 A, Adolescent with soli-

tary left testis. B, Appearance following implantation of right testicular
prosthesis.

A

No
responsed

B

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 582 u Disorders and Anomalies of the Scrotal Contents
Table 582.2  American Urological Association Guidelines
for Evaluation and Treatment of Males with
an Undescended Testis
DIAGNOSIS
• Providers should obtain gestational history at initial evaluation of
males with suspected cryptorchidism. (Standard)
• Primary care providers should palpate testes for quality and
position at each recommended well-­child visit. (Standard)
• Providers should refer infants with a history of cryptorchidism
(detected at birth) who do not have spontaneous testicular
descent by 6 months (corrected for gestational age) to an
appropriate surgical specialist for timely evaluation. (Standard)
• Providers should refer males with the possibility of newly diagnosed
(acquired) cryptorchidism after 6 months (corrected for gestational
age) to an appropriate surgical specialist. (Standard)
• Providers must immediately consult an appropriate specialist for
all phenotypic male newborns with bilateral, nonpalpable testes
for evaluation of a possible disorder of sex development (DSD).
(Standard)
• Providers should not perform ultrasound (US) or other imaging
modalities in the evaluation of males with cryptorchidism before
referral because these studies rarely assist in decision making.
(Standard)
• Providers should assess the possibility of a disorder of sex
development (DSD) when there is increasing severity of
hypospadias with cryptorchidism. (Recommendation)
• In males with bilateral, nonpalpable testes who do not have
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), providers should measure
Mullerian Inhibiting Substance (MIS or Anti-­Mullerian Hormone
[AMH] level), and consider additional hormone testing, to
evaluate for anorchia. (Option)
• In males with retractile testes, providers should monitor the
position of the testes at least annually to monitor for secondary
ascent. (Standard)
TREATMENT
• Providers should not use hormonal therapy to induce testicular
descent because evidence shows low response rates and lack of
evidence for long-­term efficacy. (Standard)
• In the absence of spontaneous testicular descent by 6 months
(corrected for gestational age), specialists should perform surgery
within the next year. (Standard)
• In prepubertal males with palpable, cryptorchid testes, surgical
specialists should perform scrotal or inguinal orchidopexy. (Standard)
• In prepubertal males with nonpalpable testes, surgical specialists
should perform examination under anesthesia to reassess for
palpability of testes. If nonpalpable, surgical exploration and, if
indicated, abdominal orchidopexy should be performed. (Standard)
• At the time of exploration for a nonpalpable testis in boys, surgical
specialists should identify the status of the testicular vessels to
help determine the next course of action. (Clinical Principle)
• In males with a normal contralateral testis, surgical specialists may
perform an orchiectomy (removal of the undescended testis) if a
male has a normal contralateral testis and either very short testicular
vessels and vas deferens, dysmorphic or very hypoplastic testis, or
postpubertal age. (Clinical Principle)
• Providers should counsel males with a history of cryptorchidism
and/or monorchidism and their parents regarding potential long-­
term risks and provide education on infertility and cancer risk.
(Clinical Principle)
Adapted from Kolon TF, Herndon CDA, Baker LA, et al. Evaluation and treatment
of cryptorchidism (2018): AUA Guideline. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines-­and-­
quality/guidelines/cryptorchidism-­guideline

Clinical Manifestations

A detailed history is helpful in determining the cause of the swelling and
includes the rapidity of onset of pain. With testicular torsion, the pain
often is sudden in onset and may be associated with exercise or minor
genital trauma, duration of pain, and radiation of pain. Inguinal discomfort is common with testicular torsion, inguinal hernia, or epididymitis,
and associated flank pain can occur with passage of a ureteral calculus;
previous episodes of similar pain, which are common in males with intermittent testicular torsion or inguinal hernia; nausea and vomiting, which

3305

Table 582.3  Differential Diagnosis of Pediatric Adolescent
Acute Scrotal Pain
Appendage torsion
Appendix testis
Other appendage (epididymis, paradidymis, vas aberrans)
Spermatic cord torsion
Intravaginal, acute or intermittent
Extravaginal
Epididymitis
Infectious
Urinary tract infection
Sexually transmitted infection
Viral including COVID-­19
Sterile or traumatic
Scrotal edema or erythema
Diaper dermatitis, insect bite, or other skin lesions
Idiopathic scrotal edema
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Orchitis
Associated with epididymitis with or without abscess
Vasculitis (e.g., IgA vasculitis)
Viral illness (mumps, COVID-­19)
Trauma
Hematocele or scrotal contusion or testis rupture
Hernia or hydrocele
Inguinal hernia with or without incarceration
Communicating hydrocele
Encysted hydrocele with or without torsion
Associated with acute abdominal pathology (e.g., appendicitis,
peritonitis)
Varicocele
Intrascrotal mass
Cystic dysplasia or tumor of testis
Epididymal cyst, spermatocele or tumor
Other paratesticular tumors
Musculoskeletal pain from inguinal tendinitis or muscle strain
Ilioinguinal neuropathy
Genitofemoral nerve entrapment
Referred pain (e.g., ureteral calculus or anomaly)
Modified from Palmer LS, Palmer JS. Management of abnormalities of the external genitalia in boys. In: Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CW, eds. Campbell-­
Walsh Urology, 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Box 44-­2.

Table 582.4  Differential Diagnosis of Scrotal Masses in
Male Children and Adolescents
PAINFUL
Testicular torsion
Torsion of appendix testis
Epididymitis
Trauma: ruptured testis,
hematocele
Inguinal hernia (incarcerated)
Mumps orchitis
Testicular vasculitis

PAINLESS
Hydrocele
Inguinal hernia*
Varicocele*
Spermatocele*
Testicular tumor*
IgA vasculitis*
Idiopathic scrotal edema

*May be associated with discomfort.

Table 582.5  Differential Diagnosis of Scrotal Swelling in
Newborn Males
Hydrocele
Inguinal hernia (reducible)
Inguinal hernia (incarcerated)*
Testicular torsion*
Scrotal hematoma
Testicular tumor
Meconium peritonitis
Epididymitis*
*May be associated with discomfort.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3306 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
are associated with testicular torsion and inguinal hernia; and irritative
urinary symptoms, such as dysuria, urgency, and frequency, which indicate a urinary tract infection that can cause epididymitis. Some males
report a recent history of scrotal trauma. There are multiple reports of
familial testicular torsion related to inheritance of bell clapper deformity
(discussed later). Males with lower urinary tract pathology such as urethral stricture or neuropathic bladder may be prone to epididymitis.
Physical examination may be difficult in males with a painful scrotum. Some have advocated performing a spermatic cord block or
administering intravenous analgesia to facilitate the examination, but
such measures are often unnecessary. Scrotal wall erythema is common
in testicular torsion, epididymitis, torsion of the appendix testis, and an
incarcerated hernia. In males with a normal cremasteric reflex, testicular torsion is unlikely. Absence of a cremasteric reflex is nondiagnostic.

Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis

Pertinent laboratory studies include urinalysis and culture. A positive
urinalysis suggests bacterial epididymitis (uncommon before adolescence). Serum studies are not helpful in establishing a diagnosis unless a
testicular malignancy is suspected. After initial evaluation in males with
testicular pain, color Doppler ultrasonography often is helpful in establishing the diagnosis because it assesses whether testicular blood flow
is normal, reduced, or increased (Fig. 582.3). If a hydrocele is present
and the testis is nonpalpable, or if an abnormality of the testis is found,
sonography also is indicated. Imaging studies are not 100% accurate; they
should not be used to decide whether a male with testicular pain should be
referred for urologic evaluation. As such, torsion is a clinical diagnosis.
Color Doppler ultrasonography allows assessment of testicular
blood flow and testicular morphologic features. Accuracy is >95% if
the ultrasonographer is experienced and the patient is older than 2
years of age. The “whirlpool” sign is pathognomonic. A false-­negative
study (demonstrates normal testicular blood flow) can occur in a
male with testicular torsion if the degree of torsion is <360 degrees
and the duration of torsion is short, because there may be continued testicular perfusion. In males <1 year of age, including neonates,
blood flow may be difficult to demonstrate in 15% of normal testes.

TESTICULAR (SPERMATIC CORD) TORSION
Etiology

Testicular torsion requires prompt diagnosis and treatment to salvage
the testis. Torsion is the most common cause of severe testicular pain
in males 12 years of age and older and is uncommon before age 10.
It is caused by inadequate fixation of the testis within the scrotum,
resulting from a redundant tunica vaginalis and abnormal gubernacular attachment, allowing excessive mobility of the testis. The abnormal

R

attachment is termed a bell clapper deformity and may be bilateral.
Following spermatic cord torsion, venous congestion occurs, and subsequently arterial flow is interrupted. The likelihood of testis survival
depends on the duration and severity of torsion. After 6 hours of absent
blood flow to the testis, irreversible loss of spermatogenesis can occur.
Torsion is familial in 10% of males.

Diagnosis

Testicular torsion produces acute pain and swelling of the scrotum. On
examination, the scrotum is swollen, and the testis is exquisitely tender and
often difficult to examine. The cremasteric reflex is nearly always absent,
though this may be absent at baseline in a proportion of males. The position (lie) of the testis is abnormal, and the testis is often located high in
the scrotum. In addition, nausea and vomiting often occur. The condition
can be differentiated from an incarcerated hernia because swelling in the
inguinal area typically is absent with torsion. The Testicular Workup for
Ischemia and Suspected Torsion (TWIST) score is a clinical tool that can
be used determine the likelihood of testicular torsion. The score consists
of testicular swelling (2 points), hard testis (2 points), high-­riding testis (1
point), absent cremasteric reflex (1 point), and nausea/vomiting (1 point).
Patients can then be stratified into low (0 points), intermediate (1-­5), and
high risk (6-­7), which aids in determining further imaging and/or surgical
consultation.
For patients who are high risk or meet the clinical diagnosis of testicular torsion, prompt surgical consultation should be obtained. If the pain
duration is <4-­6 hours, manual detorsion may be attempted. In 65% of
cases the torsed testis rotates inward, so detorsion should be attempted in
the opposite direction (e.g., the left testis is rotated clockwise). Successful manual detorsion results in dramatic pain relief. In the emergency
department, patients with an intermediate risk TWIST score should
undergo immediate scrotal ultrasound. In some centers, this is performed as a point of care procedure by the emergency department staff.
Some adolescents experience intermittent testicular torsion. These
males report episodes of severe unilateral testicular pain that resolves
spontaneously after 30-­60 minutes. Treatment is elective bilateral scrotal orchiopexy. Close follow-­up and clear return instructions are requisite in such cases until elective orchiopexy is performed.

Treatment

Treatment is prompt surgical exploration and detorsion. If the testis
is explored within 6 hours of torsion, up to 90% will survive. Testicular salvage decreases rapidly with a delay of more than 6 hours. If the
degree of torsion is 360 degrees or less, the testis might have sufficient
arterial flow to allow the gonad to survive, even after 24-­48 hours. Following detorsion, the testis is fixed in the scrotum with nonabsorbable
sutures, termed scrotal orchiopexy, to prevent torsion in the future.
The contralateral testis also should be fixed in the scrotum because
the predisposing anatomic condition (bell clapper deformity) often is
bilateral. If the testis appears nonviable, orchiectomy is performed (Fig.
582.4A). The detorsed testis may undergo compartment syndrome,

L

Fig. 582.3 Testicular torsion and axis change. A color Doppler ultra-

sound in the transverse plane shows color flow in the right testicle. The
right testicle is oval to circular because it has been evaluated in the
transverse plane. The left testicle is elongated as if it is in the longitudinal plane, indicating an abnormal lie within the scrotum worrisome
for torsion. Lack of color Doppler flow in the left testicle confirms left
testicular torsion. (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 125-­13, p. 1195.)

A

B

Fig. 582.4 A, Left testicular torsion in adolescent with acute scrotum;

the testis is necrotic. B, “Late-­phase torsion” in an adolescent with severe testicular pain 1 month prior. Note absence of inflammation and
high position of testis in scrotum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 582 u Disorders and Anomalies of the Scrotal Contents
and following detorsion, despite blood flow to the testis, high intratesticular pressure may cause ischemia and necrosis. This condition has
been treated intraoperatively by incising the tunica vaginalis (similar
to a blunt testicular rupture) and placing a tunica vaginalis flap over
the exposed tunica. Some adolescents do not undergo prompt evaluation and treatment and present with late phase testicular torsion, in
which there is delayed diagnosis of torsion. Often the testis is high in
the scrotum and nontender (see Fig. 582.4B). While males with torsion
of longer duration prior to treatment may exhibit reduced spermatogenesis, current evidence shows pregnancy rates of couples in which
the male has a history of acute testicular torsion to be similar to the
general population.
Spermatic cord torsion can also occur in the fetus or neonate. This
condition results from incomplete attachment of the tunica vaginalis to
the scrotal wall and is “extravaginal.” When torsion occurs just before
delivery, the baby usually is born with a large, firm, nontender testis.
Usually the ipsilateral hemiscrotum is ecchymotic (Fig. 582.5). In these
cases, the testis rarely is viable because torsion was a remote event.
However, the contralateral testis is at increased risk for torsion until
1-­2 months beyond term. The pediatric urology community is divided
regarding whether immediate exploration is necessary in a male newborn who has suspected testicular torsion at birth, but if observation is
recommended, the family needs to be counseled regarding the risk of
contralateral spermatic cord torsion. If the initial exam is normal and
the newborn subsequently develops scrotal swelling and erythema, and
imaging is consistent with spermatic cord torsion, emergency scrotal
exploration is indicated.

TORSION OF THE APPENDIX TESTIS/EPIDIDYMIS

Torsion of the appendix testis is the most common cause of testicular pain in males age 4-­10 years but is uncommon in adolescents. The
appendix testis is a stalklike structure that is a vestigial embryonic remnant of the müllerian (paramesonephric) ductal system that is attached
to the upper pole of the testis. When it undergoes torsion, progressive inflammation and swelling of the testis and epididymis occurs,
resulting in testicular pain and scrotal erythema. The onset of pain is
typically gradual. Palpation of the testis usually reveals a 3-­5 mm tender indurated mass on the upper pole (Fig. 582.6A). In some cases,
the appendage that has undergone torsion may be visible through the
scrotal skin, termed the “blue dot” sign. In some males, distinguishing torsion of the appendix from testicular torsion is difficult. In such
cases, color Doppler ultrasonography is useful because testicular blood
flow is normal and shows hyperemia to the upper pole of the testis.
In such cases, the radiologist often recognizes epididymal enlargement
and makes the diagnosis of epididymitis, reflecting the inflammatory
reaction (see Fig. 582.6B).
The natural history of torsion of the appendix testis is for the
inflammation to resolve in 3-­
10 days. Nonoperative treatment is
recommended, including bed rest for 24 hours and analgesia with

3307

nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medication for several days. If the diagnosis is uncertain, scrotal exploration is recommended.

EPIDIDYMITIS

Acute bacterial inflammation of the epididymis is an ascending retrograde infection from the urethra, through the vas deferens into the
epididymis. This condition causes acute scrotal pain, erythema, and
swelling. It is rare before puberty and should raise the question of a
congenital abnormality of the Wolffian duct, such as an ectopic ureter
entering the vas. In younger males, the responsible organism is often
Escherichia coli (see Chapter 246). After puberty, bacterial epididymitis becomes progressively more common and can cause acute painful scrotal swelling in young sexually active males. Urinalysis usually
reveals pyuria. Epididymitis can be bacterial (usually gonococcus or
Chlamydia; see Chapters 238 and 272) or viral (mumps, enterovirus,
or adenovirus; see Chapters 295, 297, and 309), but often the organism
remains undetermined. Familial Mediterranean fever is another cause.
Treatment consists of bed rest and antibiotics as indicated. Differentiation from torsion is straightforward with scrotal ultrasonography.
IgA vasculitis, previously known as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura,
(see Chapter 210.1) is a systemic vasculitis that involves multiple organ
systems and that can involve the kidney and spermatic cord. When the
spermatic cord is involved, typically there is bilateral painful scrotal
swelling with purpuric lesions involving the scrotum. Scrotal sonography should show normal testicular blood flow. Treatment is directed
toward systemic treatment of the IgA vasculitis. Isolated testicular vasculitis is less common in IgA vasculitis and, in such cases, polyarteritis
nodosa should be suspected.

VARICOCELE

A varicocele is a congenital condition in which there is abnormal dilation of the pampiniform plexus in the scrotum, often described as a
“bag of worms” (Fig. 582.7). Dilation of the pampiniform venous plexus
results from valvular incompetence of the internal spermatic vein.
Approximately 15% of adult males have a varicocele; of these, approximately 10–15% are subfertile. Varicocele is the most common (and
virtually the only) surgically correctable cause of infertility in males.
A varicocele is found in 10–15% of adolescent males, but it rarely is
diagnosed in males younger than 10 years old, because the varicocele
becomes distended only after the increased blood flow associated with

A

B
A

B

Fig. 582.5 A and B, Right testicular torsion in a newborn. The right
hemiscrotum is darker, and the testis was indurated and enlarged.

Fig. 582.6 A, Torsion of the appendix testis; the appendix testis is ne-

crotic (arrow). B, Color Doppler scrotal sonogram showing hyperemia to
the testis and absent flow to the appendix testis (right side). Symptoms
resolved with medical therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3308 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
puberty occurs. Varicoceles occur predominantly on the left side, are
bilateral in 2% of cases, and rarely involve the right side only. A varicocele in a male younger than 10 years or on the right side might indicate
an abdominal or retroperitoneal mass; an abdominal ultrasound or CT
scan should be performed in such cases.
A varicocele typically is a painless paratesticular mass. Occasionally
patients describe a dull ache in the affected testis. Usually the varicocele
is not apparent when the patient is supine because it is decompressed; in
contrast, the varicocele becomes prominent when the patient is standing and enlarges with a Valsalva maneuver. Many pediatricians do not
routinely screen adolescents for a varicocele. Varicoceles typically are
graded from 1-­3 with the male standing: grade 1 is palpable only with
Valsalva (clinically insignificant); grade 2 is palpable without Valsalva
but is not visible on inspection; and grade 3 is visible with inspection.
Males with a grade 3 varicocele are at greatest risk for testicular growth
arrest, particularly if the varicocele is larger than the testis. Testicular
size should be documented with calipers, an orchidometer, or scrotal
sonography, because if the affected left testis is significantly smaller
than the right testis, spermatogenesis probably has been adversely
affected. A semen analysis should be considered in sexually mature
adolescents who are Tanner stage V.
The goal of varicocelectomy is to maximize future fertility. Surgical
treatment of varicoceles is indicated in males with a significant disparity in testicular size, with pain in the affected testis, if the contralateral
testis is diseased or absent, or with oligospermia on semen analysis.
Following treatment, typically the involved testis enlarges and catches
up with the normal testis over the following 1-­2 years. Varicocelectomy
should also be considered in males with a large grade 3 varicocele, even
if there is no disparity in testicular size. Surgical repair is accomplished
with a variety of techniques by ligation of the veins of the pampiniform
plexus laparoscopically or through an inguinal or subinguinal incision
(with or without an operating microscope) or by ligating the internal
spermatic vein in the retroperitoneum. The operation is performed on
an ambulatory basis.

SPERMATOCELE

A spermatocele is a cystic lesion that contains sperm and is attached
to the upper pole of the sexually mature testis. Spermatoceles usually are painless and are incidental findings on physical examination.
Enlargement of the spermatocele or significant pain is an indication
for removal.

Fig. 582.7 Left varicocele in an adolescent male.

HYDROCELE
Etiology

A hydrocele is an accumulation of fluid in the tunica vaginalis (Fig.
582.8). Between 1% and 2% of neonates have a hydrocele. In most
cases, the hydrocele is noncommunicating (the processus vaginalis
was obliterated during development). In such cases, the hydrocele fluid
disappears by 1 year of age. If there is a persistently patent processus
vaginalis, the hydrocele persists. It is typically small in the morning
and may become larger during the day due to upright positioning. A
rare variant of a hydrocele is the abdominoscrotal hydrocele, in which
there is a large, tense hydrocele that extends into the lower abdominal
cavity. In some older males, a noncommunicating hydrocele can result
from an inflammatory condition within the scrotum, such as testicular
torsion, torsion of the appendix testis, epididymitis, or testicular tumor.
The long-­term risk of a communicating hydrocele is the development
of an inguinal hernia. Some older males and adolescents also develop
a hydrocele. In some cases, hydroceles develop acutely after an episode
of scrotal trauma or epididymoorchitis, whereas others develop more
insidiously.

Diagnosis

On examination, hydroceles are smooth and nontender. Transillumination
of the scrotum confirms the fluid-­filled nature of the mass. It is important to palpate the testis, because some young males develop a hydrocele
in association with a testis tumor. If the testis is nonpalpable, a scrotal
ultrasound should be performed to confirm that the testis is present and
normal. If compression of the fluid-­filled mass completely reduces the
hydrocele, an inguinal hernia/hydrocele is the likely diagnosis.

Treatment

Most congenital hydroceles resolve by 12 months of age following
reabsorption of the hydrocele fluid. If the hydrocele is large and tense,
however, early surgical correction should be considered, because it is
difficult to verify that the child does not have a hernia, and large hydroceles rarely disappear spontaneously. Hydroceles persisting beyond 12-­
18 months often are communicating and should be repaired. Surgical
correction is similar to a herniorrhaphy (see Chapter 394). Through an
inguinal incision, the spermatic cord is identified, the hydrocele fluid
is drained, and a high ligation of the processus vaginalis is performed.
If an older male has a large hydrocele, often diagnostic laparoscopy can
be performed to determine whether there is a patent processus vaginalis, and if the internal ring is closed, then the hydrocele may be corrected with a scrotal incision.

Fig. 582.8 Newborn with large right hydrocele.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 583 u Trauma to the Genitourinary Tract

3309

INGUINAL HERNIA

Inguinal hernia is discussed in Chapter 394.

In more than 50% of cases, there also are major injuries to the brain,
spinal cord, skeleton, lungs, or abdominal organs.

TESTICULAR MICROLITHIASIS

DIAGNOSIS

Approximately 2–3% of pediatric scrotal ultrasound examinations
demonstrate calcific depositions in the testis, termed testicular microlithiasis. Typically, it is found in males undergoing an examination for
testicular pain, varicocele, or scrotal swelling. In adults, it is a common finding in males with infertility and with a germ cell tumor of the
testis. In pediatric patients with microlithiasis, there are no guidelines
for monitoring, but the condition should be monitored for changes
in testicular size or induration, with follow-­up ultrasound studies as
indicated.

TESTICULAR TUMOR

Testicular and paratesticular tumors can occur at any age, even in the
newborn. Approximately 35% of prepubertal testis tumors are malignant; most commonly they are yolk sac tumors, although rhabdomyosarcoma and leukemia also can occur in this age group. In adolescents,
98% of painless solid testicular masses are malignant (see Chapter 552).
Most manifest as a painless, hard testicular mass that does not transilluminate. Scrotal ultrasonography should be performed to confirm the
finding of a testicular mass, and it can help to delineate the type of testis tumor. Serum tumor markers, including α-­fetoprotein and β-­human
chorionic gonadotropin, should be drawn. Definitive therapy includes
surgical exploration through an inguinal incision. In most cases, a radical orchiectomy, consisting of removal of the entire testis and spermatic
cord, is performed. In a prepubertal male, if the ultrasonographic study
or surgical exploration suggests that the tumor is localized and benign,
such as a teratoma or an epidermoid cyst, testis-­sparing surgery with
removal only of the mass may be appropriate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 583

Trauma to the
Genitourinary Tract
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger
Most injuries to the genitourinary tract in children result from blunt
trauma during falls, athletic activities, or motor vehicle crashes (see
Chapter 80). Children are at greater risk of blunt renal injury than adults,
because they have less body fat and because the kidneys are not located
directly behind the ribs. Children with a preexisting renal anomaly, such
as hydronephrosis secondary to a ureteropelvic junction obstruction,
horseshoe kidney, or renal ectopia, also are at increased risk for renal
injury. Blunt abdominal or flank trauma often causes a renal injury.
Falling can cause a deceleration injury that results in an injury to the
renal pedicle, interrupting blood flow to the kidney. If the bladder is
full, blunt lower abdominal trauma can cause a bladder rupture. Rupture of the membranous urethra occurs in 5% of pelvic fractures. Straddle injuries usually are associated with trauma to the bulbous urethra.
Symptoms and signs of urinary tract injury include gross or microscopic hematuria, bleeding from the urethral meatus, abdominal or
flank pain, a flank mass, fractured lower ribs or lumbar transverse processes, and a perineal or scrotal hematoma.

Evaluation of the patient begins after an adequate airway has been
established and the patient is hemodynamically stable (see Chapters 78 and 79). With significant abdominal injury, gross hematuria
or >50 red blood cells per high-­power field, or suspicion of renal
injury (deceleration injury, flank pain, or bruise), renal imaging is
indicated (Fig. 583.1). The bladder should be catheterized unless
blood is dripping from the urethral meatus, which is an indication
of potential urethral injury. Passing the catheter in the presence of
a urethral injury can increase the extent of the damage and convert a partial membranous urethral tear into a total disruption. In
these patients, a retrograde urethrogram should be performed by
injecting radiopaque contrast medium into the urethral meatus
under fluoroscopy. Oblique radiographs demonstrate the extent of
the injury and whether urethral continuity is preserved or has been
disrupted.
A three-­phase spiral CT scan should be performed to evaluate
the kidneys, ureters, and bladder. The delayed images are important
to detect renal extravasation of blood or urine. Prompt function
of both kidneys without extravasation usually excludes significant
renal injury. Renal injuries are classified according to the grading
scale presented in Table 583.1. Minor renal injuries are most common; these include contusion of the renal parenchyma and shallow
cortical lacerations not involving the collecting system. Major renal
injuries include deep lacerations involving the collecting system,
shattered kidney, and renal pedicle injuries (Fig. 583.2). Complete
absence of function of one kidney without contralateral compensatory hypertrophy (indicating congenital absence) should be
regarded as an indication of major injury to the renal pedicle. Renal
angiography, once used for further evaluation of renal injuries, particularly if a renal pedicle injury is suspected, now is rarely used
because such patients are often hemodynamically unstable, and
management is not significantly affected by the findings. In some
cases, a preexisting renal anomaly is demonstrated on the study. A
ruptured ureteropelvic junction obstruction may be apparent if the
kidney is intact, but the distal ureter is not visualized.
If there is a pelvic fracture, a urethral transection injury should be
suspected, particularly in males. The risk is directly related to the number of broken pubic rami and whether there is separation of the pubic
symphysis or displacement of the posterior pubic arch. Radiographic
evaluation with retrograde urethrography should be performed if there
is blood at the urethral or vaginal meatus, inability to void, and a perineal or penile hematoma.

TREATMENT

Minor renal injuries such as contusions are managed by bed rest
and monitoring of vital signs until abdominal or flank discomfort
and gross hematuria have resolved. Children with a major renal
injury usually are admitted to an intensive care unit for continuous
monitoring of vital signs and urine output. Intravenous antibiotics
are also administered. These injuries also are managed nonoperatively, because Gerota’s fascia often causes tamponade of bleeding
from the kidney, and dramatic healing of the injured parenchyma
can occur even with significant urinary extravasation.
Approximately 10% of children with a major renal injury
undergo surgical exploration because of associated abdominal
injuries, hemodynamic instability, persistent extravasation, or
persistent hematuria or to correct a congenital renal deformity. It
can be difficult to identify normal and devitalized parenchyma,
and the likelihood of having to remove the kidney is significant. If
the child is undergoing exploration for other abdominal injuries,
the injured kidney is examined. If there is persistent extravasation because of intermittent ureteral obstruction from a blood clot,
passage of a temporary double-­J stent endoscopically between the
bladder and kidney might allow resolution. If the renal pedicle is
injured, nephrectomy is necessary. The kidney can be salvaged by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3310 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
1. Penetrating abdominal, pelvic trauma
2. Mechanism of injury criteria: rapid
deceleration, significant blow to flank,
rib fracture, flank ecchymosis
3. Polytraumatically injured patients
4. Gross hematuria
5. Microscopic hematuria with shock

Clinically stable

Blood at meatus
Perineal hematoma
Positive for meatal blood
RGUG or flexible urethroscopy

Consider FAST

Clinically unstable

Consider single-phase CT

CT with delayed views

Inability to void or
gross hematuria and pelvic FX

Emergency surgery
if renal exploration indicated and no CT
Single-shot IVP

Urinary extravasation
No contrast in distal ureter
Cystogram with retrograde studies

CT cystogram
Abd/pelvic CT with delay

Consider CT with delayed
views when stable

Fig. 583.1 Algorithm showing the recommended evaluation protocol for patients with a medical history or physical findings consistent with
possible genitourinary injury. Abd, Abdominal; FAST, focused assessment with sonography for trauma; FX, fracture; IVP, intravenous pyelography;
RGUG, retrograde urethrogram. (From Husmann DA. Pediatric genitourinary trauma. Modified from Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA,
eds. Campbell-­Walsh Urology. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 154-­6, p. 3546.)

Table 583.1  Grading of Renal Injuries
GRADE

DESCRIPTION

1

Renal contusion or subcapsular hematoma

2

Nonexpanding perirenal hematoma, <1 cm parenchymal
laceration, no urinary extravasation; all renal fragments
viable; confined to renal retroperitoneum

3

Nonexpanding perirenal hematoma, >1 cm
parenchymal laceration, no urinary extravasation;
renal fragments may be viable or devitalized

4

Laceration extending into the collecting system with
urinary extravasation; renal fragments may be vital or
devitalized
or
Injury to the main renal vasculature with contained
hemorrhage

5

Completely shattered kidney; by definition, multiple
major lacerations >1 cm associated with multiple
devitalized fragments
or
Injury to the main renal vasculature with uncontrolled
hemorrhage, renal hilar avulsion

emergency renal revascularization only if the kidney is explored
within 2-­3 hours of the injury. Virtually all penetrating injuries of
the kidneys should be explored.
In addition to loss of renal function, the main long-­term complication
of renal injury is renin-­mediated hypertension. Children who sustain
significant renal injuries should have periodic measurement of blood
pressure if they have any residual renal abnormality.

Ureteral injuries usually are iatrogenic. Injuries of the ureter by blunt
or penetrating trauma require immediate surgical attention.
When the bladder can be catheterized, a static cystogram is obtained,
infusing a contrast solution through the catheter by gravity, ideally
using fluoroscopy. Flat and oblique views are often obtained; a postvoid
film also should be obtained because, in some cases, extravasation may
be hidden by the full bladder. An alternative is a CT cystogram, which
is highly accurate in demonstrating a bladder injury.
Bladder ruptures can be intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal. All intraperitoneal ruptures require surgical repair. Minor extraperitoneal near-­
ruptures might be treated by catheter drainage but generally require
surgical treatment.
Treatment of a membranous urethral injury is controversial.
Erectile dysfunction, urethral stricture, and urinary incontinence
are the major late complications of rupture of the membranous urethra, and therapy is directed at minimizing the risk of these problems. A large pelvic hematoma with tamponade often is present,
and an immediate attempt to repair the injury can be technically
difficult and result in significant hemorrhage. Many such injuries
are managed initially by temporary suprapubic cystostomy, with
continuous bladder drainage for 3-­6 months. Subsequently, open or
endoscopic urethroplasty can be performed. Alternatively, some try
to achieve urethral continuity under anesthesia and leave a urethral
catheter for several months. These patients typically require subsequent open urethroplasty.
Penile injury is uncommon. Partial or complete glans amputation
is a risk of newborn circumcision with a Mogen clamp. With immediate surgical repair, often the excised glans tissue can be replaced
as a free graft. Some males who are in the process of toilet training
sustain an injury to the glans penis if the lid of the toilet falls while
they are urinating. These males often have a hematoma covering the
distal half of the glans. Typically, they have no difficulty urinating
and do not need extensive evaluation. Some male infants develop
an inadvertent hair tourniquet or strangulation injury. Typically,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 584 u Urinary Lithiasis

A

B

C

3311

D

Fig. 583.2 CT images of grade 3 right renal trauma: acute, delayed, and at 3-­month follow-­up. A, Acute CT image of grade 3 renal trauma show-

ing laceration of more than 1 cm of midrenal pole with perinephric hematoma. B, Acute CT image coronal reconstruction of grade 3 renal trauma,
with possible devitalization of the entire lower pole of the kidney. C, Two-­hour delayed CT image coronal reconstruction of grade 3 renal trauma,
with no urinary extravasation noted and lower pole with questionable devitalization versus contusion. D, CT image coronal reconstruction 3 months
after traumatic injury revealing parenchymal scarring at site of laceration with scarred but functional lower pole consistent with healed parenchyma
following severe renal contusion. Scarring of lower pole was believed to have occurred with impoverished blood supply because of severe contusion. (From Husmann DA. Pediatric genitourinary trauma. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds. Campbell-­Walsh Urology. 11th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 154-­3, p. 3542.)

Chapter 584

Urinary Lithiasis
Heather N. Di Carlo and Chad B. Crigger

A

B

Fig. 583.3 A, Adolescent male with blunt right testicular injury. B, Tu-

nica albuginea of testis is ruptured; the patient underwent debridement
and closure of testicular capsule.

a very narrow constriction is noted with severe distal penile swelling and pain. Identification and incision of the hair allows prompt
resolution of the edema. The urethra and penile vascularity should
be assessed after release of the hair tourniquet. Adolescent males
who indulge in extremely vigorous sexual intercourse may sustain
rupture of one of the corporal bodies, resulting in penile fracture.
These males have severe swelling of the penile shaft and require
emergency exploration and repair. Males with penetrating injuries
of the penis also require emergency debridement and repair.
Testicular injuries are relatively uncommon in children because
of the small size of the testes and their mobility within the scrotum.
Such injuries usually result from blunt trauma during athletic activity.
Typically, these males have significant scrotal swelling, testicular pain,
and tenderness (Fig. 583.3A). Ultrasonography demonstrates rupture
of the tunica albuginea, which is the capsule of the testis, and surrounding hemorrhage. Prompt surgical treatment of testicular injuries
increases the salvage rate (see Fig. 583.3B). An uncommon injury is
the zipper injury, which can affect either the scrotum or foreskin. This
problem generally occurs in males who do not wear underwear. The
zipper can be cut with bone cutters or metal cutters. Sedation generally
is unnecessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Urinary lithiasis in children is related to genetic, climatic, dietary, and
socioeconomic factors. The incidence increased steadily over the past
several decades. Adolescents are 10 times more likely to have a symptomatic calculus compared with children age 0-­3 years. The increase in
stone disease in the United States is attributed to obesity and changes
in dietary habits, such as increased sodium and fructose intake, and
decreased calcium and water intake.
Urolithiasis is less common in the United States than in other parts of
the world. In the United States, 1 in 685 pediatric hospital admissions is
for stone disease. Approximately 7% of urinary calculi occur in children
younger than 16 years of age. In the United States, many children with
stone disease have a metabolic abnormality. The exceptions are patients
with a neuropathic bladder (see Chapter 579), who are prone to infection-­
initiated renal stones, and those who have urinary tract reconstruction
with small or large intestine, which predisposes to bladder calculi. The
incidence of metabolic stones is similar in males and females; they are
most common in the southeastern United States. Racial and ethnic differences have been noted, with the highest prevalence among Whites.
In Southeast Asia, urinary calculi are endemic and are related to dietary
factors.

STONE FORMATION

Nearly 90% of urinary stones contain calcium as a major constituent,
and 60% are composed of calcium oxalate. Most spontaneous stones
are composed of calcium oxalate, or calcium phosphate crystals; others are caused by uric acid, cystine, ammonium crystals, or phosphate
crystals, or a combination of these substances (Table 584.1). The risk
of stone formation increases in the presence of increasing concentrations of these crystals and is reduced with increasing concentrations of
urinary inhibitors. Renal calculi develop from crystals that form on the
calyx and aggregate to form a calculus. Bladder calculi may be stones
that formed in the kidney and traveled down the ureter, or they can
form primarily in the bladder.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3312 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 584.1  Classification of Urolithiasis
CALCIUM STONES (CALCIUM OXALATE AND CALCIUM
PHOSPHATE)*
Hypercalciuria
Absorptive: increased Ca absorption from gut; types I and II
Renal leak: decreased tubular reabsorption of Ca
Resorptive
Primary hyperparathyroidism (rare in children)
Iatrogenic
Loop diuretics
Ketogenic diet
Corticosteroids
Adrenocorticotropic hormone administration
Methylxanthines (theophylline, aminophylline)
Distal renal tubular acidosis, type 1 (calcium phosphate)
Hypocitraturia—citrate most important inhibitor of Ca crystallization
Vitamin D excess
Immobilization
Sarcoidosis
Cushing disease
Hyperuricosuria
Heterozygous cystinuria
Hyperoxaluria (calcium oxalate)
Primary hyperoxaluria, types 1 and 2
Secondary hyperoxaluria
Enteric hyperoxaluria
CYSTINE STONES
Cystinuria
STRUVITE STONES (MAGNESIUM AMMONIUM PHOSPHATE)
Urinary tract infection (urea-­splitting organism)
Foreign body
Urinary stasis
URIC ACID STONES
Hyperuricosuria
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
Myeloproliferative disorders
After chemotherapy
Inflammatory bowel disease
OTHER
Indinavir stones
Melamine
Nephrocalcinosis

Fig. 584.1 Noncontrast CT scan of the midabdomen in a male infant

with cystinuria shows a left-­sided calculus at the ureteropelvic junction
with proximal hydronephrosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children with urolithiasis usually have gross or microscopic hematuria. If the calculus causes ureteral or renal pelvic obstruction, then
severe flank pain (renal colic) or abdominal pain occurs. The calculus
typically causes obstruction at areas of narrowing of the urinary tract—
the ureteropelvic junction, where the ureter crosses the iliac vessels,
and the ureterovesical junction. The ureter progressively narrows distally, and its most narrow segment is the ureterovesical junction. The
pain typically radiates anteriorly to the scrotum or labia. Often the pain
is intermittent, corresponding to periods of obstruction of urine flow,
which increases the pressure in the collecting system. If the calculus is
in the distal ureter, the child can have irritative symptoms of dysuria,
urgency, and frequency. If the stone passes into the bladder, the child
usually becomes asymptomatic. If the stone is in the urethra, dysuria
and difficulty voiding can result, particularly in males. Some children
pass small amounts of gravel-­like material. Stones can also be asymptomatic, although it is uncommon to pass a ureteral calculus without
symptoms.

DIAGNOSIS

*Most common.

Low urine volume, low urine pH, calcium, sodium, oxalate, and urate
are known to promote stone formation. Many inorganic (e.g., citrate,
magnesium) and organic (e.g., glycosaminoglycans, osteopontin) substances are known to inhibit stone formation. Organic inhibitory compounds adsorb to the surface of the crystal, thereby inhibiting crystal
growth and nucleation.
Stone formation depends on four factors: matrix, precipitation-­
crystallization, epitaxy, and the absence of inhibitors of stone formation in the urine. Matrix is a mixture of protein, nonamino sugars,
glucosamine, water, and organic ash that makes up 2–9% of the dry
weight of urinary stones and is arranged within the stones in organized concentric laminations. Precipitation-­crystallization refers to
supersaturation of the urine with specific ions composing the crystal.
Crystals aggregate by chemical and electrical forces. Increasing the
saturation of urine with respect to the ions increases the rate of nucleation, crystal growth, and aggregation and increases the likelihood of
stone formation and growth. Epitaxy refers to the aggregation of crystals of different composition but similar lattice structure, thus forming
stones of a heterogeneous nature. The lattice structures of calcium oxalate and monosodium urate have similar structures, and calcium oxalate crystals can aggregate on a nucleus of monosodium urate crystals.
Urine also contains inhibitors of stone formation, including citrate,
diphosphonate, and magnesium ion.

Approximately 90% of urinary calculi are calcified to some degree and
are radiopaque on a plain abdominal film. However, many calculi are
only a few millimeters in diameter and are difficult to see, particularly
if they are in the ureter. Struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate)
stones are radiopaque. Cystine, xanthine, and uric acid calculi may be
radiolucent but often are slightly opacified. Some children have nephrocalcinosis, which is calcification of the renal tissue itself. Nephrocalcinosis is seen most commonly in premature neonates receiving
furosemide, which causes hypercalciuria, and in children with medullary sponge kidney.
In a child with suspected renal colic, there are multiple imaging
options, including ultrasound, CT, and plain radiographs. The American Urological Association recommends ultrasound as the initial imaging modality in children as it avoids radiation. Ultrasound has high
specificity (97%) but only moderate sensitivity (67%) in the diagnosis
of urolithiasis; thus CT should be considered when clinical suspicion
for stones is high, but ultrasound is negative. CT scan of the abdomen
and pelvis is the most accurate study in diagnosis of stones with both
sensitivity and specificity exceeding 96% (Fig. 584.1). This study takes
only a few minutes to perform, is useful in delineating the number
and location of calculi, and demonstrates whether the involved kidney
is hydronephrotic. Most pediatric imaging centers use low-­dose CT to
reduce radiation exposure. A plain radiograph of the abdomen and pelvis is sometimes used to detect radiopaque stones but cannot identify
obstruction and rarely visualizes renal calculi <3 mm.
In a child with a previously diagnosed calculus, renal ultrasonography can be used to follow the status of the calculus, such as whether it
has grown or diminished in size or has moved. If a child has a renal pelvic calculus, a ureteropelvic junction obstruction should be suspected.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 584 u Urinary Lithiasis
Table 584.2  Laboratory Tests Suggested for Evaluation of
Urolithiasis
SERUM
Calcium
Phosphorus
Magnesium
Uric acid
Electrolytes and anion gap
Creatinine
Alkaline phosphatase
URINE
Urinalysis
Urine culture
Spot test for cystinuria
Stone analysis
If toilet-­trained, 24 hour collection for:
Creatinine clearance
Calcium
Phosphate
Oxalate
Uric acid
Dibasic amino acids (if cystine spot test result is positive)
If not toilet-­trained, random urine sample for:
Calcium
Creatinine
Oxalate
Citrate

In some cases, it can be difficult to determine whether hydronephrosis
in such a child is secondary to an obstructing stone, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, or both.
Any material that resembles a calculus should be sent for analysis by
a laboratory that specializes in identifying the components of urinary
calculi.

METABOLIC EVALUATION

A metabolic evaluation for the most common predisposing factors
should be undertaken in all children with urolithiasis, bearing in mind
that structural, infectious and metabolic factors often coexist. This
evaluation should not be undertaken in a child who is in the process of
passing a stone, because the altered diet and hydration status, as well as
the effect of obstruction on the kidney, can alter the results of the study.
Table 584.2 lists the basic laboratory studies required, and Table 584.3
shows the normal values for 24-­hour urine collections. In children with
hypercalciuria, further studies of calcium excretion with dietary calcium restriction and calcium loading are necessary.

PATHOGENESIS OF SPECIFIC RENAL CALCULI
Calcium Oxalate and Calcium Phosphate Calculi

Most urinary calculi in children in the United States are composed of
calcium oxalate and/or calcium phosphate. The most common metabolic abnormality in these patients is normocalcemic hypercalciuria.
Between 30% and 60% of children with calcium stones have hypercalciuria without hypercalcemia. Other metabolic aberrations that
predispose to stone disease include hyperoxaluria, hyperuricosuria,
hypocitraturia, heterozygous cystinuria, hypomagnesuria, hyperparathyroidism, and renal tubular acidosis (RTA; see Chapter 569).
Hypercalciuria may be absorptive, renal, or resorptive. The primary
disturbance in absorptive hypercalciuria is intestinal hyperabsorption
of calcium. In some children, an increase in 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D
is associated with the increased calcium absorption, whereas in others,
the process is independent of vitamin D. Renal hypercalciuria refers to
impaired renal tubular reabsorption of calcium (see Chapter 562.4).
Renal leak of calcium causes mild hypocalcemia, which triggers an
increased production of parathyroid hormone, with increased intestinal absorption of calcium and increased mobilization of calcium stores.
Resorptive hypercalciuria is uncommon and is found in patients with
primary hyperparathyroidism. Excess parathyroid hormone secretion

3313

stimulates intestinal absorption of calcium and mobilization of calcium
stores. Table 584.4 summarizes the metabolic evaluation of children
with hypercalciuria.
Hyperoxaluria is another potentially important cause of calcium
stones. Oxalate increases the solubility of calcium oxalate crystallization 7-­10 times more than calcium. Consequently, hyperoxaluria
significantly increases the likelihood of calcium oxalate precipitation.
Oxalate is found in high concentrations in tea, coffee, spinach, and
rhubarb. Primary hyperoxaluria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
that can be subclassified into glycolic aciduria and l-­glyceric aciduria.
Most patients with primary hyperoxaluria have glycolic aciduria; oxalic
and glycolic acids are increased in the urine of affected persons. Both
defects cause increased endogenous production of oxalate, with hyperoxaluria, urolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, and injury to the kidneys.
Death from renal failure occurs by age 20 in untreated patients. Oxalosis, defined as extrarenal deposition of calcium oxalate, occurs when
renal insufficiency is present with elevated plasma oxalate. Calcium
oxalate deposits appear first in blood vessels and bone marrow, and
with time they appear throughout the body. Secondary hyperoxaluria
is more common and can occur in patients with increased intake of
oxalate and oxalate precursors such as vitamin C, in those with pyridoxine deficiency, and in children with intestinal malabsorption.
Enteric hyperoxaluria refers to disorders such as inflammatory
bowel disease (see Chapter 382), pancreatic insufficiency (see Chapter 398), and biliary disease (see Chapter 404), in which there is gastrointestinal malabsorption of fatty acids, which bind intraluminal
calcium and form salts that are excreted in the feces. Normally, calcium forms a complex with oxalate to reduce oxalate absorption, but
if calcium is unavailable, there is increased absorption of unbound
oxalate.
Hypocitraturia refers to a low excretion of citrate, which is an
important inhibitor of calcium stone formation. Citrate acts as an
inhibitor of calcium urolithiasis by forming complexes with calcium,
increasing the solubility of calcium in the urine, and inhibiting the
aggregation of calcium phosphate and calcium oxalate crystals. Disorders such as chronic diarrhea, intestinal malabsorption, and RTA can
cause hypocitraturia. It may also be idiopathic.
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is a syndrome involving a disturbance
of acid-­base balance within the kidney that can be classified into three
types, one of which predisposes to renal calculi that typically are calcium phosphate (see Chapter 569). In type 1 RTA, the distal nephron
does not secrete hydrogen ion into the distal tubule. The urine pH is
never <5.8, and hyperchloremic hypokalemic acidosis results. Patients
acquire nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, muscle weakness, and osteomalacia. Type 1 RTA can be an autosomal dominant disorder, but
more often it is acquired and associated with systemic diseases such
as Sjögren syndrome, Wilson disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, and
lymphocytic thyroiditis, or it results from amphotericin B, lithium, or
toluene (an organic solvent associated with glue sniffing).
From 5–8% of patients with cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454) have
urolithiasis. Typically, the stones are calcium, and they often manifest
in adolescence or young adulthood. Microscopic nephrocalcinosis also
occurs in younger children with the disease. These patients do not have
hypercalciuria, and the propensity for urolithiasis has been speculated
to result from an inability to excrete a sodium chloride load or from
intestinal malabsorption.
Other disorders can play a role in causing calcium stones. Hyperuricosuria may be related to the epitactic growth of calcium oxalate crystals around a nucleus of uric acid crystals or to the action
of uric acid, which counteracts urinary mucopolysaccharides that
then inhibit calcium oxalate crystallization. Heterozygous cystinuria is found in some patients with calcium stones. The mechanism
is unknown but may be similar to that of uric acid. Sarcoidosis (see
Chapter 209) causes an increased sensitivity to vitamin D3 and thus
an increased absorption of calcium from the gastrointestinal tract.
In Lesch-­
Nyhan syndrome (see Chapter 110), there is excessive
uric acid synthesis. These patients are more likely to form uric acid
stones, but some of these stones may be calcified. Immobility can
cause hypercalciuria by mobilization of calcium stores. High-­dose

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3314 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
Table 584.3  Urine Chemistry: Normal Values
URINE CONSTITUENT

AGE

Calcium

Oxalate*

Uric acid

Magnesium

RANDOM

TIMED

0-­6 mo

<0.8 mg/mg creat

7-­12 mo

<0.6 mg/mg creat

≥2 yr

<0.21 mg/mg creat

<1 yr

0.15-­0.26 mmol/mmol creat

1-­<5 yr

0.11-­0.12 mmol/mmol creat

5-­12 yr

0.006-­0.15 mmol/mmol creat

>12 yr

0.002-­0.083 mmol/mmol creat

Term infant

3.3 mg/dL GFR†

>3 yr

<0.53 mg/dL GFR

>2 yr

<0.12 mg/mg creat

Citrate

COMMENTS

<4 mg/kg/24 hours

Prandial variation
Sodium-­dependent

≥2 yr: <0.5 mmol/
1.73 m2/24 hr

Random urine mmol/mmol highly
age dependent
Excretion rate/1.73 m2 constant
through childhood and adulthood

<815 mg/1.73 m2/24 hr

Excretion rate/1.73 m2 from >1 yr age;
constant through childhood

<88 mg/1.73 m2/24 hr

Excretion rate/1.73 m2 constant
through childhood

>400 mg/g creat

Cystine

Limited data available for children
<60 mg/1.73 m2/24 hr

<75 mg/g creat

Cystine >250 mg/g creat suggests
homozygous cystinuria

*Oxalate oxidase assay.
†(mg/dL uric acid) (serum creatinine concentration/urine creatinine concentration).
creat, Creatinine; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
From Milliner DS. Urolithiasis. In: Avner ED, Harmon WE, Naiudet P, eds. Pediatric Nephrology. 6th ed. Berlin: Springer-­Verlag; 2009: p. 1409, with permission.

Table 584.4  Metabolic Evaluation of Children with Hypercalciuria
SERUM CALCIUM

RESTRICTED
CALCIUM (URINE)

FASTING CALCIUM
(URINE)

CALCIUM LOAD
(URINE)

PARATHYROID HORMONE
(SERUM)

N or I

N or I

N

I

D or N

Renal

N

I

I

I

I

Resorptive

I

I

I

I

I

TYPE
Absorptive

I, Increased; N, normal; D, decreased

corticosteroids can cause hypercalciuria and calcium oxalate precipitation. Furosemide, which is often administered in the neonatal
intensive care unit, also can cause severe hypercalciuria, urolithiasis,
and nephrocalcinosis.
In some children, calcium calculi are idiopathic. A complete metabolic evaluation must be performed before this diagnosis is made.

Cystine Calculi

Cystinuria accounts for 1% of renal calculi in children. The condition
is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of the epithelial cells of the renal
tubule that prevents absorption of the four dibasic amino acids (cystine, ornithine, arginine, lysine) and results in excessive urinary excretion of these products. The only known complication of this familial
disease is the formation of calculi, because of the low solubility of cystine. The patients usually have acidic urine, which leads to a higher
rate of precipitation. In the homozygous patient, the daily excretion of
cystine usually exceeds 500 mg, and stone formation occurs at an early
age. Heterozygotes excrete 100-­300 mg/day and typically do not have
clinical urolithiasis. The sulfur content of cystine gives these stones
their faint radiopaque appearance.

Struvite Calculi

Urinary tract infections (see Chapter 575) caused by urea-­splitting
organisms (most often Proteus spp., and occasionally Klebsiella spp.,
Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas spp., and others) result in urinary alkalinization and excessive production of ammonia, which can lead to
the precipitation of magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite) and

calcium phosphate. In the kidney, these calculi often have a staghorn
configuration, filling the calyces. The calculi act as foreign bodies,
causing obstruction, perpetuating infection, and causing gradual
kidney damage. Patients with struvite stones also can have metabolic
abnormalities that predispose to stone formation. These stones often
are seen in children with neuropathic bladder, particularly those who
have undergone a urinary tract reconstructive procedure (see Chapter 579). Struvite stones also can form in the reconstructed bladder of
children who have undergone augmentation cystoplasty or continent
urinary diversion.

Uric Acid Calculi

Calculi containing uric acid represent <5% of all cases of lithiasis in children in the United States but are more common in less-­
developed areas of the world. Hyperuricosuria with or without
hyperuricemia is the common underlying factor in most cases.
The stones are radiolucent on x-­
ray. The diagnosis should be
suspected in a patient with persistently acidic urine and urate
crystalluria.
Hyperuricosuria can result from various inborn errors of purine
metabolism that lead to overproduction of uric acid, the end product of purine metabolism in humans. Children with Lesch-­Nyhan
syndrome and patients with glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency (see
Chapter 107) form urate calculi as well. In children with short-­bowel
syndrome (see Chapter 385.7), and particularly those with ileostomies, chronic dehydration and acidosis sometimes are complicated
by uric acid lithiasis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 584 u Urinary Lithiasis
One of the most common causes of uric acid lithiasis is the rapid
turnover of purine with some tumors and myeloproliferative diseases.
The risk of uric acid lithiasis is especially great when treatment of these
diseases causes rapid breakdown of nucleoproteins. Uric acid calculi or
“sludge” can fill the entire upper collecting system and cause renal failure and even anuria. Urate is also present within calcium-­containing
stones. In these cases, more than one predisposing factor for stone formation can exist.

Indinavir Calculi

Indinavir sulfate is a protease inhibitor approved for treating HIV
infection (see Chapter 322). Up to 4% of patients acquire symptomatic nephrolithiasis. Most of the calculi are radiolucent and are composed of indinavir-­based monohydrate, although calcium oxalate and/
or phosphate have been present in some. After each dose, 12% of the
drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. The urine in these patients
often contains crystals of characteristic rectangles and fan-­shaped or
starburst crystals. Indinavir is soluble at a pH of <5.5. Consequently,
dissolution therapy by urinary acidification with ammonium chloride
or ascorbic acid should be considered.

Nephrocalcinosis

Nephrocalcinosis refers to calcium deposition within the renal tissue. Often nephrocalcinosis is associated with urolithiasis. The most
common causes are furosemide (administered to premature neonates), distal RTA, hyperparathyroidism, medullary sponge kidney,
hypophosphatemic rickets, sarcoidosis, cortical necrosis, hyperoxaluria, prolonged immobilization, Cushing syndrome, hyperuricosuria,
monogenetic causes of hypertension, and renal candidiasis.

TREATMENT

In a child or adolescent with a renal or ureteral calculus, the decision whether to remove the stone depends on its location, size, and
composition (if known) and whether obstruction and/or infection is
present. Pain is managed with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
or, less often, opiates. Small ureteral calculi often pass spontaneously,
although the child might experience severe renal colic. The narrowest
segment of the ureter is the ureterovesical junction. Calculi <5 mm will
pass 80–90% of the time. An α-­adrenergic blocker, such as tamsulosin,
0.4 mg at bedtime, may facilitate stone passage by decreasing ureteral
pressure below the stone and decreasing the frequency of the peristaltic contractions of the obstructed ureter. This intervention is termed
medical expulsive therapy. In many cases, passage of a ureteral stent
past the stone endoscopically relieves pain and dilates the ureter sufficiently to allow the calculus to pass. In cases such as children with a
uric acid calculus or an infant with a furosemide-­associated calculus,
dissolution alkaline therapy may be effective. Fluid management with
a forced diuresis is controversial and may not improve stone passage.
Nonetheless, dehydration (from anorexia or emesis) must be corrected,
and intravenous fluids may offset contrast-­induced renal injury if CT
contrast imaging is anticipated.
If the calculus does not pass or seems unlikely to pass or if there is
associated urinary tract infection, removal is necessary (Table 584.5).
Lithotripsy of bladder, ureteral, and small renal pelvic calculi using
the holmium laser through a flexible or rigid ureteroscope is quite
effective. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy has been successfully
applied to children with renal and ureteral stones, with a success rate
of >75%. Another alternative is percutaneous nephrostolithotomy, in
which access to the renal collecting system is obtained percutaneously
and the calculi are broken down by ultrasonic lithotripsy. In cases in
which these modalities are unsuccessful, an alternative is laparoscopic
removal; this procedure can be performed using the da Vinci robot.

STONE PREVENTION

In children with urolithiasis, the underlying metabolic disorder should
be addressed (Table 584.6). Because lithiasis results from elevated concentrations of specific substances in the urine, maintaining a continuous high urine output by maintaining a high fluid intake often is an
effective method of preventing further stones. The high fluid intake

3315

Table 584.5  Primary Surgical Treatment Options vs Stone
Size and Location
STONES

SHOCK WAVE
LITHOTRIPSY

URETEROSCOPY

PERCUTANEOUS
NEPHROLITHOTOMY

RENAL
<1 cm

Most common

Optional

Optional

1-­2 cm

Most common

Optional

Optional

>2 cm

Optional

Rare

Most common

LOWER POLE
<1 cm
Most common

Optional

Optional

>1 cm

Optional

Most common

Optional

Occasional

Most
common

Rare

Optional

URETERAL
Proximal
Most common
Distal

Optional

From Durkee CT, Balcom A. Surgical management of urolithiasis. Pediatr Clin North
Am. 2006;53:465–477.

Table 584.6  Suggested Therapy for Urolithiasis Caused by
Metabolic Abnormalities
METABOLIC
ABNORMALITY

INITIAL
TREATMENT

Hypercalciuria

Reduction of dietary Na+

Potassium citrate

Dietary calcium at RDA

Thiazides

Thiazides*

Neutral phosphate

Reduce dietary oxalate

Neutral phosphate†

Potassium citrate

Magnesium

Hyperoxaluria

SECOND-­LINE
TREATMENT

Pyridoxine†
Hypocitric aciduria

Potassium citrate

Bicarbonate

Hyperuricosuria

Alkalinization

Allopurinol

Cystinuria

Alkalinization

Tiopronin (Thiola)

Reduction of dietary Na+

d-­Penicillamine

Captopril
*If hypercalciuria is severe or there is osteopenia.
†Initial therapy in primary hyperoxaluria.
RDA, Recommended dietary allowance.
From Milliner DS. Urolithiasis. In: Avner ED, Harmon WE, Naiudet P, eds. Pediatric
Nephrology. 6th ed. Berlin: Springer-­Verlag; 2009: p. 1412, with permission.

should be continued at night, and usually it is necessary for the child
to get up at least once at night to urinate and drink more water. A daily
fluid intake of 2-­2.5 L in adolescent stone formers is recommended,
with greater intake during summer months.
Dietary sodium intake in children has increased significantly
because of increased consumption of salty, processed foods. High
sodium intake increases urinary excretion of calcium and may result
in hypocitraturia. In addition, increased salt intake induces metabolic
acidosis. To compensate for the acid load, the kidneys conserve anions,
including urinary citrate, which contributes to hypocitraturia. Reduction in dietary intake of sodium and increased potassium intake is
indicated.
Although counterintuitive, low-­calcium diets are less effective in
the treatment of calcium stones than diets containing normal amounts
of calcium and limited amounts of sodium and animal protein.
Low-­sodium, low-­protein diets reduce urinary calcium and oxalate
excretion. Children with stone disease should avoid excess calcium
intake. However, children require calcium for bone development, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3316 Part XXII u Urologic Disorders in Infants and Children
recommendations for daily calcium intake vary by age. Consequently,
calcium restriction in children should be avoided. Thiazide diuretics also
reduce renal calcium excretion. The addition of potassium citrate, an
inhibitor of calcium stones, with a dosage of 1-­2 mEq/kg/24 hours is
beneficial. An excellent source of citrate is lemonade, because 4 oz of
lemon juice contains 84 mEq of citric acid. A daily mixture of 4 oz of
reconstituted lemon juice in 2 L of water and sweetened to taste should
significantly increase the urinary citrate level. In difficult cases, neutral
orthophosphate should be given, although it is poorly tolerated.
In patients with uric acid stones, allopurinol is effective. Allopurinol is an inhibitor of xanthine oxidase and is effective in reducing the
production of both uric acid and 2,8-­dihydroxyadenine and can help
control the recurrence of both types of stones. In addition, urinary
alkalinization with sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate is beneficial.
The urine pH should be ≥6.5 and can be monitored at home by the
family.
Maintaining a high urine pH can also prevent the recurrence of cystine calculi. Cystine is much more soluble when the urinary pH is >7.5,
and alkalinization of urine with sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate
is effective. Another important medication is d-­penicillamine, which is

a chelating agent that binds to cysteine or homocysteine, increasing the
solubility of the product. Although poorly tolerated by many patients,
it has been reported to be effective in dissolving cystine stones and in
preventing recurrences when hydration and urinary alkalinization fail.
N-­Acetylcysteine appears to have low toxicity and may be effective in
controlling cystinuria, but long-­term experience with it is lacking.
Treatment of type 1 RTA involves correcting the metabolic acidosis and replacing lost potassium and sodium. Sodium or potassium
citrate therapy, or both, is necessary. When the metabolic acidosis is
corrected, the urinary citrate excretion returns to normal.
Treatment of primary hyperoxaluria involves liver transplantation
because the defective enzymes are hepatic. Ideally, this procedure is
performed before renal failure occurs. In the most severe cases, kidney
transplantation is also necessary. A U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-­approved agent (lumasiran) greatly decreases oxalate production in children with primary hyperoxaluria type 1. It is hoped that
it will prevent end-­stage renal disease in this disorder.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Gynecologic Problems of
Childhood
Chapter 585

Gynecologic History and
Physical Examination
Kathryn C. Stambough and
Alla Vash-­Margita
HISTORY

For the young patient, developmentally appropriate social questions
directed to the patient can put them at ease and help to develop cooperation and rapport that will facilitate a subsequent examination. Specific
patient, caregiver, or provider concerns about vaginal discharge or bleeding, pruritus, external genital lesions, or abnormalities should direct a
problem-­focused history. In a patient presenting with vaginal bleeding,
questions should focus on recent growth and development, signs of
pubertal progression, trauma, vaginal discharge, medication exposure,
and any history of foreign objects in the vagina. For complaints of vulvovaginal irritation, pruritus, or discharge, questions should concentrate
on perineal hygiene, the onset and duration of symptoms, the presence
and quality of discharge, exposure to skin irritants, recent antibiotic use,
travel, presence of medical comorbidities or infections in the patient
and their family members, and other systemic symptoms of illness or
skin conditions. Throughout the history, the patient should be encouraged to ask their own questions. Occasionally, the child is brought to
the clinician because they or their parents have concerns about anatomic
findings, developmental changes, or congenital anomalies. It helps to
understand the family’s concerns and if a specific reason, event, or family
history raised the need for a gynecologic consultation.

GYNECOLOGIC EXAMINATION

The physical examination of the patient should be tailored to the child’s
age, complaint, and any other concerns elicited in the history. The date
of onset of the last menstrual period should be included with an assessment of other vital signs as age appropriate.

Neonates

At the time of delivery, a brief examination of the external genitalia of
female infants to visually confirm the patency of the vagina and assess the
presence of any obvious genital anomalies should be performed. The newborn examination should note any abnormal findings, such as ambiguous
genitalia, imperforate hymen, urogenital abnormalities, abdominal mass,
or inguinal hernia, that might herald a gynecologic problem.
Placing the infant in the supine position with thighs flexed against the
abdomen allows visualization of the neonate’s external genitalia. Estrogenic effects commonly notable in neonates include prominence of the
labia majora and a white vaginal discharge. The labia minora and hymen
may protrude slightly from the vestibule. A small amount of neonatal
vaginal bleeding from endometrial sloughing after maternal hormone
withdrawal might occur. Bleeding that is excessive or persistent beyond
the first month of life requires further evaluation. Breast buds may be
palpable at the time of the neonatal examination but should regress in
the first 3 months of life; occasionally, nipple discharge occurs.
The vaginal orifice may be difficult to see. Gentle lateral traction on the
labia majora usually allows complete visualization of the hymen and vaginal orifice. The hymen should be evaluated for patency. Most hymenal
variations—imperforate, microperforate, septate—do not require

PART

XXIII

treatment during the neonatal period (Fig. 585.1). Variations should be
noted and readdressed in subsequent visits. The hymen originates from
the urogenital sinus. The uterus and upper vagina originate from the
Müllerian ducts. The concomitant renal malformations seen with Müllerian anomalies are not associated with hymenal anomalies because
of different embryologic origin of the two structures. Similarly, uterine
anomalies are typically not observed with hymenal anomalies (see Chapter 591). Hymenal polyps seen in newborns typically regress in size as the
maternal estrogen effects subside. Cervicovaginal mucus secretions can
accumulate behind the blocked outflow tract of an imperforate hymen
and manifest as a mucocolpos. In this instance and if urinary obstruction
occurs, correction of the imperforate hymen in the neonatal period is indicated. In the absence of any concern for urinary obstruction, the imperforate hymen and associated mucocolpos can be observed for resolution,
and the imperforate hymen is ideally repaired surgically after onset of
puberty, specifically thelarche. This allows for improved healing of tissue
in the presence of endogenous estrogen production.
The clitoris may appear large in proportion to the other genital structures, especially in premature infants. If the clitoris appears
enlarged, the clitoral width and length should be measured; width values >6 mm or length values >6.5 mm in a newborn indicate a need for
further evaluation. If clitoromegaly and ambiguous genitalia are present, the provider should immediately obtain expert (endocrine) consultation for evaluation of the infant and to counsel the parents. Congenital
adrenal hyperplasia is the most common cause of ambiguous genitalia
(accounting for >90% of cases), and the salt-­wasting forms can lead
to rapid dehydration with subsequent fluid and electrolyte imbalance
(see Chapter 616). Delay in the diagnosis and treatment of congenital
adrenal hyperplasia may be life-­threatening.
In the neonate, the ovaries are <1 cm in diameter and average 1 cm3 in
volume. Antenatal or postnatal abdominopelvic ultrasound might reveal
small simple ovarian cysts, which represent normal follicles. Because of
the abdominal location of ovaries in the neonate, ovarian enlargement
can manifest as a palpable abdominal mass. Large cysts (>4-­5 cm) or
those of a complex nature pose the risk of ovarian torsion, hemorrhage
into the cyst, or, uncommonly, an ovarian tumor. A nonresolving or
enlarging neonatal ovarian cyst warrants pediatric surgery or pediatric gynecology consultation. Percutaneous decompression has been
described in cases where benign nature can be reliably ascertained. Cyst
aspiration can provide temporary relief but is not recommended if cystectomy can safely be performed because the aspirated fluid may not be
reliable for diagnosis and may reaccumulate. If a cystectomy is done for
appropriate clinical indications, the cyst wall should be surgically excised
to prevent reaccumulation of fluid and to provide a pathologic diagnosis,
the remaining ovarian tissue should be left in situ, and the contralateral
ovary should be inspected. Preservation of normal ovarian tissue is recommended for all benign lesions, and salpingo-­oophorectomy should
not be performed unless clinically indicated.

Infants and Prepubertal Girls

When the maternal estrogen effect subsides, the genitalia of the female
infant change in appearance. The labia begin to flatten. The hymenal
membrane loses its redundancy and becomes translucent. The hypoestrogenic prepubertal vaginal epithelium appears thin, red, and sensitive to the
touch. The vaginal mucosa of young children can have longitudinal ridges
running along the axis of the vagina at 3 o’clock, 6 o’clock, and 9 o’clock,
which can cause small protrusions on the hymen at these locations. The
cervix usually appears flat and flush with the vaginal vault. During infancy,
the uterus regresses in size and does not return to its birth size until the
child is 5-­6 years old. The prepubertal cervix:fundus ratio is 2:1.
When puberty approaches, the child experiences increasing
endocrine activity of the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, adrenal

3317
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3318 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Urethra

Membranous
cover
opening

A

C

B

E

D

G

F

Fig. 585.1 Types of hymens. A, Crescentic. B, Annular. C, Redundant. D, Microperforate. E, Septated. F, Imperforate. G, Hymeneal tags. (A–F
from Perlman SE, Nakajima ST, Hertweck SP, eds: Clinical Protocols in Pediatric Adolescent Gynecology. Parthenon Publishing Group, 2004; G, from
McCann JJ, Kerns DL [eds]: The Child Abuse Atlas. St Louis: Evidentia Learning, 2021, www.childabuseatlas.com.)

A

B

C

D

Fig. 585.2 Different exam positions for performing a gynecologic exam on a child. A, Frog-­leg position. B, Knee-­chest position. C, Prone position.
D, Sitting on caregiver’s lap. (A from McCann JJ, Kerns DL, eds : The Child Abuse Atlas. St Louis: Evidentia Learning, 2021, www.childabuseatlas
.com; B–D from Finkel MA, Giardino AP [eds]: Medical Examination of Child Sexual Abuse: A Practical Guide. Elk Grove Village, Illinois: American
Academy of Pediatrics Publications, 2009;46–64.)

gland, and ovaries (see Chapter 599). The labia majora begin to
fill out, and the labia minora thicken and elongate as a result of
increased estrogen levels. The hymen thickens and becomes more
redundant. Clear or white physiologic secretions may be present.
Breast buds begin to appear, either bilateral or initially unilateral
with subsequent development of the contralateral breast. Pubic hair
begins to appear.

Indications for Genital Examination

Genitourinary complaints or suspected genitourinary pathology warrants assessment of the external and internal genitalia of pediatric
patients, specifically in cases of vaginal bleeding, vaginal discharge,
vulvar trauma, presence of a foreign body, perineal or pelvic masses,
vulvovaginal ulcerative or inflammatory lesions, congenital anomalies,
or suspected sexual abuse.

Preparation

An examination of the external genitalia in prepubertal females
requires a gentle, patient approach to maximize cooperation and
minimize fear and embarrassment. A clear, simple explanation of

what the examination involves can facilitate the child’s comfort and
cooperation. The presence of a parent or caregiver during the entire
examination provides reassurance for most children. For the older
prepubertal patient, the physician may discuss whether the patient
wishes to have a family member present during the examination.
Even in the presence of the caregiver, the examiner should speak
directly to the child. Before initiating any part of the examination,
the provider should explicitly verify with both the patient and their
caregiver that the caregiver has given permission for the examination. This provides an opportunity to explain to the child the privacy of body parts and who may examine or touch those areas. It is
useful to educate the patient and caregiver about the basic anatomy
and hygiene of the external genital area. Before each step of the
examination, the physician should explain what will occur. Allowing an older child the option of watching their examination with a
handheld mirror may contribute to their comfort and understanding. Forcible restraint is never indicated; if optimal evaluation is
not possible, the clinician must assess the acuity of the complaint
and pathology and determine the potential need for multiple visits
to complete the examination or an examination under anesthesia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 585 u Gynecologic History and Physical Examination
Positioning

A variety of techniques and positions can facilitate the genital examination in prepubertal patients. Children younger than 4 years of age can
be placed on the parent or caregiver’s lap with the child’s legs straddling the caregiver’s thighs (Fig. 585.2). If the child permits, they may
be positioned on the table in the supine position with the hips fully
abducted and the feet together in the frog-­leg (diamond or butterfly)
position. Older children may prefer to use the stirrups. The head of the
examination table should be raised so that eye contact can be maintained with the patient throughout the examination. When the child
is supine, grasping the labia majora along the inferior portion between
the thumb and index finger and gently pulling outward and posteriorly
(labial traction) allows visualization of the vaginal introitus. Alternatively, the child may be placed in the knee-­chest position with elevation of the buttocks and hips (see Fig. 585.2). This position provides
exposure of the inferior portion of the hymen, the lower vagina, and
possibly the upper vagina and cervix but has the disadvantage of having the child face away from the examiner.
Some extremely cooperative children tolerate a vaginoscopic examination in an outpatient office setting for better intravaginal assessment.
The endoscope (either a cystoscope or a hysteroscope) is placed in the
vagina, and the labia are gently opposed, allowing the vagina to distend
with water. This technique permits visualization of the vagina and cervix, allowing for the evaluation of an injury, lesion, and anatomic variant or for the presence of a foreign body. Application of 2% lidocaine
gel at the introitus makes the insertion easier and less irritating for the
patient. If a more complete examination is indicated or if the child is
too young, frightened, or unable to cooperate, an examination under
anesthesia is recommended.

Documentation

Clinicians should thoroughly and accurately document the genital examination findings in the medical record, reserving conclusions and diagnostic terms for the impression and plan portion of the documentation rather
than in the description of exam findings. Each structure visualized should
be noted (e.g., clitoris, labia majora, labia minora, urethra, vestibule, and
rectum) with attention to describing normal appearance and any anatomic
variations (e.g., the configuration of the hymen as annular, crescentic, and
so forth). Describing any findings or lesions using a clock-­face method
provides a consistent reference point; a sketch or magnified photograph
may also be helpful. Future examiners will rely on this documentation as
a record with which they compare their findings and note any variances.
Changes should be noted in any follow-­up examinations.

Adolescents

Some teens prefer to initially meet and discuss the reason for their
visit with the provider without their parent or guardian present, and
this request should be honored (see Chapter 151). Obtaining a history from an adolescent usually begins with meeting the patient and
parent or caregiver together to review their history and the reason
for the visit and to explain the concepts of confidentiality and privacy. Care should be taken to ask the patient their preferred name
and pronouns when addressing them. Familiarity with local laws
governing limitations to confidential services should guide the protection of the adolescent and their parents’ rights to information
access and privacy. The Guttmacher Institute provides an up-­
to-­
date listing of state and federal laws in the United States affecting
access to medical care (https://www.guttmacher.org/geography/
united-­states). Brief discussions of normal pubertal development and
menstruation can reassure both patients and their parents or guardians and provide valuable education on appropriate menstrual flow,
menstrual hygiene, and the duration and frequency of bleeding. Introducing the menstrual diary as an invaluable tool for the teen can help
patients, parents, and clinicians identify abnormal bleeding patterns
that might require further evaluation. Many applications are available
for tracking menstrual periods on a smart phone or computer.
After the initial interview with the teen and their parent or caregiver,
the confidential and sensitive portion of the history, particularly sexual

3319

history and alcohol, tobacco, and drug use, is taken with the teen alone.
Such a request could be phrased as follows: “I would like to give your
child an opportunity to ask any questions they might have privately,
so would you mind stepping out of the room for a moment?” After
obtaining the teen’s assent for the confidential interview, questions
regarding gender identity, sexual orientation, mental health, safety, and
use of illicit substances should be asked. Any concerns regarding parent or caregiver access to personal electronic health records should be
addressed. Concerns for the presence of vaginal discharge, the potential for sexually transmitted infections, pregnancy, or menstrual aberration should be explored. Teens and their parents should be informed
of the proper use and accessibility of condoms, all contraceptive methods, and emergency contraception.
Resources for educating adolescents regarding their first pelvic
examination and in-­depth sexual history and psychosocial screening tools are available. These include the North American Society for
Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology (http://www.naspag.org), the
American Academy of Pediatrics (http://www.aap.org), the Society for
Adolescent Health and Medicine (http://www.adolescenthealth.org),
and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (http://
acog.org/Patients).

Individuals with Special Needs

Special care should be taken in the approach to individuals with both
physical and cognitive disabilities (see Chapter 592). The assistance of
Child Life services can be beneficial in decreasing patient anxiety.

Pelvic Examination

Table 585.1 presents the indications for the first pelvic examination in adolescents. If an adolescent does not meet one of the criteria listed in Table 585.1, the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that the first gynecologic
encounter occur between the ages of 13-­15 years (Table 585.2), with
attention toward anticipatory guidance focusing on normal pubertal development and menstruation. All sexually active patients age
Table 585.1  Suggested Indications for Pelvic Examination
in Adolescents
Age 21 yr of age for initial Papanicolaou test (Pap smear)
Unexplained menstrual irregularities, including pubertal aberrations
(especially delayed puberty)
Severe dysmenorrhea
Unexplained abdominal or pelvic pain
Unexplained dysuria
Abnormal vaginal discharge
Concern for pelvic inflammatory disease
Placement of intrauterine device
Removal of foreign body
Inability to place tampons
Data from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on Adolescent Health Care. The initial reproductive health visit: ACOG Committee Opinion,
Number 811. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;136: e70–e80.

Table 585.2  Recommendations for First Gynecologic
Evaluation
Occurs between 13 and 15 yr of age
Focuses on patient education
Increases comfort with issues regarding adolescent sexuality
Ensures opportunity for adolescent to speak 1-­on-­1 with the provider
Makes the adolescent aware of limitations of confidentiality (including issues related to mandatory reporting, insurance billing, electronic health record notifications, and legal requirements)
Pelvic examination with Papanicolaou test (Pap smear) is generally
not indicated until 21 yr of age, unless otherwise indicated by
Table 585.1
Data from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on Adolescent Health Care. The initial reproductive health visit: ACOG Committee Opinion,
Number 811. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;136: e70–e80.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3320 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
<25 years should undergo annual screening for sexually transmitted infections (STIs). This testing can also be obtained 3 months
after treatment of a positive screening, with new symptoms, or with
each new sexual partner. With the availability of urine and vaginal
swab nucleic acid amplification testing for chlamydia, gonorrhea,
and trichomoniasis, STI screening does not necessitate a speculum
exam. Extragenital (rectal or pharyngeal) chlamydia and gonorrhea
testing can be considered for patients based on self-­reported sexual
behaviors through shared clinical decision-­making between the
patient and the provider. Expedited partner treatment may be used
according to the state law.
Before the initiation of a physical examination, all patients
should be offered the choice of having a medical attendant, family member, or friend present during their examination. Presence
of the chaperone is advised based on the laws of the state and the
policies of the institution. At the initial gynecologic exam, the
physician should explain the process in understandable terms. A
thorough evaluation begins with an assessment of body mass index,
blood pressure, menstruation status, thyroid, lymph nodes, breast
development, abdominal exam, and skin. The external genitalia
should be examined with the patient in the dorsal lithotomy position while communication is maintained between the physician and
patient. Elevating the head of the examination table allows the teen
and their examiner to maintain eye contact. The teen can hold a
mirror to follow along with the examination, and they should be
encouraged to ask questions. Inspection of the vulva is followed by
inspection of the Bartholin, urethral, and Skene glands. The clitoris,
normally 2-­4 mm in width, is then assessed; a clitoris wider than 10
mm, especially in the presence of other signs of virilization, suggests a need for further evaluation. The hymenal anatomy should
also be evaluated. Throughout the examination, the proper nomenclature for genital anatomy should be emphasized with the teen to
empower them to use proper wordage with the avoidance of slang
when referring to their body.
Because the initial Papanicolaou (Pap) test is deferred until 21
years of age except in certain immunocompromised patients and
cultures for STIs can be obtained from urine or vaginal swabs, the
need for a speculum exam is decreasing in this age group. If a speculum exam is indicated, use an appropriately sized speculum, such
as the Huffman (½ in wide × 4 in long) or Pedersen (⅞ in wide
× 4 in long) speculum. Shorter speculums will not allow visualization of the entire vaginal canal. The adolescent patient should
be reassured that the exam may be uncomfortable but should not
be painful and that their request to stop or wait will be honored.
Encouraging the patient to watch with a handheld mirror facilitates
patient education and can be empowering. They may be told before
the insertion of the speculum that they will experience a pressure
sensation. Before touching the introitus, it may be useful to touch
the inner thigh with the speculum. Compression of the urethra
anteriorly should be avoided. Gentle pressure with a finger for displacement of the fourchette posteriorly further facilitates proper
speculum placement. After visualization of the vagina and cervix,
specimens should be obtained as indicated. A bimanual examination, sometimes with a single digit, allows palpation of the vaginal
walls and cervix and bimanual assessment of the uterus and adnexa.
Reassurance of normal findings throughout the examination
should be provided, and normal variants to anatomy should be
pointed out to the teen as they are encountered (e.g., asymmetric
labia minora).
After the examination, it is appropriate to review the exam findings with the teen (and parents or caregivers as appropriate) and
initiate a collaborative discussion of the management plan. Encouraging the adolescent to participate in decision-­making empowers
them to undertake responsibility for their health, may strengthen
compliance with the medical plan, and will acknowledge them as a
unique individual.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 586

Vulvovaginitis
Helen M. Oquendo Del Toro and
Holly R. Hoefgen
Vulvovaginitis is the most common gynecologic-­based problem for
prepubertal children, with a reported incidence of 17–50%. It is most
typically caused by either inadequate or excessive hygiene or chemical
irritants. The age of presentation peaks at 4-­8 years of age. The condition is usually improved by hygiene measures and education of the
caregivers and child.

ETIOLOGY

Vulvitis refers to external genital pruritus, burning, redness, or rash.
Vaginitis denotes inflammation of the vagina, which can manifest as
a discharge with or without an odor or bleeding. If these occur simultaneously, the term vulvovaginitis is used. When a child presents with
vulvovaginitis, the history should include questions on hygiene (wiping from front to back) and information about possible exposure to
chemical irritants (bath soaps, bubble bath, bath bombs, laundry
detergents, swimming pools, or hot tubs). A detailed history of recent
diarrhea, perianal itching, or nighttime itching is important. The possibility of foreign objects being placed into the vagina should also be
asked, although the young child is unlikely to recall. Approximately
75% of cases of vulvovaginitis in children are nonspecific for a variety
of reasons, including their lack of vaginal estrogenization and resulting
atrophy and alkalinic pH, poor perianal hygiene, and the proximity of
the anus to the vagina, which is without geographic barriers given the
flattened labia and lack of pubic hair. Table 586.1 lists other vulvovaginal disorders commonly seen in children.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Infectious vulvovaginitis, where a specific pathogen is isolated as the
cause of symptoms, is commonly associated with fecal or respiratory
pathogens, and cultures may reveal Escherichia coli (see Chapter 246),
Streptococcus pyogenes (Chapter 229), Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227), Haemophilus influenzae (see Chapter 240), Enterobius vermicularis (see Chapter 340), and, rarely, Candida spp. (see Chapter 280).
These organisms may be transmitted by the child using improper toilet
hygiene or manually from the nasopharynx to the vagina. Typical presentation includes perianal redness, introital inflammation, and often
a yellow-­green or mildly bloody discharge. Children may be observed
to be grabbing their genital area or “digging” in their underwear, which
is usually stained with yellow-­brown discharge. Attempts to treat these
bacterial etiologies with antifungal medication will fail, and often the
antifungal product will lead to more irritation. Table 586.2 gives specific treatment recommendations based on the bacteria identified.
Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis are also causes of
specific infectious vulvovaginitis (see Chapter 163). If acquired after
the neonatal period, some diseases (e.g., gonorrhea, syphilis, and chlamydia) are virtually 100% indicative of sexual contact. Management
of prepubertal children who have sexually transmitted infections
requires close cooperation between clinicians and child-­protection
authorities. Official investigations for sexual abuse, when indicated,
should be initiated promptly (see Chapter 17). For some diseases (e.g.,
human papillomavirus infection and herpes simplex virus), the association with sexual contact is not as clear. Presumptive treatment for
prepubertal children who have been sexually assaulted or abused is not
recommended, because (1) the incidence of most sexually transmitted
infections in children is low after abuse/assault, (2) prepubertal females
appear to be at lower risk for ascending infection than adolescent or
adult women, and (3) regular follow-­up of children usually can be
ensured. Although Trichomonas vaginalis can be transmitted vertically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 586 u Vulvovaginitis

3321

Table 586.1  Specific Vulvar Disorders in Children
CONDITION

PRESENTATION

Molluscum
contagiosum
(Fig. 586.8)

1-­to 5-­mm discrete,
skin-­colored, dome-­shaped,
umbilicated lesions with a
central cheesy plug

Diagnosis usually
made by visual
inspection

DIAGNOSIS

• Disease is generally self-­limited and the lesions can resolve
spontaneously.
• Treatment choices in children may include cryosurgery,
laser, application of topical anesthetic and curettage,
podophyllotoxin, and topical silver nitrate.
• Use of topical 5% imiquimod cream and 10% potassium
hydroxide has been reported with similar effects.

Condyloma
acuminata

Skin-­colored papules, some
with a shaggy, cauliflower-­like
appearance

• Diagnosis is usually
made by visual
inspection.
• Biopsy should be
reserved for when
the diagnosis is in
question.
• Human papillomavirus DNA testing is
not helpful.

• Many lesions in children resolve spontaneously, with “wait and
see” often used in children (60 days).
• Topical treatment with imiquimod cream (3 times/wk at
bedtime × 16 wk, wash 6-­10 hr after application) and
podophyllotoxin (bid × 3 days followed by 4 day break; typical
treatment duration is 4 wk) is the most studied.
• General anesthesia is usually required for surgical/ablative
procedures (cryotherapy, laser therapy, electrocautery); reserve
for symptomatic or large lesions.
• Other treatments have been used in adults, including
trichloroacetic acid, 5-­fluorouracil, sine catechins, topical
cidofovir, and cimetidine.
• The efficacy and safety of these treatments in children has not
been established.

Herpes simplex

Blisters that break, leaving
tender ulcers

Visual inspection
confirmed by culture
from lesion

• Infants: Acyclovir 20 mg/kg body weight IV q8 hr × 21 days for
disseminated and central nervous system disease or × 14 days
for disease limited to the skin and mucous membranes.
• Genital/mucocutaneous disease:
• Age 3 mo-­2 yr: 15 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h × 5-­7 days.
• Age 2-­12 yr (first episode): Same as above or 40-­80 mg/kg/day
PO divided tid-­qid × 7-­10 days (max 1,000-­1,200 mg/day).
• Age 2-­12 yr (recurrence): 1,000 mg/day PO in 5 divided doses
× 5 days or 1,600 mg/day PO divided bid × 5 days or 2400 mg
PO divided q8 × 2 days.

Labial
adhesions
(see Fig. 586.1)

May be asymptomatic or
can cause vulvitis, urinary
dribbling, urinary tract
infection, or urethritis

Diagnosis made by
visual inspection of
the adherent labia,
often with a central
semitranslucent line.

• Does not require treatment if the patient is asymptomatic.
• Symptomatic patients: Topical estrogen cream or
betamethasone ointment applied alone or in combination
daily for 6 wk directly to the line of adhesion, using a cotton
swab while applying gentle labial traction.
• Estrogen should be interrupted if breast budding occurs.
• Mechanical or surgical separation of the adhesions is rarely
indicated.
• The adhesions usually resolve in 6-­12 wk; unless good hygiene
measures are followed, recurrence is common.
• To decrease the risk of recurrence, an emollient (petroleum
jelly, A and D ointment) should be applied to the inner labia
for 1 mo or longer at bedtime.

Lichen sclerosus
(see Fig. 586.4)

A sclerotic, atrophic, parchment-­
like plaque with an hourglass or
keyhole appearance of vulvar,
perianal, or perineal skin;
subepithelial hemorrhages
may be misinterpreted as
sexual abuse or trauma.
The patient can experience
perineal itching, soreness, or
dysuria.

Diagnosis usually
is made by visual
inspection.
Biopsy should be
reserved for when
the diagnosis is in
question.

• Ultrapotent topical corticosteroids are the first-­line therapy
(clobetasol propionate ointment 0.05%) once or twice a day
for 4-­8 wk.
• Once symptoms are under control, the patient should be
tapered off the drug unless therapy is required for a flare-­up.
• In many females, the condition resolves with puberty; however, this
is not always the case and patients may require long-­term follow-­up.
• Immunomodulators can be used: tacrolimus 1% (applied once
daily) and pimecrolimus 1% (applied twice daily for 3 mo, then
every other day).

Psoriasis

Children are more likely than
Diagnosis may be
adults to have vulvar psoriasis
confirmed by
noted as pruritic, well-­
locating other
demarcated, nonscaly, brightly
affected areas on the
erythematous, symmetric
scalp or in nasolabial
plaques. The classic extragenital
folds or behind the
lesions are similar but with a
ears.
silver scaly appearance.

Vulvar lesions may be treated with low-­to medium-­potency
topical corticosteroids, increasing strength as necessary.

Atopic dermatitis

Chronic cases can result in
crusty, weepy lesions that
are accompanied by intense
pruritus and erythema.
Scratching often results in
excoriation of the lesions
and secondary bacterial or
candidal infection.

Children with this condition should avoid common irritants and
use topical corticosteroids (such as 1% hydrocortisone) for
flare-­ups.
If dry skin is present, lotion or bath oil can be used to seal in
moisture after bathing.

May be seen in vulvar
area but characteristically affects the
face, neck, chest, and
extremities

TREATMENT

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3322 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Table 586.1  Specific Vulvar Disorders in Children—cont’d
CONDITION

PRESENTATION

DIAGNOSIS

Contact
dermatitis

Erythematous, edematous,
or weepy vulvar vesicles
or pustules can result, but
more often the skin appears
inflamed

Associated with
exposure to an
irritant, such as
perfumed soaps,
bubble bath, talcum
powder, lotions,
elastic bands of
undergarments, or
disposable diaper
components

Avoidance of irritant; topical corticosteroids for flare-­ups

TREATMENT

Seborrheic
dermatitis

Erythematous and greasy,
yellowish scaling on vulva and
labial crural folds associated
with greasy dandruff-­type rash
of scalp, behind ears and face

Diagnosis usually
made by visual
inspection

Gentle cleaning, topical clotrimazole with 1% hydrocortisone
added

Vitiligo (see Fig.
586.6)

Sharply demarcated hypopigmented patches, often
symmetric in vaginal and anal
regions; may be present in
periphery at body orifices and
extensor surfaces

Clinical. Test for
associated illness if
clinically warranted
(thyroid disease,
Addison disease,
pernicious anemia,
diabetes mellitus).

If desired, treat limited lesions with low-­potency corticosteroids
or tacrolimus. See dermatologist for extensive lesions.

Table 586.2  Antibiotic Recommendations for Specific Vulvovaginal Infections
ETIOLOGY

TREATMENT

Streptococcus pyogenes
Streptococcus
pneumoniae

• Penicillin V, 250 mg PO bid-­tid for children < 27 kg, and 500 mg bid-­tid for children > 27 kg × 10 days
• Amoxicillin, 50 mg/kg/day (max: 500 mg/dose) PO divided tid × 10 days
• Erythromycin ethyl succinate, 30-­50 mg/kg/day (max: 400 mg/dose) PO divided qid
• TMP-­SMX, 6-­10 mg/kg/day (TMP component) PO divided bid × 10 days
• Clarithromycin, 7.5 mg/kg bid (max: 1 g/day) PO × 5-­10 days
• Recurrence most likely from asymptomatic pharyngeal carriage in child or family member; however, failure of
penicillin regimens can occur
• For penicillin resistance: Rifampin 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hr × 2 days

Staphylococcus aureus

• Topical mupirocin 2% tid to the affected skin area
• If systemic therapy required: Amoxicillin-­clavulanate, 45 mg/kg/day (amoxicillin) PO divided bid-­tid × 7 days
(first-­line treatment because of high penicillin resistance)
• Extensive resistance to common antibiotics noted; recommend susceptibility testing for further antibiotic use
• MRSA: TMP-­SMX double-­strength 8-­10 mg/kg/day; culture abscesses, incision and drainage

Haemophilus influenzae

• Amoxicillin, 40 mg/kg/day PO divided tid × 7 days
• For cases of treatment failure or nonencapsulated H. influenzae, amoxicillin–clavulanate is recommended.

Yersinia

• TMP-­SMX 6 mg/kg (TMP component) daily for 3 days

Shigella

• TMP-­SMX 10/50 mg/kg/day (max: 160/600) PO divided bid × 5 days
• Ampicillin 50-­100 mg/kg/day PO divided qid (adult max: 4 g/day) × 5 days
• Azithromycin 12 mg/kg (max: 500) PO × 1 day, then 6 mg/kg/day (max: 250 mg) × 4 days (in areas of high
resistance to above regimens or when sensitivities are unknown)
• For resistant organisms: Ceftriaxone 50-­75 mg/kg/day IV or IM divided into 1 or 2 doses (max: 2 g/day) × 2-­5 days

Chlamydia trachomatis

• Children weighing < 45 kg: Erythromycin base or ethylsuccinate 50 mg/kg/day PO divided qid × 14 days
• Children weighing > 45 kg but age younger than 8 yr: Azithromycin 1 g PO in a single dose
• Children age older than 8 yr: Azithromycin 1 g PO in a single dose or Doxycycline 100 mg PO bid × 7 days
• Adolescents and Adults:
• Preferred: Doxycycline 100 mg PO bid × 7 days
• Alternative: Azithromycin 1 g PO in single dose or Levofloxacin 500 mg PO once daily × 7 days

Neisseria gonorrhoeae

• Children weighing < 45 kg: Ceftriaxone, 25-­50 mg/kg body weight IV or IM in a single dose (max 250 mg IM)
• Children weighing ≥ 45 kg: Treat with adult regimen of 500 mg IM in a single dose; add azithromycin 1 g PO in a
single dose if chlamydia has not been excluded. In persons > 150 kg, provide 1 g ceftriaxone.

Trichomonas

• Metronidazole, 15-­30 mg/kg/day PO bid (max: 500 mg/dose) × 7 days or Tinidazole 50 mg/kg (max 2 g) PO as a
single dose for children older than 3 yr

Pinworms (Enterobius
vermicularis)

• Mebendazole, 100 mg chewable tablet once, repeated in 2 wk
or
Albendazole, 200 mg PO for child younger than age 2 yr or 400 mg PO for older child once, repeated in 2 wk
• Pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg PO once (max 1 g), repeated in 2 wk

MRSA, Methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus; TMP-­SMX, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 586 u Vulvovaginitis

3323

and can be seen in children up to 1 year of age, it is an uncommon
cause of specific infectious vulvovaginitis in the unestrogenized prepubertal female.
Other causes of specific infectious vulvovaginitis include Shigella
(see Chapter 245), which often manifests with a blood-­tinged purulent
discharge, and Yersinia enterocolitica (see Chapter 249). Candida infections (yeast) commonly cause diaper rash (diaper dermatitis), but they
are unlikely to cause vaginitis in children because the alkaline pH of
the prepubertal vagina does not support fungal infections. Diabetic or
immunocompromised children and children taking prolonged antibiotics may be at increased risk for fungal vaginitis. Pinworms are the
most common helminthic infestation in the United States, with the
highest rates in school-­age and preschool children. Perianal itching can
lead to excoriation and, rarely, bleeding.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Diaper Dermatitis

Fig. 586.1 Labial adhesions. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

Diaper dermatitis is the most common dermatologic problem in
infancy and occurs in half of all diaper-­wearing infants and children.
The moisture and contact with urine and feces irritates the skin, and
colonization with Candida spp. increases the severity of the dermatitis.
First-­line treatment includes hygiene measures such as increasing the
frequency of diaper changes, allowing the infant to be diaper free, frequent bathing, and application of water-­repellant barriers such as zinc
oxide. If diaper dermatitis persists after these conservative measures,
or if the classic satellite lesions of Candida are present, treatment with
a topical antifungal can decrease the inflammation.

Physiologic Leukorrhea

Neonates and peripubertal children can present with a white, clear,
or mucus discharge, which is physiologic in nature and secondary to
exposure to estrogen. Some patients may complain of the moisture and
mucus. Hygiene measures, including plain warm water baths, may help
decrease symptomatology, but education should also be provided to
reassure the patient and their parents.

Labial Agglutination

Labial agglutination (labial adhesions) are described most frequently
in infants and young children (Fig. 586.1). This phenomenon is thought
to be secondary to an inflammatory response in the labia minora in
combination with a hypoestrogenic state. Diagnosis is made on routine
genital examination. Asymptomatic patients usually require no intervention. Most common symptoms include urinary frequency, vaginitis, and postvoidal dribbling; labial adhesions also increase a patient’s
susceptibility to urinary tract infections. First-­line therapy in symptomatic patients includes topical estrogen (estradiol cream 0.01%) or a
topical steroid (betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% ointment) applied
twice daily to the midline raphe under gentle traction. Surgical correction is rarely necessary, but recurrence is common until the age of
puberty. Liberal use of bland emollients for 6-­12 months after resolution of adhesions can limit recurrences.

Genital Ulcers

Acute genital ulceration of the vulva (Fig. 586.2) is described in young
adolescents who are not sexually active and can occur in association
with oral aphthous ulcers. Although linked to infectious causes such as
Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, mycoplasma, mumps, and influenza A, these ulcers may also be idiopathic vulvar aphthoses. Other
potential etiologies include Crohn disease, Behçet disease, pemphigoid, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, fixed drug eruption, or mouth and
genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage (MAGIC) syndrome, which has
combined features of relapsing polychondritis and Behçet disease.
These lesions usually appear on the mucosal surfaces of the introitus as painful red or white lesions that evolve into sharply demarcated,
red-­rimmed ulcers with a necrotic or eschar-­like base. The time course
is generally 10-­14 days until remission occurs. The lesions are painful; dysuria and vulvar pain are common complaints as well. Patients
with acute genital ulcers show a fairly consistent picture of flulike prodromal symptoms, including fever, nausea, and abdominal pain. One

A

B

Fig. 586.2 Aphthous ulcers. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

third of patients present with a history of or develop oral ulcerations.
Evaluation includes culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test
for herpes simplex virus to exclude this etiology. Special testing for
systemic disease depends on the history. Biopsies are usually nondiagnostic because they yield acute and chronic inflammatory changes.
Figure 586.3 outlines the suggested evaluation and management of initial and recurrent disease. Evaluation for Behçet disease (see Chapter
202) using the International Study Group diagnostic guidelines should
be considered with recurrent or severe cases (see Table 586.1 for other
common etiologies). Treatment of acute genital ulcers should include
topical lidocaine 2% jelly, sitz baths, good hygiene, and acetaminophen.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug avoidance is suggested because
of a possible causative link. Hospitalization may be required for pain
management not controlled with oral narcotics or urinary retention
requiring Foley catheterization, or for whirlpool debridement should
hygiene become difficult. Antibiotic treatment is not required, unless
evidence of bacterial superinfection exists or the patient is immunocompromised. Insufficient evidence exists to recommend whether oral
steroid treatment is effective, but this may be helpful in the setting of
recurrent outbreaks and extensive disease. Ultrapotent topical steroids
(clobetasol 0.05% ointment) are beneficial in oral aphthous ulcers and
may prove helpful in acute genital ulcers as well.

Dermatoses

Dermatologic conditions often affect the vulvar area in children; it is
important to determine if the child presenting with vulvar irritation
has a skin condition elsewhere on the body. Lichen sclerosus is commonly seen in the anogenital region and has a characteristic appearance of thinning and whitened skin changes associated with areas of
erosion, ulceration, and petechiae. This disease can cause severe discomfort and most commonly presents with vulvar or perianal pruritus, dysuria, and constipation. Patients may also present without any
symptoms, which may lead to underrecognition and undertreatment.
If untreated, lichen sclerosus can lead to destruction and scarring of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3324 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
AGU without history of sexual activity*

*HSV already ruled out with
negative genital HSV culture
or PCR

First episode?

Yes

No

Associated signs/
symptoms?

H/o joint, GI, ocular, or
dermatologic symptoms?

No

Fig. 586.3 Algorithm for evaluation

and management of acute genital
ulcers in non–sexually active young
girls. AGU, Acute genital ulcer; CMV,
cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­
Barr
virus; GI, gastrointestinal; HSV, herpes
simplex virus; PCR, polymerase chain
reaction. (From Rosman IS, Berk DR,
Bayliss SJ, et al. Acute genital ulcers
in nonsexually active young girls:
Case series, review of the literature,
and evaluation and management
recommendations. Pediatr Dermatol.
2012;29[2];147-­153.)

Severe
• Persistent fever
• Lymphadenopathy
• Pharyngitis
• Persistent fatigue

Consider infectious
workup:
• EBV, CMV, influenza
• Mycoplasma
• Lesional viral cultures
Consider specialist
consultation based on
symptoms

Non-specific
prodromal

None

Yes

Referral to rheumatology,
ophthalmology, gastroenterology,
or dermatology to rule out
associated condition

Idiopathic vulvar aphthosis

Treatment:
• Pain control: topical agents, acetaminophen
± narcotics (parenteral if needed)
• Local care: sitz bath, whirlpool debridement
• Topical steroids (clobetasol ointment)
• Consider oral steroids
• Bladder drainage for urinary retention
Follow-up with gynecology or dermatology

Fig. 586.4 Lichen sclerosus. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)
normal genital architecture, including labial resorption, obliteration of
the clitoris, narrowing of the introitus, and painful fissures that may
become secondarily infected. Once thought to resolve with puberty,
this theory is now controversial, and many postmenarchal adolescents still suffer from disease (Fig. 586.4). Lichen sclerosus may be
treated with potent topical steroids, such as clobetasol propionate
0.05% applied once or twice daily until the symptoms resolve, and then
tapered down through lower-­dose topical steroids. Topical calcineurin
inhibitors such as tacrolimus and pimecrolimus have been used in the
treatment of lichen sclerosus. Patients should be followed every 6-­12
months to evaluate for recurrence (Fig. 586.5).

Vitiligo is an acquired skin depigmentation resulting from an
autoimmune process directed at epidermal melanocytes. Lesions
appear as sharply demarcated patches of pigment loss, often symmetrically located around the vagina and anal area. Similar lesions
of hypopigmentation can be found surrounding body orifices and
extensor surfaces (Fig. 586.6). Although the diagnosis is clinical,
there is an association with other autoimmune or endocrine disorders (hypothyroidism, Graves disease, Addison disease, pernicious
anemia, insulin-­
dependent diabetes mellitus), and the workup
should include evaluation for thyroid dysfunction. Mild topical
corticosteroid cream or ointment may be prescribed for children.
Dermatologists may offer immunomodulators (tacrolimus) and
phototherapy.
Vulvar psoriasis presents as pruritic, well-­demarcated, erythematous, symmetric plaques that involve the vulva, perineum, and/or
gluteal folds. Lesions on the mons pubis may have the more characteristic scaly appearance. The classic signs of psoriasis may also
be appreciated with pitting nailbeds, posterior auricular erythema,
or a silvery scaling rash found elsewhere on the body. Many of the
treatments used in adults may not be appropriate in children. Psoriasis may be treated with moisturizers, topical steroids, and light
therapy. Teens may be treated with coal tar, retinoids, tacrolimus,
and calcipotriene, which is a derivative of vitamin D3.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Children with symptoms of vulvovaginitis often have had previous
evaluations and treatment failures. Cultures with sensitivities to test
for specific pathogens may be obtained with cotton swabs or urethral (Calgiswab) swabs moistened with nonbacteriostatic saline.
Use of a swab can cause discomfort or, rarely, minimal bleeding. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 586 u Vulvovaginitis

3325

Exam findings consistent with
lichen sclerosus

lnduction therapy with UPTC for 4
weeks

No response or
intolerance to
steroid

Treat with topical calcineurin inhibitor

No response

Disease
improvement

Disease
improvement

Maintenance therapy, 6-month followup, treat relapse with induction therapy,
continue maintenance 2 years

Long-term follow-up at least annually
with treatment for recurrence

Referral to pediatric dermatology or
consider biopsy

Fig. 586.5 Management algorithm for lichen sclerosus. UPTC, Ultrapotent topical corticosteroids. (From Simms-­Cendan J, Hoover K, Marathe K,
Tyler K. NASPAG clinical opinion: Diagnosis and management of lichen sclerosis in pediatric and adolescent patients. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol.
2022;35[2]:112-­120; Fig. 6.)

premoistened swab can be placed vertically between the labia minora
to collect secretions, as it is not necessary to place the swab into the
vagina. Testing for gonorrhea and chlamydia may be done by culture
or by nucleic acid amplification testing, depending on institutional
or state and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines.
Tests for Shigella and H. influenzae might require special media and
collection procedures.
If pinworms (see Chapter 340) are suspected, transparent adhesive
tape or an anal swab should be applied to the anal region in the morning before defecation or bathing and then placed on a slide. Eggs seen
on microscopic examination confirm the diagnosis, and sometimes the
pinworms can be seen at the anal verge. Clinical history is often more
indicative of disease than physical examination, and a negative tape test
does not rule out this pathogen as a cause.
If the vaginal discharge is serosanguineous, if a foul odor is present, or
if the discharge fails to respond to hygiene measures, presence of a vaginal foreign body (Fig. 586.7) should be considered. If inspection suggests
the presence of a foreign body, the vagina can be irrigated, or an examination under anesthesia may reveal the foreign body. Vaginal irrigation
may occasionally lead to expulsion of the foreign body; in cases where
this does not occur, vaginoscopy is an excellent diagnostic tool and can
be performed in an unsedated cooperative patient in an outpatient setting, or under general anesthesia if necessary. Using a cystoscope with
saline or water irrigation to gravity, insert the endoscopic device into the
vagina and gently oppose the labia; the vagina will distend, and the entire
vaginal cavity and cervix may be easily assessed.

TREATMENT AND PREVENTION
Fig. 586.6 Vitiligo. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

The treatment of specific vulvovaginitis should be directed at the
disorder or organism causing the symptoms (see Tables 586.1 and
586.2). Treatment of nonspecific vulvovaginitis includes sitz baths

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3326 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Chapter 587

Vaginal Bleeding in the
Prepubertal Child
Kathryn C. Stambough and
Christina Davis-­Kankanamge

Fig. 586.7 Vaginal foreign body as seen through vaginoscope. (Photo
courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

Fig. 586.8 Molluscum contagiosum. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt,
MD.)

and avoidance of irritating or harsh soaps and chemicals and tight
clothing that abrades the perineum. External application of bland
emollient barriers such as nonprescription diaper rash medications
and petroleum jelly may be helpful. Proper perineal hygiene is critical for long-­term improvement. Younger children need supervised
perineal hygiene, and caregivers should be advised to wipe the genital area from front to back. Use of a warm moistened washcloth or
diaper wipe is helpful after initially wiping with toilet tissue. Children should wear cotton underwear and limit time spent in tights,
leotards, leggings, tight jeans, and wet swimsuits. Soaking in warm
clean bathwater for 15-­minute intervals (no shampoo or bubble
bath) is soothing and helps with cleaning the area. Parents should
be counseled to avoid all scented, antiseptic, and deodorant-­based
soaps, and to eliminate the use of fabric softeners or dryer sheets
when laundering undergarments.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Newborn females may experience physiologic bleeding (neonatal
withdrawal bleeding) in the first week of life secondary to diminished
circulating maternal estrogen and stimulation of endometrial sloughing; this bleeding resolves in 3-­4 days. Vaginal bleeding in infants
lasting longer than a few days and all other vaginal bleeding in prepubescent children should be promptly evaluated because there are
many pathologic etiologies that require expeditious workup. Common
causes include vulvovaginitis, dermatologic conditions, vaginal foreign
bodies, and urethral prolapse; less common are the effects of endogenous or exogenous estrogen; and the least common but most worrisome sources include neoplasms and trauma.
Although many cases of pediatric vaginal bleeding are idiopathic,
many can be attributed to vulvovaginitis (see Chapter 586) stemming
from transmission of respiratory, oral, fecal, or sexually communicated pathogens. Vulvovaginitis may present with serosanguineous
vaginal drainage (e.g., Streptococcus, Shigella) or vulvar irritation. Age-­
appropriate anatomic and physiologic factors put prepubertal females at
higher risk of developing vulvovaginitis. The protective barrier of fully
developed labia is absent, leaving the vaginal introitus exposed to the
external environment. The hypo-­estrogenized vagina is marked by an
alkaline milieu prone to infection because of lack of the protective acidic
pH afforded by the lactobacilli colonization that occurs with puberty.
Routine handwashing, improved perineal hygiene (e.g., wiping from
front to back, use of wet wipes after bowel movements, proper cleansing
of genitalia during baths), and avoidance of topical irritants, chemicals,
and perfumed or deodorant soaps and bubble baths reduces nonspecific
vulvovaginitis. Topical application of bland emollient barriers (e.g., over-­
the-­counter diaper rash ointments, petroleum jelly) may be protective
against and mitigate symptoms of external irritation. Antibiotics should
be employed in the event of recurrent or persistent infections where a
specific pathogen has been identified (see Table 586.2).
Vulvar dermatoses may initially present with bleeding. Lichen
sclerosus (see Table 586.1 and Fig. 586.4) is characterized by chronic
inflammation, intense pruritus, loss of normal architecture, and thinning and whitening of vulvar and perianal skin, often in a butterfly
or keyhole distribution. Petechiae or blood blisters can complicate
the classic clinical picture, leading to a mistaken assumption of sexual trauma. A tissue biopsy can provide a definitive diagnosis but is
not usually necessary in prepubertal children and, if needed, is most
appropriately performed under anesthesia. The first-­line treatment is
ultrapotent topical steroids (e.g., clobetasol propionate 0.05%). Appropriate timing and duration of application is practitioner dependent,
but guidelines suggest treating children similarly to adults by starting
with once or twice daily application for 4 weeks. Tapering of topical
corticosteroid use can then occur with symptom control and include a
decrease in the frequency of corticosteroid application, potency of the
corticosteroid used, or both. Follow-­up evaluations for response should
start at 1 month after initiation of treatment. In the event of flare-­ups,
long-­term maintenance therapy with a lower potency steroid may be
initiated with appropriate counseling because side effects are rare.
Vaginal foreign bodies are a common finding in children presenting with blood-­
tinged and foul-­
smelling discharge. Quick
identification and removal of the foreign body avoids potential complications, including recurrent urinary tract infections, dermatologic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 587 u Vaginal Bleeding in the Prepubertal Child
abnormalities, vaginal perforation, or fistula formation. The most common object found in the prepubertal vagina is retained toilet paper. If
physical exam in knee-­chest or frog-­leg position reveals the object, an
attempt at removal in the office can be made using warm water flushes
through a small feeding tube. If the object is not visible, irrigation is
unlikely to remove it, and examination under anesthesia and vaginoscopy are often required. Direct visualization via vaginoscopy facilitates
extraction of an object, as well as evaluation for potential sites of injury
or unrelated sources of bleeding. In-­office vaginoscopy may also be a
possibility in the appropriate patient (see Chapter 585).
Several urologic conditions may have a mixed clinical picture suspicious for vaginal bleeding, including gross hematuria (see Chapter 558)
and urethral prolapse (see Chapter 581) (Fig. 587.1). Prolapse involves
protrusion of urethral mucosa through the external meatus, resulting
in a friable hemorrhagic mass that often obscures the adjacent vaginal
introitus. Predisposing factors include hypoestrogenic state, neuromuscular diseases, urethral anomalies, fascial defects, trauma, and chronic
increases in intra­abdominal pressure (e.g., recurrent Valsalva related to
constipation or forceful coughing). Treatment of prolapse is conservative, involving twice-­daily sitz baths followed by topical application of
estrogen cream (e.g., Estradiol 0.01%) at the affected area for 2 weeks. If
on reevaluation the prolapse remains, application should be continued
until complete resolution is achieved. Surgical excision is rarely necessary and reserved primarily for management of necrotic tissue.
Vaginal bleeding may be a presenting sign of precocious puberty
(see Chapter 600), defined as premature pubertal development occurring 2.0-­2.5 standard deviations earlier than the average age in the
general population. A formal evaluation should be conducted if pubic
hair or breast development occurs rapidly or initiates before age 8
years in a female child. The most common source of premature development is gonadotropin-­dependent or central precocious puberty
(see Chapter 600.1), resulting in early enhancement of pulsatile release
of hypothalamic gonadotropic-­releasing hormone (GnRH) that stimulates ovarian follicular growth and subsequent estrogen production.
Gonadotropin-­independent or peripheral precocious puberty
occurs less commonly and in the absence of hypothalamic influence, with estrogen being a product of ovarian or adrenal tumors, or
McCune-­Albright syndrome (see Chapter 600.6). In both instances,

Fig. 587.1 Prepubertal urethral prolapse with high crescent-­shaped
hymen. (From Lara-­Torre E, Valea FA. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology: Gynecologic examination, infections, trauma, pelvic mass, precocious puberty. In Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA [eds]:
Comprehensive Gynecology. Elsevier, 2022: 227; Fig. 12.6.)

3327

elevated estrogen levels lead to a thickened endometrium capable of
shedding as in menses.
Evaluation of precocious puberty starts by examining for secondary sex characteristics and documenting the Tanner stage of breast
and pubic hair development using the Sexual Maturation Index (see
Chapter 150). Plotting height and weight on a growth chart may assist
in identifying accelerated growth velocity. Supportive laboratory findings include elevated serum luteinizing hormone levels, but the gold
standard remains measurement of gonadotropin levels after stimulation with GnRH or a GnRH receptor agonist. Estradiol levels greater
than 100 pg/mL can indicate either the presence of premature ovarian
follicles or a peripheral tumor (e.g., ovarian germ cell tumor). A pelvic
ultrasound should be used to evaluate for ovarian or adrenal pathology,
as well as uterine maturation in response to estrogen. However, premature ovarian follicles typically produce estrogen for a very short period,
in quantities just sufficient to stimulate growth and shedding of the
endometrium. Follicular involution and return of estrogen to prepubertal levels may occur before an ultrasound can be obtained. An x-­ray
for bone maturity is simple and noninvasive. Other supportive radiologic findings include a brain MRI demonstrating a mass in the context
of central precocious puberty. If indicated, central precocious puberty
can be suppressed with GnRH agonist therapy. Peripheral tumors (i.e.,
ovarian germ cell tumors) are treated by surgical excision with staging
and chemotherapy as indicated by oncologic protocols.
Differential diagnoses of vaginal bleeding attributed to premature estrogenization must also include exposure to exogenous estrogens, including
hormonal contraceptives, certain foods (soy), beauty products (lavender,
tea tree oil), and plastics with endocrine disruptors. Ingesting large quantities of Bisphenol A (BPA), a product that may leach into the contents of
plastic cups and bottles, is known to convey an estrogenic effect, although
the impact remains unknown. Treatment involves elimination of any
problematic sources of estrogen from the patient’s daily use.
Juvenile hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603) commonly causes
pubertal delay, but severe cases may present with premature breast
development, vaginal bleeding, and abdominal distention secondary
to ovarian enlargement and ascites. The mechanism for this condition
is unclear, but it has been proposed that elevated levels of thyroid-­
stimulating hormone cross-­react with follicle-­stimulating hormone
receptors, resulting in follicle maturation and estradiol production.
Treatment with thyroid hormone replacement (e.g., levothyroxine)
results in improvement and ultimately reversal of symptoms.
Neoplasms of the vulva and vagina (see Chapter 590) are rare causes
of bleeding in the pediatric patient. Infantile hemangiomas are the most
common benign vascular neoplasm of infancy, affecting up to 5% of all
infants. Most lesions initially proliferate before resolving spontaneously
and seldom require intervention. However, on identifying a perineal
hemangioma, a neurologic assessment should be performed due to an
association with spinal dysraphism. If a persistent lesion is superficial,
application of topical β blockers (e.g., Timolol 0.5%) 2-­3 times daily for
6-­12 months has demonstrated good response rates. Oral β blocker use
and intralesional corticosteroids may be used as well. If conservative
therapies fail, laser therapy and surgical excision may be beneficial. Vaginal polyps may result in bleeding, and vaginoscopy for evaluation of any
upper vaginal or cervical etiologies for bleeding with expedient excision
and pathologic evaluation is recommended.
Malignant gynecologic neoplasms (see Chapter 590) are a source
of pediatric genital bleeding that requires scrupulous evaluation and
timely management. Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft
tissue sarcoma of childhood; 3% arise from the uterus or vagina. The
embryonal variant is responsible for uterine sarcomas, whereas the
embryonal subvariant sarcoma botryoides is found in the vagina.
Primary endodermal sinus (i.e., yolk sac) tumors of the vagina are
exceedingly rare, but early diagnosis is imperative given the malignancy’s aggressive nature and poor prognosis. Both sarcomatous and
endodermal sinus tumors arise primarily in the first 3 years of life,
presenting on examination with a cystic or polypoid mass, bloody
discharge, and occasionally urinary retention. Treatment consists of a
multimodal approach, including surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy
per oncologic guidelines.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3328 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Vulvovaginal trauma is an especially concerning cause of pediatric
genital bleeding. Most traumatic injuries are accidental, but physical
and sexual abuse must be ruled out (see Chapter 17.1). Straddle injuries are commonly seen after falls at home, particularly after slipping
on a wet surface in the bathroom; they may result in bruising, hematomas, or lacerations (Fig. 587.2). Accidental trauma usually spares the
hymen and vagina, instead affecting the external impact-­absorbing tissue of the mons and labia. However, a physical finding consistent with
external injuries does not exclude the need to rule out involvement of
internal genital structures. If there are no eyewitnesses to the injury, if
the history does not clarify or support the clinical findings, and especially if there is a hymenal laceration, abuse must be considered in the
differential diagnosis and a forensic interview of the patient and family
conducted. If after initial inspection a penetrative injury is suspected,
further examination and imaging are necessary to assess for potential
damage to the urethra, bladder, anus, or intraabdominal structures. An
examination under anesthesia may be needed to fully assess and repair
extensive injuries, while minor lacerations in a cooperative child may
potentially be repaired using local anesthesia and/or conscious sedation. If the patient can void spontaneously, nonexpanding hematomas
can be observed and treated with ice, pressure, and pain medications.
Large expanding hematomas may require drainage, ligation of bleeding
vessels, and placement of a closed suction drain if the overlying skin
is showing signs of necrosis. A Foley catheter should be placed in all
children who are having difficulty with voiding secondary to the injury.
Vaginal bleeding in the infant or prepubertal female is distressing
to the patient and their family and can result from a wide spectrum of
pathologic conditions or traumatic incidents. A detailed history and
thorough physical examination must be done to identify the source of
bleeding and for a management plan to be established efficiently. Presentations suspicious for trauma or abuse should involve the appropriate healthcare staff and authorities from an early stage, with findings
meticulously documented. If an intervention is indicated to manage
bleeding, regardless of its source, the risks and benefits of any therapy
should be reviewed carefully with the family before initiation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 587.2 Vulvar hematoma in an adolescent female as a result of
a straddle injury. (From Mok-­Lin EY, Laufer MR. Management of vulvar
hematomas: Use of a Word catheter. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2009;
22:e156-­e158.)

Chapter 588

Breast Health
Marcene R. McVay-­Gillam and
Amy D. DiVasta
Breast complaints in pediatric patients typically include concerns
about breast appearance or development, pain, nipple discharge, or
a lump/mass. Although the development of breast cancer is very rare
during childhood and adolescence, this patient population should be
evaluated by practitioners who have experience with the immature and
developing breast to avoid overtreatment with unnecessary diagnostic
or invasive procedures.

BREAST DEVELOPMENT

Prenatal breast development begins around the fifth week of gestation, when the ectoderm on the anterior body wall thickens into two
mammary ridges. These ridges extend from the axilla to the region
of the inguinal canal (Fig. 588.1). The ridge above and below the area
of the pectoralis muscle recedes in utero, leaving the mammary primordium, which is the origin of the lactiferous ducts. The lactiferous
ducts form between weeks 10 and 20 and become interspersed through
the developing mesenchyme, which develops into the fibrous and fatty
portions of the breast. The breast bud, under the stimulation of maternal estrogen, becomes palpable at week 34 of gestation. This breast bud
regresses within the first month of life once estrogen stimulation is no
longer present. The areola appears at 5 months of gestation, and the
nipple is seen shortly after birth. It is initially depressed or inverted,
and later becomes elevated.
Thelarche, the onset of pubertal breast development, is hormonally
mediated. It occurs when the hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the pituitary gland to
produce follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone
(LH) (see Chapter 599). FSH and LH then stimulate the ovaries to
produce estradiol, which leads to breast development. Thelarche typically occurs between ages 8 and 13 years. Age at thelarche is affected by
familial predisposition and varies by ethnicity.

Fig. 588.1 Milk lines or mammary ridges. (From Gao Y, Saksena MA,

Brachtel EF, terMeulen DC, Rafferty EA. How to approach breast lesions
in children and adolescents. Eur J Radiol. 2015;84:1350-­1364; Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 588 u Breast Health 3329
Breast development continues over a 2-­4 year period after thelarche
and is classified by the Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) system (also
known as Tanner staging) into five stages (see Chapter 150). Lack of
breast development (amastia) by age 13 years is considered delayed
and warrants evaluation. Menarche (onset of menses) usually occurs
2-­3 years after thelarche.

BREAST EXAMINATION

Breast examination should be included in the routine healthcare maintenance examinations of all children and adolescents. Assessment of
the newborn includes breast size, nipple position, presence of accessory
nipples, and nipple discharge. Assessment of the prepubertal female
includes inspection and palpation of the chest wall for masses, pain,
nipple discharge, and signs of premature thelarche. Examination of the
adolescent is performed with the patient in the supine position; the arm
ipsilateral to the breast that is being examined should be placed next to
the patient’s head. The breast tissue is examined with the flat pads of the
middle fingers, and the examiner should palpate all of the breast tissue in
a uniform manner. The SMR should be noted and the axillary, supraclavicular, and infraclavicular nodes evaluated for lymphadenopathy. The
areola should be gently compressed to assess for nipple discharge.

Fig. 588.2 Preoperative frontal view of a patient with left breast hypoplasia secondary to Poland syndrome. (From Laberge LC, Bortoluzzi PA.
Correction of breast asymmetry in teenagers. In: Hall-­Findlay EJ, Evans
GRD, eds. Aesthetic and Reconstructive Surgery of the Breast. London:
Elsevier, 2010. Fig 39.14.)

BREAST SELF-­AWARENESS

Controversy exists as to the utility of breast self-­examination in the adolescent population. Experts believe that it might be ill-­advised to encourage breast self-­examination in the adolescent because of a potential for
unnecessary anxiety and possible unwarranted treatment in a population that is at low risk for malignant disease. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) endorses breast self-­awareness,
which is defined as a female’s awareness of the normal appearance and feel
of their breasts. Breast self-­awareness may increase an adolescent’s understanding of their body, increase their comfort with exams, and provide
opportunities for questions or discussion. Instruction in self-­exam techniques should be considered for high-­risk patients, such as those with a
family history of conditions that may increase breast cancer risk or those
at risk of secondary tumors. Adolescents should be educated to report any
changes in their breasts or concerns to their healthcare providers.

Neonatal Breast Hypertrophy

Breast bud enlargement is a common condition in term newborns of
either gender. It occurs as a result of elevated circulating maternal steroid hormones in late gestation. As maternal estrogen levels fall, prolactin levels can increase, and the breasts may produce a clear or cloudy
(milk like) nipple discharge (“witch’s milk”) in male and female infants.
Repeated manipulation of the breast can exacerbate the condition and
should be discouraged.

ABNORMAL DEVELOPMENT
Premature Thelarche

Premature thelarche is defined as isolated unilateral or bilateral breast
development in a female child under age 8 years without other signs of
puberty; this is commonly seen in children under 3 years of age. Patient
assessment includes a careful review of medications (including creams,
ointments), home exposures to potential estrogens, review of growth
charts, and x-­ray for determination of bone age. Treatment consists of
reassurance and follow-­up to confirm that thelarche remains benign.
Serial examinations, with particular emphasis on growth velocity, secondary sex characteristics such as pubic hair, pigmentation of the labia
or areola, or vaginal bleeding, are imperative. Occasionally, patients
with premature thelarche eventually develop true central precocious
puberty (see Chapter 600.1). If puberty progresses, further workup
should be performed to exclude central nervous system disorders or
possible adrenal or gonadal neoplasm.

Amastia and Athelia

Complete absence of the breast, or amastia, is rare and is thought
to occur from lack of formation of or obliteration of the mammary
ridge. Amastia is usually unilateral and can be congenital or associated with systemic disorders (e.g., ectodermal dysplasia), endocrine

Fig. 588.3 Accessory nipple located inferior to the right breast. (From
Swartz MH. Textbook of Physical Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2014; Fig 13-­5.)

disorders (e.g., congenital adrenal hyperplasia, gonadal dysgenesis,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism), or novel pathogenic gene variants. It can be associated with anomalies of the underlying mesoderm, such as the absence or hypoplasia of the pectoralis muscles
seen in Poland syndrome (aplasia of the pectoralis muscles, rib
deformities, webbed fingers, and radial nerve aplasia) (Fig. 588.2).
Amastia or hypomastia can also be iatrogenic, resulting from injuries sustained during thoracotomy, chest tube placement, radiotherapy, severe burns, or incisional/excisional procedures on the
breast bud. Surgical correction is individualized to the patient and
the etiology. Athelia, the absence of a nipple either unilaterally or
bilaterally, is rare and can be familial. It is also associated with exposure to endogenous androgens during pregnancy.

Polymastia and Polythelia

Accessory breast tissue (polymastia) or accessory nipples (polythelia) occur in approximately 1–6% of the population (Fig. 588.3).
The abnormally placed tissue can be seen anywhere along the mammary ridges (“milk lines”) as a result of incomplete involution but
is usually noted on the chest, axilla, or just inferior to the normally
positioned breast. Polythelia has been reported in association with
congenital malformations, particularly renal anomalies; it is therefore reasonable to perform a genitourinary ultrasound in an infant
with supernumerary nipples. Surgical excision of the accessory
breast or nipple is usually performed for pain (mastodynia), nipple
discharge, or cosmesis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3330 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Breast Hypoplasia and Asymmetry

Breast hypoplasia varies in degree from a near-­total absence of breast
tissue to well-­formed breasts that are considered by the patient to be
too small. Poor or absent breast development may simply be a delay in
the development of normal secondary sex characteristics; the breasts
develop slowly but are normal in all other respects. Family history
may reveal other family members with a similar pattern. Other causes
include ovarian dysfunction, hypothyroidism, eating disorders, chest
wall irradiation, or surgery. Hypoplastic breast tissue can also be associated with a tuberous breast anomaly. Tuberous breasts are characterized by hypoplasia, a narrow breast base, and the appearance of
herniation of the glandular tissue through enlarged areolae (Fig. 588.4).
More commonly, patients complain of breast asymmetry. Some
degree of breast asymmetry is normal; it may be more pronounced
during puberty while the breasts are developing. In asymmetry, the
goals of evaluation are twofold. First, it is essential to exclude a neoplasm as the cause of the larger breast. Other etiologies may include a
solitary large fibroadenoma, multiple fibroadenomas, or a parenchymal abscess. Alternatively, the possibility of tuberous breast development or Poland syndrome should be considered when evaluating the
smaller side. Treatment depends on the underlying cause. Patients with
mild asymmetry and no other associated pathology should be reassured. If a child has marked breast asymmetry, they may be initially
offered cosmetic options, such as use of bra inserts or prostheses for the
underdeveloped breast. Surgical correction may be pursued after breast
development is complete. The American Society of Plastic Surgeons
generally recommends that uncommon chest deformities or congenital
breast asymmetry are the only cases in which a board-­certified plastic surgeon should deem breast augmentation appropriate for a teenager. It is important that patients undergoing surgery have a realistic
understanding of the potential results as well as the possible need for
additional surgery. Saline-­filled implants are the only type of implant
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for females <22
years; saline-­filled implants typically have a life span of about 10 years.

regarding indications and timing of surgical intervention and referral
should be provided. Assessment of the adolescent’s physical and emotional maturity level must be performed, as well as screening for body
dysmorphic disorder.
Juvenile hypertrophy, or spontaneous massive growth of one or
both breasts, is rare and should be distinguished from simple adolescent macromastia. This rapid growth of breast tissue may occur
any time after thelarche but more commonly occurs abruptly over a
several month period, after a preceding sustained period of normal
breast development. Circulating estradiol levels are normal. Juvenile
hypertrophy can cause extreme mastalgia, skin hyperemia or necrosis,
and even damage to normal breast parenchyma due to compromised
vascular supply. It can be unilateral or bilateral (Fig. 588.5). The etiology has not been elucidated; therefore treatment options include both
pharmacologic and surgical interventions. The key to management is
prompt recognition and intervention before the development of complications. Reduction mammoplasty is often the treatment of choice,
with pharmacologic treatment (e.g., tamoxifen) or even mastectomy
reserved for recurrence following surgery.

Infections

Mastitis is the most common infection of the breast and can occur any
time from the neonatal period through adolescence and into adulthood.
Neonatal mastitis is an infection that usually occurs in the first 2 months
after delivery in term or near-­term infants. Breast infections in adolescents occur most commonly with lactation. Adolescents can also develop
nonlactational mastitis or a breast abscess as a result of irritation of
the skin (e.g., acne lesions of the chest, shaving, or nipple stimulation),
trauma, a foreign body (e.g., piercing), or ductal abnormality (such as
ductal ectasia). Staphylococcus aureus is the cause of nearly all breast
infections, but anaerobic bacilli (Bacteroides) may also be involved in the
adolescent population. Methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA) coverage should be considered in communities where the prevalence is high,

Macromastia

Adolescents may develop very large breasts (macromastia), leading
to both physical and psychologic symptoms. Common complaints
include back pain, postural kyphosis, breast pain, intertrigo, limitation
of physical activities, unwanted negative attention, diminished self-­
esteem, and eating disordered behaviors. Strong emotional support
should be provided because macromastia can affect an adolescent’s
self-­esteem at a vulnerable time in their psychologic development. The
differential diagnosis for macromastia includes obesity, pregnancy,
fibrocystic disease, end organ hormonal hypersensitivity, or lesions
described in the previous paragraphs. Options for treatment of simple
macromastia include surgical and nonsurgical interventions. Bras that
provide maximal support can help correct symptoms. Alternatively,
breast reduction mammoplasty may be desired. When adolescents
are seeking breast surgery, ACOG first recommends education and
reassurance regarding normal variations in anatomy, growth, and
development for the patient and her family. Nonsurgical alternatives
for comfort and appearance should be emphasized, and knowledge

Fig. 588.5 Juvenile hypertrophy in a 12-­year-­old female. (From Al-­
Saif AA, Al-­Yahya GM, Al-­Qattan MM. Juvenile mammary hypertrophy:
is reduction mammaplasty always feasible? J Plast Reconstr Aesthet
Surg. 2009;62:1470-­1472; Fig. 1.)

Fig. 588.4 Bilateral tuberous breast anomaly. (Adapted from Pacifico MD, Kang NV. The tuberous breast revisited. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg.
2007;60:455-­464; Fig. 5.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 588 u Breast Health 3331
especially for infants. Mastitis may be initially treated with warm compresses, analgesics, and oral antibiotics for 7-­10 days. Antibiotic options
include dicloxacillin, clindamycin, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, or
amoxicillin-­clavulanic acid. If symptoms fail to resolve after a course of
antibiotics, ultrasonography may reveal an abscess and can be used to
guide needle aspiration. Incision and drainage should be reserved for
failure of aspiration, and a periareolar incision is most cosmetic. Follow­up ultrasonography should be considered in adolescents to ensure that
there is no remaining parenchymal lesion (e.g., cyst).

as bromocriptine or cabergoline. Surgical intervention, usually transsphenoidal hypophysectomy, is rarely required.
Bloody discharge may be due to chronic nipple irritation (such as
from jogger’s nipple), ductal ectasia, phyllodes tumor, or intraductal
papilloma (a rare, benign proliferative tumor). Unless the etiology of
the bloody discharge is superficial (i.e., from obvious skin breakdown
related to jogger’s nipple), cytologic assessment of bloody discharge
should be performed. Breast ultrasound may also be obtained to determine whether a mass or cyst is present.

Trauma and Inflammation

Mastalgia

Nipple Discharge

Table 588.2

Breast trauma is common in adolescent girls participating in contact
sports. The trauma usually takes the form of contusion or hematoma and
can resolve spontaneously or may be associated with late cystic changes in
the breast, fat necrosis with calcium deposition over time, or fibrosis with
retraction of the skin or the nipple over the injured area. When diagnosed
with a hematoma, or when a palpable mass is present at the area of injury,
serial follow-­up by ultrasound is recommended until complete resolution. Persistent calcifications lasting more than 18 months after injury may
require additional investigation by advanced imaging or biopsy.
Nipple discharge must be carefully evaluated and characterized. Discharge
may be milky and white (galactorrhea), bloody, purulent, or serous
(Table 588.1). A careful history and physical examination will help the
practitioner determine the etiology. Examination of the discharge assists
in diagnosis. Infection is usually associated with a purulent discharge;
ductal ectasia (dilated subareolar ducts and periductal inflammation)
may present with sticky, green or brown, or serosanguineous discharge.
Discharge from the ducts of Montgomery (coming from the areola itself
rather than through the nipple) may appear clear or brownish.
Galactorrhea is a specific type of nipple discharge that appears milky
and is usually bilateral. Causes of galactorrhea are listed in Table 588.2.
Cytologic evaluation of milky nipple discharge is not recommended. Laboratory evaluation should include a pregnancy test, prolactin, estradiol,
and thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH); these measures are obtained
to rule out pregnancy, a pituitary prolactinoma, and/or the presence of
a thyroid abnormality. If the prolactin level is elevated, visual field studies and a brain MRI might reveal the presence of a pituitary adenoma
(see Chapter 598). Treatment is directed by results of the history, physical exam, and lab and imaging studies. Patients should be instructed
to avoid nipple stimulation and stop any offending drugs, if appropriate to do so. Hypothyroidism should be treated and prolactin-­releasing
tumors managed with appropriate medical or surgical care. Medical
treatment of galactorrhea consists primarily of dopamine agonists such
Table 588.1

Common Causes of Nipple Discharge

DISCHARGE CHARACTERISTICS
Milky (galactorrhea)

POTENTIAL ETIOLOGY
Pregnancy or postpartum
Medication use/drug use
Herbal supplements
Hypothyroidism
Prolactinoma
Chest wall trauma

Serous, serosanguineous

Ductal ectasia
Intraductal papilloma

Sticky

Ductal ectasia
Fibrocystic changes

Purulent

Mastitis
Abscess

Bloody

Intraductal papilloma
Phyllodes tumor
Ductal ectasia
Trauma (“jogger’s nipple”)

Episodic, clear to brown

Montgomery tubercles

Mastalgia, or breast tenderness, is common in reproductive-­age females.
Mastalgia may be due to exercise, medications, early pregnancy, or benign
breast changes (fibrocystic changes). Physiologic swelling and tenderness can occur on a cyclic basis, most commonly during the premenstrual
phase, and are secondary to hormonal stimulation and resulting proliferative changes. Hormonal imbalance can cause exaggerated responses in
the breast tissue, especially in the upper and outer quadrants. Evaluation
should include a pregnancy test and a breast examination. Nodularity,
Etiologies of Hyperprolactinemia

PITUITARY DISEASE
Prolactinomas
Acromegaly
Empty sella syndrome
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Cushing disease
HYPOTHALAMIC DISEASE
Craniopharyngiomas
Meningiomas
Dysgerminomas
Nonsecreting pituitary adenomas
Other tumors/metastatic disease
Sarcoidosis
Eosinophilic granuloma
Chiari-­Frommel syndrome
Encephalitis
Pituitary stalk section or compression
MEDICATIONS
Anesthetics, including cocaine
Opiates
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Phenothiazines
Benzodiazepines
Protease inhibitors
Prostaglandins
Tricyclic antidepressants
Atypical antipsychotics
α-­Methyldopa
Reserpine
Metoclopramide
Marijuana
Herbal supplements (fennel, anise, fenugreek)
NEUROGENIC DISORDERS
Chest wall lesions/surgery
Spinal cord lesions
Breast stimulation
OTHER CAUSES
Pregnancy, postpartum, and postabortion
Hypothyroidism
ROHHAD
Chronic renal failure
Cirrhosis
Stress
Idiopathic disorders
ROHHAD, rapid-onset obesity, hypothalamic dysregulation, hypoventilation, and
autonomic dysregulation.
Modified from Chanson P, Maiter D. Prolactinoma. In Melmed S (ed). The Pituitary. 4th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017; 467-­514.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3332 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
poorly localized tenderness, and soreness radiating to the axilla and arm
are usual accompanying findings. Treatments for mastalgia include utilization of a firm, supportive sports-­type bra, heat, and analgesics (oral or
topical). Low-­dose combined estrogen/progestin oral contraceptives often
improve the breast pain. A course of NSAIDs is also typically effective.
The effect of caffeine and chocolate on mastalgia is controversial, but if
pain is worsened with increased intake, they should be avoided. Evening
primrose oil, vitamin E, and chamomile extract are popular but unproven
treatments.

BREAST MASSES
Peripubertal Masses

Initial breast development at the onset of thelarche can be unilateral and
asymmetric, with the developing breast bud being mistaken for a “mass.”
Such asynchronous thelarche should be recognized to avoid unnecessary
biopsy and potential injury to the maturing breast. If there is any question
as to the etiology of the lump, ultrasound can be used to evaluate for a
mass.

Adolescent Breast Masses

The differential diagnosis for breast masses in the adolescent patient
is broad (Table 588.3). The patient should be questioned about variations associated with the menstrual cycle, associated symptoms such as
nipple discharge, recent trauma to the breast, family history of breast
masses or cancer, and personal history of chest radiation or malignancy. Physical examination should characterize the mass location,
size, and firmness and determine whether tenderness, skin changes,
nipple discharge, or lymphadenopathy is present. Because breast cancer in the adolescent is extremely rare (3.2 cases per million person-­
years for women <25 years), masses in this population can often be
expectantly managed for extended periods of time.
Fibroadenomas are the most common solid mass found in the
adolescent breast. Fibroadenomas are slow-­
growing, hormonal
dependent masses most often located in the upper, outer quadrant
of the breast. The average size at diagnosis is 2-­3 cm; 10–25% of
patients have multiple lesions. On examination, these lesions are
well circumscribed, rubbery, mobile, and not tender. Given the
slow-­growing nature and lack of malignant potential, conservative

Table 588.3

Breast Masses in the Adolescent Female

Developmental

Unilateral thelarche
Macromastia, simple
Juvenile hypertrophy or gigantomastia
Intramammary lymph node

Infectious

Mastitis
Abscess

Traumatic

Fat necrosis
Hematoma

Cystic

Fibrocystic change
Vascular malformation (hemangioma, lymphatic
malformation)
Galactocele

Benign tumors

Fibroadenoma (simple or juvenile/giant)
Lipoma
Hamartoma
Intraductal papilloma
Juvenile papillomatosis

Malignant
tumors

Cystosarcoma phyllodes
Breast carcinoma (secretory or ductal)
Metastatic disease (lymphoma, neuroblastoma,
sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, acute leukemia)

management is recommended for most patients. If expectant management is chosen, serial exams and/or ultrasounds every 6-­12
months may be done to prove lack of progression or rapid growth.
Fibroadenomas have defined sonographic characteristics; biopsy
is not required to make the diagnosis. A subset of fibroadenomas
behave differently and can be distinguished from their routine
counterparts by rapidity of growth and excisional biopsy alone.
Juvenile fibroadenomas (or giant fibroadenomas) grow rapidly
over 3-­6 months to >5 cm and can replace the breast tissue or cause
skin necrosis. The distinction between these and phyllodes tumor
on core needle biopsy is difficult, so excisional biopsy is the recommended intervention. The only true histologic difference between
juvenile and routine fibroadenomas is hypercellularity. Surgical
excision of fibroadenomas is recommended when a mass has complex ultrasonographic signs, is >5 cm or rapidly growing, or causes
anxiety to the patient or their family. The presence of five or more
fibroadenomas in an adolescent should prompt a genetic evaluation
for PTEN pathogenic variant.
Breast cysts are common, often arising from ductal ectasia, glands
of Montgomery, or lymphatic malformations. Ultrasound is used for
diagnosis and surveillance. Simple cysts are usually self-­limited. If a
simple cyst persists, it may be aspirated with a needle. Aspirated fluid
that is clear may be discarded. Bloody fluid and other aspirated material should be sent for cytologic examination. Cysts that resolve with
aspiration should be reevaluated in 3 months by ultrasound. If they
recur, biopsy or excision should be considered.

Malignant Masses

Phyllodes tumors are classified as sarcomas and are the most
common nonepithelial tumor of the breast. They are classified as
benign, borderline, or malignant based on histopathology and are
characterized by asymmetric breast enlargement in association with
a firm, mobile, circumscribed mass. The tumor often grows rapidly
and can become quite large, mimicking a giant or juvenile fibroadenoma. The majority of these tumors have a favorable prognosis,
but malignant phyllodes can recur locally or with metastases. Excision with 1 cm margins is the preferred initial therapy in adolescent
patients, regardless of the histologic classification of the lesion. Survival at 10 years approaches 90% after complete excision.
Juvenile papillomatosis is a rare proliferative tumor that often
presents as a discrete mass. It is a marker for increased breast cancer
risk in family members, and in patients with this condition, up to 15%
may have a juvenile secretory carcinoma. Treatment of juvenile papillomatosis is total resection of the lesion with preservation of the breast.
Family members of these patients should be screened.
Primary breast carcinoma is extremely rare in adolescents. Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data from 2015–
2019 established an age-­specific rate for female invasive breast
cancer of 0.1/100,000 for ages <20 years. Although malignancy is
rare, suspicion may be raised if a lesion is enlarging, hard, immobile, and poorly circumscribed. Biopsy of lesions with suspicious
imaging findings (e.g., irregular shape or microlobulated/spiculated
margins) or progressive growth is imperative. Contrary to adults
with primary ductal carcinoma, 10-­year survival is only slightly better than 50% in adolescents.
Rather than primary breast cancer, secondary cancers or metastatic
tumors are more prevalent. Adolescents with previous therapeutic radiation to the chest or with malignancies with the potential to metastasize
to the breast should be monitored more closely for breast masses. Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common to metastasize to the breast. Other
malignancies with risk of breast metastases include neuroblastoma, melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and Ewing sarcoma. Breast tumors also may
be the first manifestation of relapse (extramedullary) in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Those with previous radiation therapy have increased risk
of developing breast cancer at a young age and require careful ongoing
surveillance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 588 u Breast Health 3333
Palpable breast mass, age ≤ 18
Ultrasound

Low risk1

High risk1

Symptomatic2

Asymptomatic

Surgery

OR
Observation3

Needle biopsy4

+/–
Pain control

No growth
OR
Resolution

Rapid
growth5
OR
Persistent

Continue
observation

Indeterminate
OR
Phyllodes
tumor
OR
Malignant

Benign
findings

1

Risk stratification should be
based on personal and family
cancer history, as well as
provider’s clinical judgment.
2
Symptomatology include,
but not limited to, pain,
discharge, and/or anxiety.
3
Initial 3–6 month follow-up
with repeat ultrasound.
4
Fine needle aspiration and
core needle biopsy acceptable,
per provider and institutional
experience.
5
Doubling of size or > 2 cm
increase in largest diameter
in 3–6 month period.

Surgery

Fig. 588.6 Suggested clinical care algorithm for children presenting with a palpable breast mass. (From McLaughlin CM, Gonzalez-­Hernandez J,
Bennett M, Piper HG. Pediatric breast masses: An argument for observation. J Surg Res. 2018;228:247-­252; Fig 3.)

Imaging of Breast Masses

Ultrasonography is the imaging modality of choice for palpable
abnormalities in the pediatric and adolescent breast, given the diagnostic specificity and lack of ionizing radiation. MRI may be useful in
select disease processes, but its use should be guided by a surgeon or
oncologist. Because of the dense breast tissue in this patient population, there is no role for mammography.

MANAGEMENT OF BREAST MASSES

Figure 588.6 represents management algorithms for pediatric patients
undergoing imaging for an identified breast mass. Core needle biopsy
as a diagnostic tool is very sensitive but lacks specificity in distinguishing the hypercellular stroma of a juvenile fibroadenoma from a phyllodes tumor. Core needle biopsy should be recommended only for
indeterminate masses, and based on co-decision-making between the
patient, family, and clinician. Generally, observation and ultrasound
surveillance should be the initial management for masses under 4 cm
in size and excisional biopsy considered for those >4-­5 cm.

Recommendations for Daughters of Women with
Breast Cancer
Risk Reduction

There are a limited number of things that young people can do to lower
their risk of breast cancer. The American Cancer Society recommends

regular physical activity, limiting alcohol, eliminating cigarette smoking,
and maintaining a healthy weight. Some studies have shown that breastfeeding for at least 1 year may slightly lower the breast cancer risk.

Screening Procedures

Screening mammography and/or ultrasound are not currently recommended in adolescents, regardless of family history. Routine testing
of children and adolescents for the BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathogenic
variants in families with a known history is also not typically recommended, because there are no guidelines for additional screening or
treatment at this age, and children are very unlikely to develop a cancer
related to an inherited BRCA variant.
Even in high-­risk families, development of breast cancer below the
age of 18 years is extremely rare. The American Cancer Society recommends a breast-­screening regimen including mammography and
MRI beginning at age 30 years for females with a known BRCA pathogenic variant or history of chest radiation between the ages of 10 and
30 years. Patients with an identified familial predisposition for malignancy should be referred for genetic evaluation to determine whether
and/or when screening tests should occur. Any adolescent patient with
a known primary breast malignancy should also be referred to a geneticist to be screened for pathogenic variants such as Li-­Fraumeni (p53)
or Cowden syndrome (PTEN).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3334 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Chapter 589

Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome and Hirsutism
Heather G. Huddleston, Molly M. Quinn,
and Mark Gibson
POLYCYSTIC OVARY SYNDROME
Etiology and Definition

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common disorder of reproductive hormone function. The most widely accepted approach to
the diagnosis of PCOS in adult females is the Rotterdam criteria,
which require two out of three of the following features: oligomenorrhea, clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism, and ovaries with
a polycystic morphology on ultrasound examination (≥20 follicles
in one ovary and/or ovarian volume >10 mm3). Increased levels of
antimüllarian hormone may be a marker of ovarian dysfunction and
antral follicle count. Alternative criteria, such as the Androgen Excess
Society and National Institutes of Health, place a greater emphasis
on requiring hyperandrogenism be present (Table 589.1). The disorder, affecting 5–10% of females of reproductive age, depending on the
diagnostic criteria used, typically emerges in adolescence when a normal menstrual pattern is not established and there is clinical evidence
of androgen excess. Although not part of the diagnostic schemes,
PCOS is often accompanied by cardiovascular disease risk factors,
including insulin resistance, obesity, and dyslipidemia. Depression
and anxiety have also been found to be more prevalent in females
with PCOS.

Pathology, Pathogenesis, and Genetics

PCOS has a high concordance rate in twins, and in some studies either
epigenetic or dominant inheritance patterns are observed. Nonetheless, a consistent hereditary pattern has not been identified.
Gonadotropic dysregulation with increased luteinizing hormone
(LH) pulsatility and abnormally high ratios of circulating LH to
follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) are found in many patients with
PCOS. Increased ovarian production of androgen in response to LH
and impaired folliculogenesis owing to lower FSH are attributed to this
gonadotropic pattern (Fig. 589.1). An increased ratio of circulating levels of LH:FSH is not a diagnostic criterion for PCOS.
Alterations in activities of steroidogenic enzymes that would explain
ovarian androgenic hyperfunction are seen in PCOS subjects, but they
are not consistently present in all patients, and it is unclear whether
these alterations are a cause of PCOS or are a consequence of ovarian
dysregulation. The size of ovarian stromal cells responsible for androgen production is increased; surgery that reduces this ovarian component (ovarian wedge resection or laparoscopic ablative procedures)
reduces circulating androgen levels and often restores ovarian cyclicity.
Patients with hyperandrogenic congenital or adult-­onset adrenal hyperplasia exhibit PCOS-­like ovarian dysfunction that can be reversed by
reducing the adrenal-­derived androgens with glucocorticoid therapy. A

primary role for androgen excess in the pathophysiology of all instances
of PCOS seems unlikely; many patients have minimal hyperandrogenism, and elimination of androgen excess (with gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone agonists) does not affect associated insulin resistance.
Measures of insulin resistance are greater and more prevalent
among females with PCOS than controls even when accounting for
body mass index (BMI). Insulin enhances ovarian androgen production directly and contributes to elevation of free testosterone levels
through its suppression of hepatic production of sex steroid–binding
globulin. Treatment with insulin sensitivity–enhancing agents that can
reduce insulin levels is associated with modest reductions in measures
of androgen excess and, in some patients, restoration of regular ovulation. The association of insulin resistance with weight might explain
the appearance of features of PCOS among some females who gain
weight, as well as the resolution of PCOS among affected females who
lose weight.

Clinical Manifestations

PCOS, a lifelong disorder, commonly manifests as puberty progresses,
but its onset can occur later, in young adulthood. Clinical hallmarks
are menstrual abnormalities and manifestations of hyperandrogenism,
but the severity of the disorder is variable (Table 589.2). Ovulation is
typically irregular or absent, and menses are consequently irregular
or absent. When menstrual bleeding does occur, it may be anovulatory bleeding, which is often heavy and/or protracted, resulting from
an extended period of unopposed endometrial growth. Alternatively,
bleeding can be relatively normal in character as a consequence of a
preceding ovulation. Protracted spells of anovulation, with accompanying unopposed estrogen, are a risk factor for endometrial hyperplasia, and more severe premalignant and frankly malignant changes may
eventuate. Hyperandrogenism is most commonly manifest as hirsutism, which is graded by the extent and locations of excessive male pattern hair growth (Fig. 589.2).
Obesity is common among individuals with PCOS. In some patients,
the expression of features of PCOS is conditional on elevation of
BMI and is reversible with weight loss. However, there is a subset of
patients who present with a lean PCOS phenotype, and thus normal
or low weight should not preclude consideration of the PCOS diagnosis. PCOS is associated with an increased prevalence of insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes independent of the tendency for many
affected patients to have an elevated BMI. Additionally, PCOS confers
a substantial and specific increase in risk for metabolic syndrome
(hyperlipidemia, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes) in adults as well as
adolescent females after accounting for BMI.

Laboratory Findings, Diagnosis, and Differential
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of PCOS requires exclusion of disorders that would
otherwise account for hyperandrogenism and anovulation. Serum
17-­
hydroxyprogesterone should be measured when there is clear
androgen excess to screen for adult-­onset 21-­hydroxylase deficiency
(see Chapter 616). In the adolescent with amenorrhea but minimal
hyperandrogenic findings, consideration should be given to functional
hypothalamic suppression as a result of excessive exercise and/or dieting, and a careful history taken to rule out such behavioral patterns.
All patients should be clinically evaluated for Cushing syndrome, and
biochemical evaluation is indicated when clinical findings, including

Table 589.1  Diagnostic Criteria for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome in Adult Females*
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
CRITERIA
Oligoovulation or anovulation
and
Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism

ROTTERDAM CRITERIA**
Two of three of the following:

• Oligoovulation or anovulation
• Polycystic ovaries on ultrasonography (20 or more
follicles in a single ovary or ovarian volume
of > 10 mm3 in one ovary)
• Clinical and/or biochemical hyperandrogenism

ANDROGEN EXCESS SOCIETY
Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism
and at least one of the following:
• Polycystic ovaries
or
• Oligoovulation or anovulation

**In adolescents, diagnosis should be made when both hyperandrogenism and oligomenorrhea are present, with ultrasound criteria not required/recommended.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 589 u Polycystic Ovary Syndrome and Hirsutism
Adrenal gland

Altered sex steroid levels

IGFs
FSH Insulin

Hypothalamus

Abnormal GnRH
secretion

Insulin resistance
Insulin
Bioavailable E2
Bioavailable T
Bioavailable IGF-I

Ovary
LH
DHEAS

3335

Pituitary

T
A
A

A

Aromatase

17β-HSD

E1

SHBG
IGFBP-1

Skin

Adipose
tissue

LH

FSH

5α -red

17β-HSD
E2

DHT

Liver

Peripheral and target tissues

Fig. 589.1 Pathologic mechanisms in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). A deficient in vivo response of the ovarian follicle to physiologic quanti-

ties of follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH), possibly because of an impaired interaction between signaling pathways associated with FSH and insulin-­
like growth factors (IGFs) or insulin, may be an important defect responsible for anovulation in PCOS. Insulin resistance associated with increased
circulating and tissue levels of insulin and bioavailable estradiol (E2), testosterone (T), and IGF-­I gives rise to abnormal hormone production in a
number of tissues. Oversecretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and decreased output of FSH by the pituitary, decreased production of sex hormone–
binding globulin (SHBG) and IGF-­binding protein 1 (IGFBP-­1) in the liver, increased adrenal secretion of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS),
and increased ovarian secretion of androstenedione (A) all contribute to the feed-­forward cycle that maintains anovulation and androgen excess in
PCOS. Excessive amounts of E2 and T arise primarily from the conversion of A in peripheral and target tissues. T is converted to the potent steroids
estradiol or DHT (dihydrotestosterone). Reductive 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-­HSD) enzyme activity may be conferred by protein products of several genes with overlapping functions; 5α-­reductase (5α-­red) is encoded by at least two genes, and aromatase is encoded by a single
gene. GnRH, Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone. (From Bulun SE. Physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In Melmed S, Auchus
RJ, Goldfine AB, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020. Fig 17-­30.)

Table 589.2  Phenotypes for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome Based on 2003 Rotterdam Criteria
SIGNS, RISKS, AND
­ REVALENCE
P

SEVERE PCOS

HYPERANDROGENISM AND
CHRONIC ANOVULATION

OVULATORY PCOS

MILD PCOS

Periods

Irregular

Irregular

Normal

Irregular

Ovaries on ultrasonography

Polycystic

Normal

Polycystic

Polycystic

Androgen concentrations

High

High

High

Mildly raised

Insulin concentrations

Increased

Increased

Increased

Normal

Risks

Potential long term

Potential long term

Unknown

Unknown

Prevalence in affected females

61%

7%

16%

16%

PCOS, Polycystic ovary syndrome.
From Norman RJ, Dewailly D, Legro RS, Hickey TE. Polycystic ovary syndrome. Lancet. 2007;370(9588):685-­697.

hypertension and/or characteristic exam features, are suggestive (see
Chapter 619). The two disorders have in common a tendency for overweight and varying degrees of insulin resistance and androgen excess,
but they differ in that Cushing syndrome demonstrates muscle wasting
as a result of catabolism.
Evidence for androgen excess that is rapid in onset and/or severe,
especially if masculinizing, warrants measurement of androgens (total
testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEAS]) to exclude the possibility of an androgen-­secreting adrenal or ovarian tumor. The laboratory evaluation is completed with the exclusion of hyperprolactinemia,
premature ovarian failure, and thyroid disease as causes of anovulation
by measurement of prolactin, FSH, and thyroid-­stimulating hormone,
respectively.
The diagnosis of PCOS in reproductively mature females (at
8 years post menarche) is confirmed by the constellation of oligoovulation or anovulation, androgen excess (clinically or with

biochemical confirmation), and typical ovarian morphology on
ultrasound. Various experts weigh these three features differently
and do not, as a rule, require the presence of all (see Table 589.1).
Antimüllarian hormone levels are elevated in PCOS and may be
a marker for ovarian dysfunction and cyst formation. Other recommendations have clarified that ultrasound features need not
be assessed in adolescents, because normative values for ovarian
anatomy have not been established. Indeed, young females often
exhibit the multifollicular ovaries without any evidence of hyperandrogenism or oligomenorrhea, and not all patients with PCOS by
the criteria of hyperandrogenism and ovulatory disruption exhibit
ovarian changes typical of PCOS. Therefore in the adolescent, diagnosis should only be made when both oligomenorrhea and hyperandrogenism are present and other causes of these symptoms have been
ruled out. Findings of anovulatory cycles and hyperandrogenism,
particularly acne, may accompany the normal pubertal transition.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3336 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4
1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

Fig. 589.2 Gender-­neutral modified Ferriman-­Gallwey (mFG) diagram. (From Grimstad F, Moyer Q, Williams CR, Kremen J. A body-­neutral and
gender-­neutral modified Ferriman-­Gallwey diagram. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2021;S1083-­318800334-­X. Fig 2.)

For this reason, it is recommended that a formal PCOS diagnosis
not be considered until at least 2 years post menarche. Adolescents
with features of PCOS before this time can be considered “at risk”
for PCOS, and a plan can be made for reevaluation in the future.
Insulin resistance is common among females with PCOS, and
although not requisite for diagnosis, it should be considered when
PCOS is identified. Adults, as well as adolescents, with hyperandrogenemia and anovulation should be evaluated for diabetes or
impaired glucose tolerance with a 2-­hour (75-­g glucose load) glucose tolerance test.

Table 589.3  Lifelong Health Complications of Polycystic
Ovary Syndrome
PRENATAL OR
CHILDHOOD

POST­
MENOPAUSAL

Menstrual irregularity
Hirsutism
Acne
Infertility
Endometrial cancer
Miscarriage
Pregnancy complications

Delayed menopause

Obesity
Impaired glucose
tolerance
Insulin resistance
Dyslipidemia
Type 2 diabetes

Obesity
Impaired glucose
tolerance
Insulin resistance
Dyslipidemia
Type 2 diabetes

Sleep apnea
Fatty liver
Depression

Cardiovascular
disease risk factors

REPRODUCTIVE
Premature
adrenarche
Early menarche

Complications and Long-­Term Outlook

Management of the features of hyperandrogenism, assistance with fertility, prevention of endometrial cancer, and reduction in the likelihood
and severity of the common accompanying risk for the metabolic syndromes are long-­term tasks for the PCOS patient and their healthcare
providers (Table 589.3). Although there is a tendency for symptoms
to ameliorate as menopause approaches, PCOS usually requires management throughout the reproductive years. Young patients should
be counseled that modern fertility management allows most affected
females to have children without great difficulty, and they should also
know that the disorder does not confer reliable protection from unintended pregnancy. Endometrial cancer can develop as early as the third
decade in females with PCOS who are not managed with progestins or
ovulation induction; thus patients should understand the importance
of long-­term strategies for endometrial protection. Impaired glucose
tolerance, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic syndrome are more common
in females with PCOS compared to weight-­matched controls. Metabolic disturbance can manifest as early as adolescence, and the prevalence increases over time. Weight control through diet and lifestyle
measures, detection and management of impaired glucose tolerance
and diabetes, and management of abnormal lipids are targets for long-­
term management.

ADOLESCENCE,
REPRODUCTIVE YEARS

METABOLIC
Abnormal fetal
growth

OTHER

From Norman RJ, Dewailly D, Legro RS, Hickey TE. Polycystic ovary syndrome. Lancet.
2007;370(9588):685-­697.

Treatment

The management of PCOS is multifaceted and depends on the specific complaints of the patient. Primary goals include management of
menstrual abnormalities, treatment of symptoms of androgen excess,
and optimization of metabolic health. Weight loss through lifestyle

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 589 u Polycystic Ovary Syndrome and Hirsutism
change, use of hormonal contraceptive agents for menstrual regulation
as well as androgen suppression, antiandrogens as adjuncts for hirsutism treatment, and insulin-­sensitizing agents are common components
of treatment.

Lifestyle Changes

Comprehensive lifestyle programs for overweight and obese adults
with PCOS aimed at fitness and weight loss can yield restoration of
normal menstrual function in some patients. Lifestyle changes also
lead to a reduction in the free androgen index, reduction in measures
of insulin resistance, and improvement in serum lipids. Limited data
show similar benefits from such interventions for obese adolescents
with PCOS. Successful weight loss programs for adolescents with
PCOS using both psychologic and nutritional counseling may result in
improved menstrual function.

Hormonal Contraceptives

Combined (estrogen and progestin) hormonal contraceptive medications are considered first-­line therapy for patients not desiring fertility (see Chapter 160). Avoidance of hyperplastic endometrial states
resulting from unopposed estrogen and management of abnormal
uterine bleeding in anovulatory episodes can be accomplished with
the use of combined hormonal contraceptives. The progestational
component inhibits endometrial proliferation, and the schedule of
pill administration predictably regulates menstrual bleeding. The
estrogenic component of the combined oral contraceptive elevates
circulating sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG), which reduces
free and bioavailable testosterone levels. Both of the hormonal elements in oral contraceptives combine to suppress gonadotropic (particularly LH) stimulation of ovarian androgen production. DHEAS
levels, often contributory to hyperandrogenemia in PCOS, are usually decreased by combined contraceptive use. Products with less
androgenic progestational components (drospirenone, desogestrel)
may provide better relief from androgenic symptoms.
Using hormonal contraception that is well tolerated in long-­term use
is more important than using a product with a particular progestational
component. Products with reduced frequency and duration of pill-­free
intervals can provide superior androgen suppression and a welcome
decrease in the frequency of bleeding episodes. Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate for contraception, endometrial protection, and androgen suppression may be a suitable alternative to combined hormonal
contraceptives; it provides even more profound suppression of ovarian androgen production, but it does not elevate SHBG. Low-­dose
progestin-­only regimens (oral minipills, implantable progestational
contraceptives, and progestin-­releasing intrauterine devices) also provide effective endometrial protection but would be expected to provide
only partial and/or inconsistent androgen suppression and would not
elevate SHBG.
Patients without the need for management of hyperandrogenic
symptoms or contraception are often treated with periodic use of oral
progestins to induce predictable menstrual bleeding and prevent endometrial hyperplasia and malignancy. Twelve-­day courses of medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg daily or norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily
are effective and safe for this purpose when taken every 1-­2 months.
Oral contraceptives also provide the added benefit of contraception. Given the relative infrequency of ovulation, fertility in females
with PCOS would be expected to be reduced relative to that of their
peers, but they are still at risk for pregnancy and should be counseled
accordingly.

Metformin

Metformin is a biguanide medication used to treat type 2 diabetes,
which is its only FDA-­approved indication. It has been used in a variety of settings and with differing objectives for patients with PCOS.
Metformin exerts its principal effect by reducing hepatic production
of glucose and limiting intestinal absorption of glucose. A subset of
females with PCOS resume regular ovulation and menses when treated

3337

with metformin, obviating the need for progestational therapy to protect endometrial health or medications to induce ovulation. For some
patients, the resulting normal reproductive function is appealing
regardless of interest in fertility.
Metformin reduces insulin resistance and the levels of androgens. Its extended use can reduce the likelihood of development
of impaired glucose tolerance or the progression of impaired glucose tolerance to type 2 diabetes; these effects are not yet proven
for patients with PCOS. It should not be used in the presence of
renal or hepatic impairment. Typical dosing is 1,500-­2,000 mg/
day, achieved through gradual increments because gastrointestinal
intolerance is common. Long-­acting preparations are helpful when
gastrointestinal intolerance is a problem. The use of metformin in
the treatment of PCOS depends on the patient’s goals and preference. For the treatment of hyperandrogenic symptoms, metformin effects may be modest compared with other available agents.
There are no empirical data supporting the theoretical benefits of
long-­term use of metformin in adolescents with PCOS and obesity
compared with the outcomes achieved with weight loss and oral
contraceptive medications. Use of metformin as a first-­line agent
is favored by some experts, in part for improvement in serum measures of intermediate outcomes, and in part because of evidence
in other populations of reduced progression of insulin resistance.
There is no evidence for a long-­term benefit for clinical outcomes
of adding metformin to treatment for patients managed primarily
with oral contraceptives. For adolescents receiving metformin as a
first-­line medication, some element of progestational management
(combined contraceptives or periodic progestins) will still be necessary for those not resuming ovulatory function, and oral contraceptives may still be an important adjunct for management of clinical
hyperandrogenism and/or contraception. Metformin side effects
include nausea, emesis, and diarrhea; more serious effects include
lactic acidosis and vitamin B12 deficiency. Glucagon-like peptide
receptor agonists are being studied as a possible add on therapy to
metformin or as a single agent to treat PCOS.

Antiandrogens

Antiandrogenic medications may be added to other therapies or
used alone for the treatment of hirsutism. These agents are usually used adjunctively with ovarian hormonal suppression, in part
because of better reduction in hirsutism when antiandrogens are
combined with ovarian suppression but also to reduce the risk of
unintended embryonic or fetal exposure. The highly active androgen antagonist and progestin, cyproterone, is available in Europe
and in Canada as a single agent for treatment of hirsutism or in
combination with ethinyl estradiol as an oral contraceptive with
enhanced antiandrogenic profile. In the United States, spironolactone is the most commonly used antiandrogen. Spironolactone
antagonizes androgens at their receptor and also impairs androgen
synthesis. Doses of 100-­200 mg daily are commonly used. Other
agents that have been studied are finasteride, a 5α-­reductase inhibitor, and flutamide, a nonsteroidal and highly specific androgen
receptor antagonist. These are rarely used because of lack of evidence of superior effectiveness, cost, and, in the case of flutamide,
the potential for hepatotoxicity.

HIRSUTISM

Hirsutism is defined as abnormally increased terminal (mature, heavy,
dark) hair growth in areas of the body where hair growth is normally
androgen dependent (see Chapter 703). Its presence is a result of the
combination of the extent of androgenic stimulation and familial
regional follicle sensitivity to androgens, which varies considerably
among ethnic groups. Patients’ cosmetic concerns generally determine
whether findings of hirsutism are a matter for clinical investigation
and treatment. Hirsutism as an isolated finding is to be distinguished
from masculinization. The latter includes alteration in muscle mass,
clitoral enlargement, and voice change, generally manifesting as a rapid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3338 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Table 589.4  Treatment of Hirsutism
SYSTEMIC THERAPIES
Suppression of androgen production
Combined oral contraceptives (ethinyl estradiol + progestin with
low androgenic activity)
Androgen blockers
Spironolactone
Finasteride
Flutamide
Cyproterone acetate (not available in the United States)
COSMETIC STRATEGIES
Temporary measures
Shaving, bleaching, chemical depilation
Permanent measures
Electrolysis
Laser therapy

Chapter 590

Gynecologic Neoplasms
and Prevention Methods
for Human Papillomavirus
Infections in Adolescents
Joan R. Tymon-­Rosario, Levent Mutlu, and
Alla Vash-­Margita
OVERVIEW OF GYNECOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES IN
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS

evolution (over months). Masculinization mandates a search for a neoplastic source of androgen. Elevations of testosterone or DHEAS commonly indicate an ovarian or adrenal androgen source, respectively;
specific imaging and occasionally selective catheterization studies are
indicated (see Chapters 590 and 617).
Hirsutism without masculinization is common. The potential
causes to consider are PCOS (when there is hyperandrogenism
and anovulation), benign functional androgen excess (measurable hyperandrogenism without anovulation), idiopathic hirsutism
(increased hair in androgen-­dependent areas without measurable
androgen excess), and adult-­onset adrenal hyperplasia. Patients can
be primarily distinguished by evidence of an ovulatory disorder by
menstrual history, and for those with absent or irregular menses, a
diagnosis of PCOS can be made. The remainder, for whom adult-­
onset adrenal hyperplasia and PCOS have been excluded, either
have normal androgen levels with enhanced end-­organ sensitivity
owing to familial or ethnic predisposition or have a functional and
benign overproduction of ovarian androgens. Measures of androgens (testosterone, DHEAS) may be normal or mildly elevated in
the latter group. Testosterone suppresses circulating sex-­steroid
binding globulin, so states of testosterone overproduction might
not be accompanied by elevated measures of total testosterone,
although estimates of “free” or “bioavailable” testosterone reveal
hyperandrogenism. Measures of unbound testosterone distinguish
idiopathic hirsutism from mild benign hyperandrogenic states;
making this distinction contributes little to patient management
and adds cost. Idiopathic hirsutism (without evidence of androgen
excess) usually responds to antiandrogen or androgen suppression
therapy similarly to hirsutism associated with elevated androgens
and anovulation (PCOS) and benign hyperandrogenism not associated with PCOS.
If hirsutism is present, and clinical evaluation excludes neoplasm, adult-­onset adrenal hyperplasia, and Cushing syndrome,
then management for symptoms of hyperandrogenism (regardless of whether measures of circulating androgens are elevated or
not) can proceed as for patients with PCOS (Table 589.4). Estrogen and progestin suppression of ovarian function, with or without added antiandrogen treatment, is the mainstay of therapy for
these patients. Androgen suppression and/or antagonism results
in gradual regression of the size and productivity of follicles in
androgen-­s ensitive areas of the face and body, and these changes
will evolve over successive and months-­long generations of hair
growth and shedding. Patients should therefore be advised that
the effects of medical therapy accrue slowly, over many months.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Cancer is the second most common cause of death in children and adolescents, surpassed only by childhood injuries. The highest death rate is
in the 5-­to 14-­year-­old age group. Although rare, gynecologic malignancies can result in long-­term sequelae such as infertility, depression,
and a poor self-­image, which may cause significant morbidity.
In children and adolescents younger than 18 years, ovarian cancer
accounts for 87.5% of gynecologic malignancies, vaginal cancer for
4.5%, cervical cancer for 3.9%, uterine cancer for 2.5%, and vulvar cancer comprises 1.6% of all gynecologic cancers.
Ovarian cancers usually manifest as an abdominal or pelvic mass
with acute or chronic lower abdominal pain and/or menstrual irregularities. The diagnostic workup includes a physical exam and laboratory tests such as a urine pregnancy test, hormone levels, and tumor
markers. The preferred initial method of imaging is transabdominal
pelvic ultrasonography. The differential diagnosis includes gynecologic
tumors, other abdominal and pelvic organ-­based tumors, and functional, physiologic, inflammatory/infectious, or pregnancy-­
related
ovarian pathology. Although the majority of ovarian neoplasms are
benign, approximately 9–33% of all pediatric or adolescent ovarian
neoplasms are malignant. Ovarian neoplasms constitute 1.3% of all
childhood malignancies but account for 60–70% of all gynecologic
malignancies in this age group. Germ cell tumors are the most common type of neoplasm. Less often, the vagina or cervix is a site of
malignant lesions in children, with a few specific tumors having their
greatest incidence in this population. Vulvar and endometrial malignancies in children and adolescents are exceedingly rare.

IMPACT OF CANCER THERAPY ON FERTILITY

The treatment of gynecologic cancer, depending on the type and extent
of disease, may include fertility-­sparing cytoreductive surgery with
adjuvant chemotherapy, definitive surgery including bilateral salpingo-­
oophorectomy, and comprehensive surgical staging, radiation, and/
or secondary salvage surgery. Fertility-­sparing surgery is defined as
unilateral salpingo-­oophorectomy, lymph node sampling, and omentectomy, whereas maximal cytoreduction includes hysterectomy and
contralateral salpingo-­oophorectomy. For malignant ovarian germ cell
tumors, the most common adolescent gynecologic malignancy, the use
of fertility-­sparing surgery, is seen as the gold standard. This approach
achieves a good prognosis, and the majority of patients achieve normal hormonal function and future pregnancies. Importantly, it does
not seem to be associated with lower progression-­free survival, overall
survival, or mortality rates compared with radical surgery.
Platinum-­based chemotherapeutic regimens are most often used for
malignant ovarian tumors. The need for chemotherapy and radiation
therapy is associated with acute ovarian failure, premature menopause,
and infertility (Table 590.1). Risk factors include older age, abdominal or spinal radiation, and certain chemotherapeutic drugs, such as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

3339

Table 590.1  	 Effect of Cancer Treatment on the Development of Amenorrhea
TREATMENT

AGENT/MODALITY

IMPACT

TREATMENT FOR

Protocols containing nonalkylating agents or lower levels of
alkylating agents

ABVD, CHOP, COP, multiagent
therapies for leukemia

LOWER RISK
<20% of women develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Leukemia

Protocols containing

Multiagent therapies using vincristine

VERY LOW/NO RISK
No effect on menses

Leukemia
Lymphomas

Protocols containing

Procarbazine
MOPP and BEACOPP
3 cycles >6 cycles

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Hodgkin lymphoma

Protocols containing

Temozolomide or BCNU + cranial
radiation

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Brain tumor

Abdominal or pelvic radiation

10-­15 Gy in prepubertal females
5-­10 Gy in postpubertal females

INTERMEDIATE RISK
30–70% of women develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Brain tumor
Neuroblastoma
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma
Spinal tumor
Wilms tumor

Whole abdominal or pelvic
radiation

>15 Gy in prepubertal females
>10 Gy in postpubertal females
>6 Gy in adult women

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Total cyclophosphamide

5 g/m2 in women >30 yr
7.5 g/m2 in women and females <20
yr

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Any alkylating agent + pelvic
radiation

Busulfan, carmustine,
cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide,
lomustine, melphalan, procarbazine

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Ovarian cancer
Sarcoma

Any alkylating agent + total
body irradiation

Busulfan, carmustine, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, lomustine,
melphalan, procarbazine

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Lymphomas
Myelomas
Choriocarcinoma
Ewing sarcoma, neuroblastoma

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Acute myeloid leukemia
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Myeloma
Acute lymphoid lymphoma
Chronic lymphoid lymphoma
Some solid tumors (e.g., breast,
ovarian, kidney, brain)

Any cancer requiring bone
marrow transplant/stem cell
transplant

ABVD, Doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine; CHOP, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone; COP, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone; MOPP,
mechlorethamine, vincristine, prednisone, procarbazine; BEACOPP, bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, prednisone; BCNU, carmustine; Gy, gray.
Adapted from Female Fertility Preservation LIVESTRONG, a registered trademark of the LIVESTRONG Foundation. https://www.livestrong.org/we-­can-­help/just-­diagnosed/female-­
fertility-­preservation.

alkylating and platinum-­based agents (cisplatin, cyclophosphamide,
busulfan). Uterine irradiation is associated with infertility, spontaneous pregnancy loss, and intrauterine growth restriction. The vagina,
bladder, ureters, urethra, and rectum can also be injured by radiation.
Vaginal shortening, vaginal stenosis, urinary tract fistulas, and diarrhea are potential side effects of pelvic irradiation.
Advancements in oncologic treatments of gynecologic and systemic
tumors have led to improvements in childhood cancer survival rates.
Unfortunately, with these advances come an increase in short-­and
long-­term adverse effects, which include gonadotoxicity and infertility. Approximately 15% of all childhood cancer survivors experience
infertility, and pregnancy outcomes appear to be influenced by prior
chemotherapy and radiation treatment (see Chapter 543). Cancer survivors have an increased rate of spontaneous abortion, premature delivery, and low birthweight infants compared with their healthy siblings.
No data support an increased incidence of congenital malformations in

offspring. Individualized risk of infertility should be discussed before
gonadotoxic therapies and options for fertility preservation should be
made available to all patients, with referrals to reproductive specialists
and mental health professionals as appropriate. Multiple recommendations specifically address the pediatric population, stating that parents/
guardians should be allowed to act for and consent in the interest of
their minor children.
Mature oocyte and embryo cryopreservation are both standard of
care preservation options available to postpubertal females with ample
time before treatment to allow for ovarian stimulation (2-­6 weeks).
Ovarian tissue cryopreservation (OTC) is the only available option for
prepubertal females. OTC is also an option for fertility preservation
for postpubertal females with time-­limiting treatment plans. The safety
and feasibility of OTC and transplantation after nonsterilizing chemotherapy and in select leukemia survivors have been favorable, and there
have been over 130 live births reported after orthotopic transplantation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3340 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
of previously cryopreserved and thawed ovarian tissue as of 2017. Laparoscopic ovarian transposition can be used before radiation therapy
where a high risk of ovarian radiation exposure in its anatomic position is expected. Hormone suppression with gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone (GnRH) analogs has been investigated as a means of fertility
preservation, but evidence is lacking as to its efficacy.
Gonadotoxicity can also lead to primary ovarian insufficiency,
which is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular complications, osteoporosis, and difficulties with sexual function. Risks
and benefits of hormone replacement therapy should be addressed
as appropriate.

A

NEONATAL AND PEDIATRIC OVARIAN CYSTS

Normal follicles or physiologic ovarian cysts can be seen by ultrasound examination of the ovaries in healthy neonates, infants,
and prepubertal females. The true incidence of neonatal cysts is
unknown, but most are physiologic. Ovarian cysts are often detected
during prenatal imaging and should be differentiated from masses
originating from the urinary or gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Ovarian
cysts that are less than 2 cm, sonolucent, and have a simple appearance on ultrasound are most likely physiologic. Simple neonatal
ovarian cysts will resolve spontaneously and should be followed with
observation. Larger cysts may be seen; in these cases, the interval to
complete resolution is usually longer. Because of the risk of ovarian torsion and resultant autoamputation of the ovary, treatment
modalities have been developed to prevent ovarian torsion, including
ultrasound-­guided aspiration, laparoscopic cystectomy, and detorsion, with the goal of ovarian preservation. Oophorectomy should
be avoided. Treatment is usually reserved for the postnatal period
unless the cyst is large enough to prevent embryonic development.
Similarly, intervention might be necessary if the cyst is large enough
to complicate delivery or if there is concern for compromise of the
other organs because of the mass effect. If a conservative approach is
chosen, serial ultrasonographic evaluation is reasonable until resolution in the prenatal and neonatal period. In the neonatal period,
aspiration is an option for cysts that are larger than 6 cm and persistent over 4 months. Surgical exploration is generally reserved for
complex, symptomatic, or enlarging cysts, with a great deal of effort
exerted to preserve the surrounding normal ovary.
In prepubertal children, ovarian cysts are rare and, if present, usually asymptomatic and hormonally inactive. However, a careful exam
is indicated because prepubertal ovarian cysts may be associated with
peripheral precocious puberty. If symptomatic, cysts might present as
an abdomino-­pelvic mass resulting in pain, constipation, or urinary
frequency. In adolescents, ovarian cysts are common and usually represent normal follicular development.
Cysts that are simple appearing, without septations or internal
echogenicity, and less than 10 cm on transabdominal ultrasound are
almost always benign, and observation is preferred (Fig. 590.1). Careful counseling and patient education should be provided for early recognition of complications related to ovarian cysts, such as cyst rupture
and ovarian torsion. Unless associated with intractable symptoms or
intraabdominal bleeding because of cyst rupture, cysts can be managed
conservatively. Large ovarian cysts pose a risk of ovarian torsion. Ovarian torsion is a surgical emergency and can happen with ovarian cysts
of any size, although the risk increases in adnexal masses larger than
5 cm. Rarely, torsion of the adnexa can occur without presence of an
ovarian cyst, which is more common in prepubertal patients.

Functional Cysts

Over the course of several menstrual cycles, a dominant follicle forms
and increases in size. After ovulation, the dominant follicle becomes
a corpus luteum that, if it bleeds, is termed a hemorrhagic corpus
luteum. These can become symptomatic owing to size or peritoneal
irritation, and they have a characteristic complex appearance on
ultrasound. Expectant and symptomatic management for a presumed
functional or hemorrhagic cyst is appropriate. Physiologic cysts are
usually ≤5 cm and resolve over the course of 6-­8 weeks or several menstrual cycles without the need for any intervention. Monophasic oral

B
Fig. 590.1 Ovarian cyst. 14-­yr-­old female with pelvic pain. A, Trans-

verse and sagittal images from a transabdominal pelvic ultrasound
demonstrate a well-­circumscribed cystic lesion in the right adnexa with
a fluid–debris level (arrows). B, Follow-­up imaging 6 weeks later demonstrates complete resolution of the cyst. (From Walters MM, Robertson
RL. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2017:186; Fig. 6.70.)

contraceptives can be used to suppress future follicular development
and prevent formation of additional cysts. When a cyst is found on
ultrasound, a pregnancy test should be obtained because an adnexal
mass on imaging could represent either a corpus luteum cyst that physiologically supports a normal pregnancy or an abnormal pregnancy
state such as an ectopic pregnancy in the adnexa.

OVARIAN NEOPLASMS
Teratomas

Ovarian teratomas are the most common pediatric ovarian neoplasm
and account for 25% of all pediatric teratomas. Aberrant migration and
differentiation of primordial germ cells from the yolk sac to the gonadal
ridge during embryogenesis is considered to be the embryologic origin
of teratomas. Ovarian teratomas are usually asymptomatic but may
become quite large and present with abdomino-­pelvic pain and a palpable mass; ovarian torsion may be the initial presenting symptom.
Ovarian teratomas are usually unilateral, but about 10% of cases are
bilateral. Mature cystic teratomas (dermoid cysts) account for more
than 95% of all teratomas. Depending on the germ layers, teratomas
can be polydermal or monodermal and may contain mature tissue of
ectodermal (skin, hair, sebaceous glands, neuroectodermal tissue),
mesodermal (muscle, bone, cartilage, fat, teeth), and/or endodermal
(thyroid, salivary, respiratory, GI) origin (Fig. 590.2). Mature teratomas are usually benign; malignant transformation is reported in less
than 2% of the cases. Although any of the components of the mature
teratoma can undergo malignant transformation, the most common
secondary neoplasm arising from mature teratoma is squamous cell
carcinoma. Teratomas have a characteristic sonographic appearance
that includes findings such as fluid-­fluid levels, Rokitansky nodules (a
solid protuberance projecting from an ovarian cyst), echogenic sebaceous material, calcification, and hyperechoic regions. On abdominal
radiograph, calcification is often a hallmark for teratomas. Ultrasound
has a high sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing dermoid cysts with
excellent diagnostic accuracy. Monodermal teratomas are rare and
contain elements originating from a single germ cell layer. Struma
ovarii is a monodermal teratoma that is composed of mature thyroid
tissue that may result in clinically overt hyperthyroidism. Ovarian carcinoid tumors are another example of a monodermal teratoma. These
rare tumors are generally associated with a mature teratoma but can
be encountered in a pure form as a monodermal teratoma in a minority of cases. Approximately 30% of the time, clinical signs of carcinoid
syndrome such as diarrhea, flushing, abdominal pain, and wheezing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

3341

include collection of ascites and pelvic washings, examination of peritoneal surfaces with biopsy and excision of any nodules, examination
of lymph nodes with sampling of any firm/enlarged lymph nodes,
inspection/palpation of omentum with biopsy of any abnormal areas,
and unilateral oophorectomy with preservation of the fallopian tube if
uninvolved. It should be emphasized that grossly normal lymph nodes
on palpation and normal appearing omentum may not need to be routinely removed. Stage I and grade 1 ITs can be managed with serial
monitoring of associated tumor markers and pelvic imaging after initial fertility-­sparing surgery. Grade 2-­3 or stage II-­IV IT are typically
treated with systemic treatment in the form of the BEP chemotherapy
regimen (bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin).

Cystadenomas

Fig. 590.2 Mature teratoma. 12-­yr-­old female with increasing ab-

dominal girth. Transabdominal pelvic ultrasound image demonstrates a
large pelvic mass with cystic and solid components. There is a rounded
echogenic area in the center of the large, hypoechoic cystic portion. A
central dense echogenic focus (yellow arrow) demonstrates posterior
acoustic shadowing, consistent with calcification. Tiny linear echogenic
foci (white arrow) are also associated with the central echogenic mass,
representing hair. This constellation of findings is seen with a mature
teratoma or dermoid cyst. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL. Pediatric
Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017: 187;
Fig. 6.71.)

may be present because of vasoactive amines secreted by the carcinoid
tumors.
Benign teratomas can be observed if they are asymptomatic and
small (<5 cm). However, when they are large or symptomatic, they
should be surgically resected to prevent torsion or rupture, with preservation of the surrounding healthy ovarian parenchyma. Cystectomy is the treatment of choice, and minimally invasive techniques
are increasingly used. Rupture of the cyst should be avoided as much
as possible because of concerns for chemical peritonitis secondary to
fatty acids of a teratoma and the rare risk of inadvertent upstaging of
an occult carcinoma. During surgery, both ovaries should be evaluated for lesions. Intraoperative concern for a malignant lesion should
prompt an evaluation of both the gross specimen and frozen section by
pathology because malignant transformation of mature teratomas can
occasionally occur.
An immature teratoma (IT) of the ovary is an uncommon tumor,
accounting for <1% of ovarian teratomas. In contrast to the mature cystic teratoma, which is encountered most often during the reproductive
years but occurs at all ages, IT has a specific age incidence, occurring
most commonly in the first 2 decades of life. IT contain cells originating from three germ cell layers, but in contrast to mature teratomas,
these elements have varying degrees of maturation. IT are histologically separated into three categories based on the proportion of the
immature neural elements. Grade 3 IT have the highest percentage of
immature neural elements, which correlates with the greatest risk of
extraovarian spread. The presence of a yolk sac component also confers
a higher risk of extraovarian spread. Clinically, IT present similarly to
mature teratomas with pelvic pain or a mass. There is an association of
dermoid tumors with neural elements and anti–N-­methyl-­d-­aspartase
receptor (anti-­NMDAR) encephalitis. Patients may present with flu-­
like symptoms and progress to psychiatric and cognitive symptoms,
autonomic instability, and seizure activity (see Chapter 638). The sonographic appearance of IT is nonspecific but is typically a heterogenous,
partially solid mass with coarse calcifications.
Although the data are scant in the pediatric population, the stage
and grade of the IT ultimately determines the treatment approach. Surgical staging for germ cell tumors in the pediatric population may differ from the adult population, and surgical staging in pediatric patients

Serous, mucinous, and mixed serous/endometrioid or mucinous/
endometrioid cystadenomas are the second most common benign
ovarian tumor in adolescents, representing 10–28% of adolescent
tumors (Fig. 590.3). These tumors are usually thin walled, cystic,
and may be associated with mild elevation of tumor markers such
as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA-­125, and CA 19-­9, but high
levels of these markers should raise suspicion for malignancy. These
cystic lesions can become very large, yet, with care, these tumors can
be resected, preserving normal ovarian tissue for future reproductive
potential. Recurrence rates may be as high as 9%, and thus patients
and providers may choose to continue surveillance postoperatively
with pelvic ultrasound.

Endometriomas

Endometriosis is a syndrome defined by the presence of ectopic
endometrial tissue usually located within the pelvis and abdomen but
outside of the uterus. The principal clinical symptoms in adolescents
consist of severe menstrual pain and pelvic pain but may also include
abnormal uterine bleeding and GI, genitourinary, or constitutional
symptoms. Diagnosis is often delayed, and a high clinical suspicion
should be maintained. Although endometriosis has a variable presentation, it is associated with endometriomas in approximately 17–44% of
adolescent cases; they may be unilateral or bilateral. Endometriomas
(chocolate cysts) form when collections of old blood and hemosiderin deposit within an endometrium-­lined cyst within or on the ovary.
They have a typical homogeneous “ground glass” echogenic appearance
on ultrasound and are more common in adults than in adolescents.
Conservative management (suppressive therapy with ovulation suppression, nonsteroidal anti­inflammatory drugs, combined oral contraceptives, or progestin therapy) is recommended for adolescents.
An ovarian-­sparing cystectomy should be performed if conservative
care fails to control the symptoms or the size of the endometrioma
is concerning for torsion. Recurrence of endometriosis occurs more
commonly in adolescents than adults, and future fertility is associated
with stage of disease. Early diagnosis and initiation of menstrual suppression with estrogen-­progesterone, progesterone-­only formulations,
GnRH agonist, or GnRH antagonist may prevent progression of the
disease.

Pelvic Inflammatory Disease and Tuboovarian
Abscess

Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) complicated by a tuboovarian
abscess (TOA) should be considered in a sexually active adolescent
with an adnexal mass and pain on examination (see Chapter 163). PID
is a spectrum of upper genital tract inflammation and includes some
combination of endometritis, salpingitis, and TOA. Rarely, TOA can
occur in nonsexually active adolescents, particularly in association
with obstructive Müllerian anomalies, ruptured appendicitis, obesity,
and severe constipation. Patients with PID and TOA typically exhibit
fever with leukocytosis, cervical motion, uterine or adnexal tenderness, vaginal discharge, nausea, peritoneal signs, and abnormal vaginal
bleeding. TOAs are usually demonstrated on transvaginal ultrasound,
but pelvic CT imaging may be used for uncertain cases. Treatment
of PID with TOA consists of inpatient administration of intravenous (IV) antibiotics. After 48-­72 hours of treatment with antibiotics

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3342 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Fig. 590.3 Serous cystadenoma and mucinous

cystadenoma. A and B, 20-­
yr-­
old female with
pelvic pain. A, Transverse ultrasound and (B)
axial T2 fat-­
saturated magnetic resonance images (MRIs) demonstrate a complex cystic mass
with septations in the left adnexa (arrows). This
was removed and found to be a serous cystadenoma. C and D, 15-­yr-­old female with pelvic
pain. C, Transverse ultrasound and (D) axial T2
fat-­
saturated MRIs demonstrate a cystic, septated mass posterior to the uterus. After surgical
resection, pathology confirmed a mucinous cystadenoma. Note that the imaging appearances
of serous and mucinous cystadenoma are similar.
A specific diagnosis is difficult to discern based
on imaging alone. (From Walters MM, Robertson
RL. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017; 188: Fig. 6.72.)

C
A

alone, patients with TOAs who do not respond or who worsen should
undergo imaging-­guided abscess drainage. Conservative management
with IV and then oral antibiotics and/or image-­guided drainage is recommended as long as the patient continues to improve. TOAs that are
large (>7-­8 cm in the largest diameter) are associated with the need for
surgical intervention and/or radiologically guided drainage. Clinical
deterioration is an indication for surgical exploration, and a familiarity with bowel surgery is important with any attempt at resection of
a pelvic abscess because of the challenges of encountering anatomic
distortion, other organ involvement, and friable tissue planes.

Adnexal Torsion

D

B

Adnexal torsion of the ovary and/or fallopian tube is the fifth most
common gynecologic emergency and occurs more often in children
and adolescents than in adults. If ovarian torsion is suspected, timely
surgical intervention is necessary to preserve ovarian function and
future fertility. About 60% of ovarian torsions are on the right side;
this is possibly because the right utero-­ovarian ligament is longer than
the left and/or due to the protective effect of the descending colon
to the left adnexa. The most common presentation is sudden-­onset
abdominal pain, which is typically intermittent and nonradiating, with
associated nausea and vomiting. Abdominal tenderness is common
on physical exam and may be accompanied by peritoneal signs. Ultrasound with Doppler is the imaging modality of choice (Fig. 590.4).
In adnexal torsion, ovarian venous flow is obstructed, and the fallopian tube and/or ovary become enlarged. Pelvic ultrasound findings
include an edematous appearance of the ovary with subsequent hyper-­
echogenicity, increase in size, “whirlpool” sign (twisted vascular pedicle of the ovary), and peripherally displaced follicles. Doppler studies
in the evaluation of torsion are limited because of low sensitivity, and
the presence of arterial flow does not rule out torsion. Therefore Doppler flow alone should not guide clinical decision-­making. Prompt
surgical intervention (i.e., diagnostic laparoscopy and laparoscopic
ovarian detorsion) is essential to preserve ovarian function. Appearance of the ovary during surgery is not a reliable indicator for ovarian
viability as even devascularized-­appearing ovaries during laparoscopy
have been reported to regain normal perfusion and function in several days. The goal of surgery should be to preserve the ovary regardless of the color and time from onset of symptoms to intervention. A

torsed ovary should not be removed in adolescents unless it is severely
necrotic and is disintegrating.
Although adnexal torsion may occur in individuals with normal
ovaries, torsion occurs more commonly in adnexa enlarged by cystic
changes or ovarian neoplasms. The rate of malignancy among premenarchal adolescents with ovarian torsion ranges from 0.4–5%. If an
ovarian cyst is easily identified at the time of detorsion, it is reasonable to proceed with concomitant cystectomy; however, it should be
noted that the concomitant cystectomy could be challenging because
of the friable edematous ovary, which can result in ovarian damage and
bleeding leading to oophorectomy. Given that most cysts are benign,
drainage of the cyst’s fluid is reasonable, and repeat ultrasound in 6-­12
weeks usually demonstrates resolution of the cyst. Another approach
may include detorsion and second-­stage surgery at delayed interval for
cystectomy. Oophoropexy is controversial, and the two most compelling reasons are the absence of a contralateral ovary and a history of
recurrent ovarian torsion. Initiation of ovarian suppression is reasonable to prevent recurrent ovarian cysts.

OVARIAN MALIGNANCIES

Ovarian cancer is very uncommon in children; only 1.3% of all ovarian cancers are diagnosed in patients < 20 years old. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) age-­adjusted incidence rates for
2016–2020 are 1.35/100,000 for females 15–19 years; mortality rates for
this age group are 0.05/100,000.

Germ Cell Tumors

Germ cell tumors are the most common ovarian malignancy and
originate from primordial germ cells that develop into a number of
heterogeneous tumor types. Dysgerminomas are the most common
malignant germ cell tumor of the ovary and have the best prognosis
(Table 590.2). They may contain syncytiotrophoblastic cells that produce alpha-­fetoprotein (AFP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), making these serum proteins useful tumor markers for monitoring disease
activity during surveillance (Table 590.3). Because of rapid growth
and expansion, dysgerminomas may present as large abdomino-­pelvic
masses, and hemoperitoneum may result due to capsular rupture. Dysgerminomas are the most common bilateral ovarian germ cell tumor,
occurring bilaterally in 10–15% of patients. Yolk sac tumors, also

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

A

B

3343

C

Fig. 590.4 Ovarian torsion. 15-­yr-­old female with acute-­onset pelvic pain. A, Sagittal and transverse transabdominal pelvic ultrasound images

demonstrate a rounded appearance of the right ovary, which is displaced medially and positioned posterior to the uterus. There is peripheralization
of the ovarian follicles. B, Power Doppler imaging shows no demonstrable flow within the ovarian parenchyma. C, Transverse image of the pelvis
shows marked asymmetric enlargement of the right ovary (RTO) in comparison with the normal left ovary (LTO). This patient went to surgery, and
right ovarian torsion was confirmed. UT, Uterus. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2017; 189: Fig. 6.74.)

Table 590.2  Malignant Ovarian Tumors in Children and
Adolescents
OVERALL 5-­YR
SURVIVAL

TUMOR

CLINICAL FEATURES

GERM CELL TUMORS
Dysgerminoma

85%

10–20% bilateral
Most common ovarian
malignancy
Gonadal dysgenesis/
androgen insensitivity
Sensitive to chemotherapy/
radiation

Immature teratoma

97–100%

Endodermal sinus
tumor

80%

Almost always large (>15 cm)
Schiller-­Duval bodies

Choriocarcinoma

30%

Rare
Can mimic ectopic
pregnancy

Embryonal carcinoma

25%

Endocrinologic symptoms
(precocious puberty)
Highly malignant

Gonadoblastoma

100%

Primary amenorrhea
Virilization
45,X or 45,X/46,XY mosaicism

SEX CORD STROMAL TUMORS
Juvenile granulosa
92%
stroma cell tumor

All three germ layers
present

Produce estrogen
Menstrual irregularities
Isosexual precious
pseudopuberty
Call-­Exner bodies rare

Sertoli-­Leydig cell
tumor

70–90%

Virilization in 40%
Produce testosterone

Lipoid cell tumors

∼80%

Rare heterogeneous group
with lipid-­filled parenchyma

Gynandroblastoma

90% or greater

Rare low-­grade mixed
tumors that produce either
estrogen or androgen

referred to as endodermal sinus tumors, clinically present similarly
to dysgerminomas with a rapidly enlarging pelvic mass and associated
abdominal pain. Schiller Duval bodies are pathognomonic on pathology and contain a central blood vessel surrounded by cuboidal tumor
cells. AFP is a useful marker for monitoring response to treatment and
for surveillance. Immature teratomas and yolk sac tumors are more
aggressive malignancies than dysgerminomas. Embryonal carcinomas

are a relatively undifferentiated product of the primordial germ cells
and are one of the most malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary. They
may secrete β-­hCG and AFP. Gonadoblastomas are almost always
associated with chromosomal abnormalities; therefore chromosomal
analysis is essential. Polyembryoma is a very aggressive ovarian malignancy and contains embryoid bodies. The treatment for stage Ia dysgerminomas and stage I immature teratomas is resection. For stage Ic
and higher, treatment is surgical excision followed by postoperative
chemotherapy. Radiotherapy may be administered for disease recurrence in dysgerminomas, but it is not included in routine treatment.
For unresectable tumors or for patients who cannot undergo surgery,
neoadjuvant chemotherapy is an option. Recurrences are treated with
chemotherapy. Germ cell tumors may recur in up to 10% of cases, and
thus yearly follow-­up ultrasound is recommended.

Sex-­Cord Stromal Tumors

Sex-­cord stromal tumors (SCSTs) originate from the stromal component of the gonads and include benign thecomas and fibromas, as well
as malignant Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors and juvenile granulosa cell
tumors. Individuals with Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome are at increased risk
for developing SCSTs. SCSTs clinically present as an abdomino-­pelvic
mass, pain, and symptoms of excess sex steroid hormone production,
such as hirsutism, virilization, and heterosexual or isosexual precocious
puberty. When an SCST is suspected, serum levels of inhibin B, AFP,
estradiol and testosterone should be obtained. SCSTs usually present as
a unilateral solid mass on imaging, but some degree of necrosis could
lead to a heterogenous appearance (Figs 590.5 and 590.6).
Most juvenile granulosa cell tumors have an intact capsule and
therefore are associated with a good prognosis; however, in the case
of capsular rupture or invasion, they potentially have an aggressive
course. Juvenile granulosa cell tumors are usually associated with
excess estrogen and precocious puberty in prepubertal females.
Approximately 20% of the SCSTs in the pediatric population are
Sertoli-­L eydig cell tumors, which may be associated with clinical
signs and symptoms of androgen excess. The DICER1 pathogenic
variant is associated with Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors, and the presence
of the variant increases the risk of metachronous tumor in the contralateral ovary. Karyotype and referral to genetics is recommended
for patients with SCSTs.

Epithelial Ovarian Cancers

Epithelial ovarian cancers are less common than germ cell tumors in
the pediatric and adolescent population, comprising only 12.4% of
ovarian malignancies in this group. Borderline ovarian tumors are
similarly exceedingly rare in adolescents. Individuals with BRCA1 and
BRCA2 pathogenic variants are at higher risk of developing epithelial
ovarian cancer at younger ages compared with females without BRCA
variants. Similarly, low-­grade epithelial ovarian carcinomas tend to
occur at younger ages compared with high-­grade ovarian carcinomas. Common presenting symptoms include dysmenorrhea, abdominal pain, abdominal distention, nausea and vomiting, and vaginal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3344 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Table 590.3

Serum Tumor Markers

TUMOR

CA-­125

Epithelial tumor

+

Immature teratoma

+

AFP

β-­HCG

LDH

+

Dysgerminoma
+

Embryonal carcinoma

+

Choriocarcinoma

T

INHIBIN

MIS

VEGF

+
+

Endodermal sinus tumor

E2

+

+

DHEA
+

+

+

+

Mixed germ cell

+

Granulosa cell tumor

+

+

+

+

Sertoli-­Leydig
Gonadoblastoma

+

Theca-­fibroma

+
+

+

+

+

+

+
+

AFP, α-­Fetoprotein; CA-­125, cancer antigen 125; DHEA, dehydroepiandrostenedione; E2, estradiol; β-­hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; T, testosterone; MIS, Müllerian-­inhibiting substance; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

Fig. 590.5 Complex 13.1 × 8.1 × 10.6 cm solid mass with smaller

cystic foci, arising from the right ovary. Final pathology demonstrated
juvenile granulosa cell tumor. (Image courtesy Alla Vash-­Margita, MD.)

discharge; CA-­125 is almost always elevated. Treatment involves surgical salpingo-­oophorectomy, pelvic washings, and biopsies of suspicious
omental, peritoneal, and lymph node lesions, with adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) stage II-­IV disease. Given the young age of this population,
although this is not the standard of care for adult patients, fertility-­
sparing surgery is recommended for stage I cancer to conserve the contralateral ovary and uterus if they appear normal. Data suggest that in
patients with early-­stage disease, such an approach with appropriate
surgical staging results in optimal outcomes but is not recommended
for stage II-­IV disease due to the high rate of recurrence. The number
of term pregnancies and use of oral combined hormonal contraceptive pills decrease the risk of invasive epithelial ovarian cancer. Young
females with a family history of ovarian cancer should consider the
use of long-­term oral combined hormonal contraceptive pills for the
preventive benefits when pregnancy is not being sought.

UTERINE MALIGNANCIES

Uterine malignancies account for 2.5% of all gynecologic malignancies
of children and adolescents less than 18 years of age. The most common types are sarcomas (34%), followed by adenocarcinomas (34%)

and squamous cell carcinomas (10%). Rhabdomyosarcomas are the
most common type of soft tissue sarcoma occurring in patients <20
years of age (see Chapter 549). They can develop in any organ or tissue
in the body except bone, and roughly 3% originate from the uterus or
vagina. Of the various histologic subtypes, embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas in the female patient most often occur in the genital tract of
infants or young children. They are rapidly growing entities that can
cause the tumor to be expelled through the cervix, with subsequent
complications such as uterine inversion or large cervical polyps. Irregular vaginal bleeding may be another presenting clinical symptom.
They are defined histologically by the presence of mesenchymal cells
of skeletal muscle in various stages of differentiation intermixed with
myxoid stroma. A genetic link has been found between Li-­Fraumeni
cancer susceptibility syndrome, Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome,
pleuropulmonary blastoma, Costello syndrome, Noonan syndrome,
and neurofibromatosis type I. Treatment recommendations are based
on protocols coordinated by the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study
Group and consist of a multimodal approach including radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Vincristine, Adriamycin-­D, and cyclophosphamide (VAC) with or without radiation therapy make up the first line
of treatment. Intensity-­modulated radiation therapy and proton beam
radiotherapy are used to reduce the therapy burden and long-­term toxicity. Resection rates are very low because of the risk of losing the form
and function of local tissue; chemotherapy with restrictive surgery and
adjunctive irradiation has enabled many patients to retain the uterus
while achieving excellent long-­term survival rates.
Leiomyosarcomas and leiomyomas are extremely rare, occurring in
<2 in 10 million individuals in the pediatric and adolescent age-­groups,
although their numbers are increasing among pediatric patients with
AIDS. They usually involve the spleen, lung, or GI tract, but they could
also originate from uterine smooth muscle. Epstein-­Barr virus pathogenesis has been shown in AIDS and solid-­organ transplant patient
populations (see Chapter 301). Despite treatment that demands complete surgical resection (and chemotherapy for the sarcomas), they
tend to recur frequently.
Endometrial stromal sarcoma and endometrial adenocarcinoma
of the uterine corpus are extremely rare in children and adolescents. A
comprehensive review described 19 cases of endometrial cancer (EC)
among adolescent females younger than 21 years in which five subjects (26.3%) had a genetic condition (Cowden syndrome and Turner
syndrome). This emphasizes the consideration of genetic evaluation in
very young patients with EC. In most cases, patients presented with
abnormal uterine bleeding and had associated comorbidities such as
obesity and polycystic ovary syndrome. Standard of care for treatment
of EC consists of hysterectomy, removal of both ovaries and fallopian
tubes and surgical staging, followed by adjunctive radiotherapy and/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

A

B

D

C

or chemotherapy as indicated by final pathology and stage. In young
patients who desire childbearing, fertility-­sparing approaches with
preservation of the uterus have been increasingly utilized. Per National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, candidates for
this approach are patients with grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma
on dilation and curettage, patients with disease confined to endometrium by MRI (preferred imaging modality) or ultrasound, absence
of metastatic disease on imaging, and no contraindications to medical therapy or pregnancy. Patients should undergo counseling that
fertility-­sparing options are not standard of care for the treatment of
endometrial carcinoma. Existing data on hormonal therapy come from
observational studies and have variable rates of outcomes. Although
there is no standard follow-­up protocol, patients with EC treated with
hormonal therapies should be reexamined with endometrial sampling
every 3-­6 months.

VAGINAL MALIGNANCIES

Vaginal tumors are rare with a variable clinical presentation that may
include abdomino-­pelvic pain, an abdominal mass, bloody vaginal
discharge, genital ulceration, or tissue protruding from the vagina.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common vaginal malignancy followed by germ cell tumor (GCT) and clear cell
adenocarcinoma (CCA). The management of pediatric vaginal tumors
consists of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by local control with
surgery or radiotherapy.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) or sarcoma botryoides typically arises in the anterior wall of the vagina or within the wall of the
bladder and presents as an edematous grapelike mass protruding from
the vagina. Overall, RMS arising in the female genital tract accounts for
less than 4% of all pediatric RMS. Approximately 90% of these sarcomas
present before age 5 years. Embryonal RMS of the vagina is managed
with multimodality treatment. A series of Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group (IRSG) reports demonstrated survival rates in
excess of 85% employing the use of combination chemotherapy treatment with vincristine, actinomycin-­D, and cyclophosphamide (VAC)
and wide excision with or without adjuvant radiation treatment. This
approach spares most patients from exenterative surgery. Because of
the high rates of local recurrences in patients who did not receive radiation, the Soft Tissue Sarcoma committee of the Children’s Oncology

3345

Fig. 590.6 Sertoli-­
Leydig cell tumor. 2-­yr-­old female with a palpable
pelvic mass and secondary sex characteristics. A, Transabdominal pelvic
ultrasound demonstrates a complex
cystic, septated mass, with a solid
component posteriorly (arrow). B,
Contrast-­
enhanced computed tomography shows a predominantly
cystic mass, with an enhancing mural nodule along the posterior margin (arrow). C, T2-­weighted and D,
contrast-­
enhanced magnetic resonance images in a different patient
demonstrate a T2 hyperintense lesion in the pelvis, with enhancing
internal solid components noted
after contrast administration (arrow).
(From Walters MM, Robertson RL.
Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites,
4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017;
188: Fig. 6.73.)
Group recommends local radiation treatment unless potential toxicity
is considered unacceptable.
Endodermal sinus tumors or yolk sac tumors are the most common subtype of pediatric germ cell tumor of the vagina but are still
quite rare. These tumors present almost exclusively in children under
the age of 3 years with vaginal bleeding. Typically, patients have a
markedly elevated serum AFP, which can be used to monitor treatment
effect and disease recurrence. Management involves combination of
surgery and chemotherapy (either carboplatin/etoposide/bleomycin,
BEP regimen, or VAC regimen). Unfortunately, survival rates are low
despite treatment.
There is an increased incidence of clear cell adenocarcinoma (CCA)
of the vagina in young females related to in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) during the first 16 weeks of pregnancy. The suggested
mechanism of carcinogenesis involves the retention of nests of abnormal cells of Müllerian duct origin that, after stimulation by endogenous
hormones during puberty, are promoted into adenocarcinomas. Most
cases involve the anterior upper third of the vaginal wall. Treatment
of CCA of the vagina includes a surgery and/or radiation treatment
depending on the extent of disease. Fortunately, the incidence of CCA
of the vagina has decreased since the practice of prescribing DES during pregnancy has been eliminated.

VULVAR MALIGNANCIES

Pediatric vulvar malignancies are rare. Patients typically present with
an ulcerated or raised lesion and/or a mass. It is imperative that any
concerning vulvar lesion be biopsied and submitted for pathologic
evaluation. Vulvar malignancies that have been described in the literature include invasive squamous cell carcinomas, yolk sac tumors, Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNET), and melanomas. Each of these entities make up approximately 10% of reported
cases. Cases of pediatric vulvar squamous cell carcinoma include those
lesions that are human papillomavirus (HPV)-­mediated and HPV-­
independent. Possible risk factors include HPV infection, immunosuppression, Fanconi anemia, and lichen sclerosis. Extragonadal germ
cell tumors involving the vulva are very uncommon, and the leading hypothesis behind their pathogenesis is possible aberrant germ
cell migration along the gubernaculum. These are aggressive tumors,
and treatment options include various combinations of excisional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3346 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Negative for
intraepithelial
lesion

Not
satisfactory
for
evaluation

Repeat Pap in
3 years

Repeat Pap
after 2–4
months

ASC-US

HPV
unknown

LSIL

Repeat Pap in
12 months
HPV not
acceptable

HPV
acceptable

Negative Pap

HPV
positive

Repeat Pap in
3 years

Repeat Pap in
12 months

HSIL

HPV
negative

Negative Pap
ASC-US
or LSIL

Repeat Pap in
3 years

Repeat Pap in
12 months

Negative × 2

Routine
screening

≥ ASC

ASC-H
HSIL

AIS
AGC

Colposcopy

Colposcopy
and endo
curettage

Colposcopy

Management
per ASCCP
guideline

Expert
management
per ASCCP
guideline

Management
per ASCCP
guideline

Fig. 590.7 Algorithm for the management of Pap smear results in women between age 21-­24. AIS, adenocarcinoma in situ; AGC, atypical glan-

dular cells; ASC, atypical squamous cells; ASCCP, American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology; ASC-H, atypical squamous cells that
cannot exclude HSIL; ASC-US, atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; LSIL, low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; HPV, human
papilloma virus; HSIL, high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (From Trotman GE, Vash-­Margita A, Kahn JA, et al. Human papillomavirus infection and cervical cancer screening and prevention in adolescents. In: Emans SJ, Laufer MR, Di Vasta DP, eds. Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2020; 330–348: Fig 20.9.)

procedures and neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy. Malignant
melanoma of the vulva represents 2.4–10% of all vulvar malignancies,
second to invasive squamous cell carcinomas in frequency. Early-­stage
melanoma treatment involves surgical excision followed by possible
radiation treatment. Treatment of advanced stage melanoma involves
systemic chemotherapy and/or targeted treatment agents such as
checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy. Rhabdomyosarcomas are the
most common vulvar sarcomas reported in pediatric patients. The second most common sarcoma of the vulva in pediatric patients is ES/
PNET. Management of both vulvar sarcomas includes surgical excision, multi-­agent chemotherapy, and radiation treatment. ES/PNET
cases often present in the advanced stage and have a poor prognosis.
Condyloma acuminata are common, raised, verrucous lesions
of the vulva that result from squamous cell proliferation associated
with HPV infection (most common genotypes HPV 6 and 11). Prevention of HPV infection and subsequent formation of condyloma
acuminata has been achieved through HPV vaccination. In young
children with condyloma acuminata, sexual abuse must be ruled out.

These lesions are benign and can spontaneously regress. If lesions
are bothersome, treatment modalities consist of topical podophyllin resin, imiquimod, trichloroacetic acid, local cryotherapy, electrocautery, excision, and laser ablation. Imiquimod is approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for individuals 12
years of age and above.

CERVICAL MALIGNANCIES AND THEIR
PREVENTION

In 2020, cervical cancer accounted for an estimated 604,000 new cancer cases and 342,000 deaths worldwide, making it the fourth most
common cancer in females of all ages. From 2016 to 2020, the United
States age-­adjusted incidence of cervical cancer in females under age
20 was <0.1 per 100,000. The adolescent population is at greatest risk
of HPV infection, which predisposes them to development of cervical
cancer because about half of HPV infections occur before the age of
24. Thus prevention of initial infection in the adolescent population is
critical to decreasing cervical cancer rates.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies
Primary prevention of HPV infection includes vaccination before
the onset of sexual activity with the HPV vaccine. The HPV vaccine
is approved for males and females ages 9-­26. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends two doses of the HPV
9-­valent vaccine for patients before age 15 years (typically between
ages 11-­12) given 6-­12 months apart (see Chapter 215). For those initiating the vaccine series at 15 years of age or older, three doses of the
HPV vaccine should be given at 0, 1-­2, and 6 months. Three doses are
also recommended for patients who are immunocompromised (i.e.,
solid organ transplant recipient, HIV infection). Children with a history of sexual abuse should start immunization at age 9. In 2018, the
FDA approved the use of the HPV 9-­valent vaccine to include adults
age 27-­45 years; while the vaccine is not routinely recommended
in this group, it may be given after shared clinical decision-making
between a patient and their healthcare provider. The HPV vaccine
can be administered despite prior infection with HPV. Cervical cancer screening via Papanicolaou (Pap) testing and HPV co-­testing
are important secondary prevention strategies. ACOG recommends
cervical cancer screening for females starting at age 21 years in
immunocompetent females regardless of onset of penetrative vaginal
intercourse or primary prevention with HPV vaccination. Separate
guidelines describe cervical cancer screening recommendations for
immunocompromised individuals. Briefly, sexually active immunocompromised adolescents (such as solid organ or hematopoietic stem
cell transplant recipients, patients with inflammatory bowel disease
on immunosuppressive therapy, and patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus) should start screening 1 year after of onset of sexual
activity and thereafter annually for 3 years. If consecutive screening
is negative, patients may follow the guidelines for immunocompetent females. HIV positive patients should start screening at age 21
regardless of sexual activity. Additionally, condom use, limiting the
number of sexual partners, and smoking cessation are recommended
to lower the risk for cervical cancer.
Because of the high prevalence of HPV infection in the adolescent
population and because HPV-­associated lesions typically regress, HPV
screening should be not done before age 21 years in immunocompetent
patients. If an inadvertent HPV test is done in adolescents, the results
should not be acted on. Guidelines on management of the abnormal
results of cervical cancer screening (Pap smear) for females age 21-­24
are shown in Figure 590.7. Overall, data shows that prevention strategies such as widespread implementation of HPV vaccine translates into
reduced incidence of cervical cancer in the future. Pediatric providers
should educate patients and caregivers about benefits of the HPV vaccine and offer it at the recommended age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 591

Vulvovaginal and
Müllerian Anomalies

Table 591.1  Congenital Müllerian Anomalies
MÜLLERIAN ANOMALY

DESCRIPTION

Agenesis

Absence of uterus, cervix, and upper
portion of vagina

Hypoplasia

Incomplete development of uterus,
cervix, and upper portion of vagina

Unicornuate uterus

One cervix and one uterine horn, the
result of failure of one Müllerian
duct to descend

Septate uterus

Septum dividing the uterus, partially
or completely

Didelphic uterus

Two cervices, each associated with
one uterine horn

Bicornuate uterus

One cervix associated with two
uterine horns

OHVIRA (obstructed
hemivagina and ipsilateral
renal anomaly)

Double uterus with unilateral
obstructed hemivagina and
ipsilateral renal agenesis

CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED
WITH MÜLLERIAN
ANOMALIES

DESCRIPTION

Hydrocolpos

Accumulation of mucus or
nonsanguineous fluid in the vagina

Hematocolpos

Accumulation of blood in the vagina

Hematometra

Accumulation of blood in the uterus

Hydrosalpinx

Accumulation of serious fluid in the
fallopian tube, often a result of
pyosalpinx

Table 591.2  Genetic Conditions Associated with Müllerian
Anomalies
MODE OF
INHERITANCE
Autosomal
dominant

SYNDROME

ASSOCIATED
MÜLLERIAN DEFECT

Camptobrachydactyly

Longitudinal vaginal
septum

Hand-­foot-­genital

Incomplete Müllerian
fusion

Denys-­Drash

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

McKusick-­Kaufman

Vaginal atresia,
transverse vaginal
septum

Johanson-­Blizzard

Longitudinal vaginal
septum

Renal-­genital-­middle
ear anomalies

Vaginal atresia

Fraser

Incomplete Müllerian
fusion

Persistent Müllerian
duct

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

Urioste syndrome

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

Polygenic/
multifactorial

Mayer-­Rokitansky-­
Küster-­Hauser

Müllerian aplasia

X-­linked

Persistent Müllerian
duct

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

Autosomal
recessive

Laura L. Hollenbach, Emanuele Pelosi,
Miranda Margetts, and Alla Vash-­Margita
EMBRYOLOGY

The formation of a normal reproductive system occurs in the developing
embryo and early fetus and is regulated by several processes, including cellular differentiation, duct elongation, fusion, resorption, canalization, and
programmed cell death. Numerous Müllerian and/or vulvovaginal anomalies can result from interruption of the intricate sequence or functions of
any one of these processes during formation of the reproductive system
(Table 591.1). Genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors all have been
described as playing some role in these processes (Table 591.2).

3347

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3348 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Phenotypic sexual differentiation, especially during formation of
the vulvovaginal and Müllerian systems, is determined from genetic,
gonadal, and hormonal influences (see Chapter 622). Gonadal development determines the hormonal production regulating progression or
regression of the genital ducts and subsequently the external genitalia.
In 46,XY embryos, the SRY (sex-­
determining region of
Y-­chromosome) gene is one of the first regulators driving the formation of a testis from a primitive gonad and triggering the expression of a
cascade of additional factors responsible for testis development as well
as spermatogenesis. The testis begins to develop between 6-­7 weeks of
gestation, first with Sertoli cells, which produce anti-­Müllerian hormone (AMH), followed by Leydig cells, which produce testosterone
starting at approximately 8 weeks of gestation. The genital tract in both
male and female embryos initially includes both the Wolffian and the
Müllerian (or paramesonephric) ducts and begins to differentiate later
than the gonads. The differentiation of the Wolffian ducts, the primordia of the male reproductive tract, is regulated by testosterone, and the
local action of testosterone activates development of the epididymis,
vas deferens, and seminal vesicle. Concomitantly, the anti-­Müllerian
hormone (or Müllerian-­inhibiting substance) will cause regression of
the Müllerian ducts. Further male genital duct and external genital
structures depend on the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. Failure of Müllerian duct regression results in retention of Müllerian derivatives in males. One example is persistent Müllerian duct
syndrome (PMDS), which is characterized by the presence of Müllerian structures usually associated with undescended testes. The majority of PMDS cases are due to pathogenic variants in the AMH gene or
its receptor AMHR2. Other conditions featuring the presence of Müllerian derivatives in males are Denys-­Drash syndrome (characterized
by gonadal dysgenesis), nephropathy, and Wilms tumor, each caused
by pathogenic variants in the WT1 gene, and Müllerian derivatives-­
lymphangiectasia-­polydactyly syndrome (Urioste syndrome), a condition of unknown etiology.
In a 46,XX embryo, female sexual differentiation occurs about 2
weeks later than gonadal differentiation in the male. The regression
of the Wolffian ducts results from the lack of local gonadal testosterone production, and the persistence of the Müllerian ducts results
from the absence of anti-­Müllerian hormone production. The Müllerian ducts continue to differentiate into the fallopian tubes, uterus,
and upper one-­third of the vagina without interference from anti-­
Müllerian hormone. Because the ovaries develop separately from the
Müllerian ducts, females with Müllerian ductal anomalies usually have
normal ovaries and steroid hormone production. There are complex
interactions among the Wolffian, Müllerian, and metanephric ducts
(the latter giving rise to the urinary tract) early in embryonic development, and normal development of the Müllerian system depends
on such interaction. If this process is interrupted, coexisting Müllerian and renal anomalies are often discovered in the female patient
at the time of evaluation. Although most Müllerian defects seem
sporadic, familial recurrence or clustering has been observed, which
strongly supports the influence of genetic factors. The molecular processes underlying the developmental program of the female reproductive tract are extremely intricate and are regulated by numerous gene
products, including WNT4, WNT5, WNT7A, WNT9B, LIM1, HNF1B,
EMX2, PAX8, and HOX. The WNT family plays crucial roles in both
the formation and differentiation of the Müllerian ducts, providing
inductive signals for the correct patterning of the developing tract.
Homeobox genes LIM1 and HNF1B are expressed in duct epithelial
cells and are necessary for the development of the entire urogenital
tract. Similarly, EMX2 and PAX8 play fundamental roles in the initial steps of urogenital development by regulating the formation of the
Wolffian and Müllerian ducts. The family of HOXA genes is one of the
most well described and comprises regulatory molecules that encode
highly conserved transcription factors regulating the developmental
axis of the female reproductive tract. These genes display a characteristic expression pattern along the developing reproductive tract (Fig.
591.1). A role for environmental factors in Müllerian anomalies has
also been proposed. During gestation, the Müllerian ducts develop in
an estrogen-­free environment because of the presence of α-­fetoprotein

HOXA9

HOXA10

HOXA11

HOXA13

Tubes

Uterus

Cervix

Vagina

Fig. 591.1 Expression of HOXA genes in the developing Müllerian
system. (Adapted from Taylor HS. The role of HOX genes in the development and function of the female reproductive tract. Semin Reprod
Med. 2000;18:81-­89.)
peptides that sequester estrogen molecules. Therefore attention has
been turned to endocrine-­disrupting chemicals (EDCs), especially
compounds with estrogenic activity, for their potential teratogenic
role in Müllerian anomalies. A striking example is provided by diethylstilbestrol (DES), an estrogen agonist once given to pregnant patients
to prevent pregnancy-­related complications, including miscarriage.
However, DES was found to induce epigenetic modifications and cause
reproductive malformations, including a T-­shaped uterus ultimately
associated with higher spontaneous abortion rates.
By 10 weeks of gestation, the caudal portions of the Müllerian
ducts fuse together in the midline to form the uterus, cervix, and
upper vagina, in a Y-­shaped structure, with the open upper arms of
the Y forming the primordial fallopian tubes. Initially, the Müllerian
ducts are solid cords that gradually canalize as they grow along and
cross the mesonephric ducts ventrally and fuse in the midline. The
Müllerian ducts caudally open into the urogenital sinus, where proliferation of the cells at the point of contact form the Müllerian tubercle. Cells between the Müllerian tubercle and the urogenital sinus
continue to proliferate, forming the vaginal plate. At the same time of
the midline fusion of the Müllerian ducts, the medial walls—forming
the septum—begin to degenerate, forming the central cavity of the
uterovaginal canal. Uterine septal resorption is thought to occur in
a caudal to rostral direction and to be complete at approximately 20
weeks of gestation. This theory has been scrutinized because some
anomalies do not fit the standard classification system; it is possible
that septal resorption starts at some point in the middle and proceeds in both directions. At approximately 16 weeks of gestation, the
central cells of the vaginal plate desquamate, and resorption occurs,
forming the vaginal lumen. The lumen of the vagina is initially separated from the urogenital sinus by a thin hymenal membrane. The
hymenal membrane undergoes apoptosis and central resorption and
is usually perforate before birth.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Müllerian anomalies can include abnormalities in portions or all of
the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina (Fig. 591.2). True estimates of prevalence are difficult because of the varied presentations
and asymptomatic nature of some of the anomalies, use of different
diagnostic procedures, subjectivity of the diagnostic criteria, and the
inconsistent interpretation of the classification of Müllerian anomalies.
It is estimated that Müllerian anomalies are present in 6.7% of the
general female population. The prevalence of Müllerian anomalies
increases in females with a history of adverse pregnancy outcomes or
infertility: 8% of females who are infertile, 15% of females with primary amenorrhea, 16.7% of females with recurrent pregnancy loss, and
24.5% of females with both miscarriage and infertility have Müllerian
defects.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies

3349

ASRM MÜLLERIAN ANOMALIES CLASSIFICATION 2021
Scan QR code to view the ASRM MAC 2021 tool (page 1 of 2)
©2021 American Society for Reproductive Medicine

MÜLLERIAN AGENESIS

MÜLLERIAN AGENESIS

MÜLLERIAN AGENESIS WITH R/L
ATROPHIC UTERINE REMNANT
WITH FUNCTIONAL ENDOMETRIUM

UNICORNUATE UTERUS

CERVICAL AGENESIS

CERVICAL AGENESIS

DISTAL CERVICAL AGENESIS

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH R/L
DISTAL ATROPHIC UTERINE
REMNANT

R/L UNICORNUATE UTERUS

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH
R/L DISTAL UTERINE REMNANT WITH
FUNCTIONAL ENDOMETRIUM

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH
R/L ASSOCIATED ATROPHIC
UTERINE REMNANT

UTERUS DIDELPHYS

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH
R/L UTERINE HORN
COMMUNICATING AT LEVEL OF
CERVIX
UTERUS DIDELPHYS AND
LONGITUDINAL SEPTUM

UTERUS DIDELPHYS AND
+/- LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH

UTERUS DIDELPHYS AND
OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA

BICORNUATE UTERUS

Serosal indentation
>1 cm

BICORNUATE UTERUS

Serosal indentation
>1 cm

BICORNUATE UTERUS WITH
R/L COMMUNICATING TRACT

UTERUS BICORNUATE BICOLLIS

COMBINED BICORNUATE SEPTATE
UTERUS

Fig. 591.2 Classification system of Müllerian duct anomalies developed by the American Society of Reproductive Medicine. (From Pfeifer SM, Attaran M, Goldstein J, et al. ASRM Müllerian anomalies classification 2021. Fertil Steril. 2021;116:1238-­1252; Fig 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3350 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
SEPTATE UTERUS

Septum length >1 cm
Septum angle <90°

TRANSVERSE VAGINAL SEPTUM

Arcuate/Normal
length <1cm angle >90°

PARTIAL SEPTATE UTERUS

NORMAL/ARCUATE UTERUS

ROBERT’S UTERUS

MID VAGINAL SEPTUM

COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS
WITH DUPLICATED CERVICES AND
LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL SEPTUM

COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS WITH
SEPTATE CERVIX AND
LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL SEPTUM

COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS,
DUPLICATED CERVICES, AND
OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA

DISTAL VAGINAL AGENESIS

COMPLEX ANOMALIES

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL SEPTUM

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH
AND UTERUS DIDELPHYS

BICORNUATE UTERUS WITH
BILATERAL OBSTRUCTED
ENDOMETRIAL CAVITIES

UTERUS DIDELPHYS WITH
COMMUNICATING HEMIUTERI AND
UNILATERAL R/L CERVICO-VAGINAL
ATRESIA

OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA
AND UTERUS DIDELPHYS

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH
AND COMPLETE SEPTATE
UTERUS WITH DUPLICATED CERVIX

OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA,
HEMIUTERUS AND SINGLE CERVIX
WITH SEPARATE CONTRALATERAL
R/L PATENT HEMIUTERUS, CERVIX
AND VAGINA

BICORNUATE UTERUS WITH
R/L COMMUNICATING TRACT AND
TRANSVERSE VAGINAL SEPTUM

OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA
AND COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS
WITH DUPLICATED CERVICES

Scan QR code to view the ASRM MAC 2021 tool (page 2 of 2)
©2021 American Society for Reproductive Medicine
UTERUS ISTHMUS AGENESIS

Fig. 591.2 cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies

3351

by an altered urethral angle or pressure on the sacral plexus. Urinary hesitancy and incomplete emptying symptoms may be present before abdominopelvic pain increases from the obstruction in
a patient of any age. Some menstruating adolescents may present
with increasing cyclic abdominopelvic pain with their menses due
to an obstructed hemivagina with uterine didelphys and ipsilateral
renal agenesis (OHVIRA).
B

*

Fig. 591.3 Sagittal MRI of pelvis showing large volume hematocolpos
(asterisk). B, Bladder; arrow, hematometra.

Combinations of congenital anomalies in other organ systems are
prevalent in females with Müllerian anomalies. Renal and musculoskeletal abnormalities are the most common. An estimated 29% of
females with a renal anomaly will have an associated Müllerian abnormality. Concomitant congenital malformations are also prevalent in
approximately 54.4% of females with Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Kuster-­
Hauser (MRKH) syndrome.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Vulvovaginal and Müllerian anomalies can manifest at a variety of
chronological time points during a female’s life: from infancy, through
childhood and adolescence, and during adulthood (see Table 591.1).
The majority of external genitalia malformations manifest at birth, and
often even subtle deviations from normal in either a male or female
newborn warrant evaluation. Structural reproductive tract abnormalities can be seen at birth or can cluster at menarche or any time during
a patient’s reproductive life. Some Müllerian anomalies such as arcuate
uterus are asymptomatic and have no implications clinically, whereas
others can cause gynecologic, obstetric, or fertility issues.
Clinical manifestations and treatments depend on the specific type
of Müllerian anomaly and are varied. There may be a pelvic mass,
which may or may not be associated with symptoms. A mass bulging
at the introitus or within the vagina indicates complete or partial outflow tract obstruction. A newborn can present with no evidence of
a vaginal opening. An adolescent can present with cyclic pelvic pain
either in association with primary amenorrhea or several months after
the onset of menarche. Patients also may be asymptomatic until they
present with miscarriage, pregnancy loss, or preterm delivery. When
presentation is acutely symptomatic, emergency management may be
required. Obstruction can result from a number of distinct anomalies,
including an imperforate hymen, a transverse vaginal septum, a distal vaginal agenesis, or a noncommunicating rudimentary horn. As
menstrual fluid accumulates proximal to the obstruction, the resulting
hematocolpos (Fig. 591.3) and hematometra cause cyclic pain, pelvic
mass and, occasionally, urinary dysfunction.
Prenatal or neonatal presentation of hydrometrocolpos from distal vaginal obstruction produces fluid accumulation in the vagina
and uterus and presents as a lower abdominal mass with or without
associated acute urinary tract obstruction. Hydrometrocolpos with
polydactyly may be a result of two autosomal recessive disorders:
McKusick-­Kaufman syndrome (with associated congenital heart disease) and Bardet-­Biedl syndrome (with associated obesity, learning
disabilities, retinitis pigmentosa, and renal anomalies).
Adolescent patients can present with acute obstruction of the
outflow tract because of a Müllerian anomaly, which requires
emergency evaluation and surgical treatment. A small percentage
of females can present with concomitant urinary retention caused

LABORATORY AND RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS

Laboratory evaluation in the setting of primary amenorrhea would
include hormonal evaluation with assessment of the beta chorionic
gonadotropin (beta-­hCG) to rule out pregnancy, follicle-­stimulating
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), estradiol, and thyroid-­
stimulating hormone (TSH). Androgen evaluation may be done if
virilization is seen on physical examination. The patient’s karyotype
may be obtained based on clinical presentation. Other hormonal testing might be indicated in specific cases. Several radiographic studies
have been used, often in combination, to aid in diagnosis including
ultrasound, hysterosalpingogram, sonohysterography (saline-­infusion
sonography), and MRI. The least invasive initial study for a young
adolescent with cyclic pain, a pelvic mass, or amenorrhea is a transabdominal pelvic ultrasound; transvaginal pelvic ultrasound can be
used in sexually active teens. MRI is considered the gold standard of
care and best suited for complex anomalies because of its noninvasive,
high-­quality capabilities. MRI is the most sensitive and specific imaging technique used for evaluating Müllerian anomalies because it can
image nearly all reproductive structures, blood flow, external contours,
junctional zone resolution on T2-­weighted images, and associated
renal and other anomalies. MRI also has a high correlation with surgical findings because of its multiplanar capabilities and high spatial
resolution. Three-­dimensional ultrasound is another useful diagnostic tool and may be superior to traditional pelvic ultrasound and hysterosalpingogram but may not be easily accessible. Evaluation of the
external contour of the uterus is important for differentiating types
of uterine anomalies. This often requires a combination of radiologic
modalities for the uterine cavity, external contour, and possible tubal
patency. Diagnostic laparoscopy or hysteroscopy may be necessary
depending on the presentation, but it is less common with advancement of MRI and other imaging modalities.
Diagnosis of Müllerian anomalies should include a complete history,
including family history, with special attention to history of infertility
for female relatives and renal and skeletal abnormalities. A complete
physical exam including skeletal inspections for associated anomalies
should be performed in addition to the radiology studies discussed
above. Renal anomalies are noted in 30–40% and skeletal anomalies are
associated in 10–15% of patients with Müllerian anomalies. Unilateral
renal agenesis occurs in 15% of patients. The most common skeletal
anomaly is scoliosis. Patients usually have a normal female karyotype (46, XX), and most malformations are sporadic, with a polygenic
mechanism and multifactorial etiology (Table 591.2).

UTERINE ANOMALIES

Anomalous development of the uterus may be symmetric or asymmetric and/or obstructed or nonobstructed. Patients can present with primary amenorrhea or have either irregular or regular menstrual cycles.
There may be an asymptomatic pelvic mass or dysmenorrhea. In adolescents and adults, pregnancy loss can cause the first suspicion of a
uterine anomaly. Treatment is tailored to the specific anomaly.

Septate Uterus

Uterine septum (also known as a septate uterus) is the most common
Müllerian anomaly, accounting for just over half of all abnormalities,
and it is the most common structural uterine anomaly. After the two
Müllerian ducts fuse in the midline, resorption must occur to unify
the endometrial cavities; failure of this process results in some degree
of uterine septum. It can vary in length from just below the fundus to
beyond the cervix, depending on the amount of caudal resorption, but
is generally defined as >1 cm. A septate uterus has a normal external
uterine contour, which is what distinguishes it from a bicornuate or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3352 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
didelphic uterus. An MRI can help delineate between a predominantly
fibrous septum and a muscular or myometrial septum. There is insufficient evidence between an association of the uterine septum and infertility. Controversy still exists regarding whether a female should have
such surgical removal of the septum as part of infertility treatment. A
previous recommendation for surgical septum resection has been challenged by recent research, which demonstrated that septum resection
did not improve live birth rates compared with expectant management.
Limited data exist on the influence of the thickness and the length of
the septum on the choice of treatment and reproductive outcomes. Differentiating precisely between bicornuate and septate uteri is extremely
important to determine effective and safe treatment plans.

*

Bicornuate Uterus

Both Müllerian ducts develop and elongate in this anomaly, but they do
not completely fuse in the midline. The vagina and external cervix are
normal, but the extent of division of the two endometrial cavities can
vary, depending on the extent of failed fusion between the cervix and
the fundus. Bicornuate uteri are also associated with increased preterm
labor and delivery, malpresentation, and miscarriage. This anomaly
accounts for approximately 10–20% of Müllerian anomalies. Presently
there is no pregnancy outcome data to provide evidence to support
unification of a uterine duplication, and expectant management should
be encouraged.

Unicornuate Uterus and Rudimentary Horns

A unicornuate uterus results from the normal creation of a fallopian tube, functional uterus, cervix, and vagina from one Müllerian
duct. The other side fails to develop, resulting in either absence of
the contralateral Müllerian duct or a rudimentary horn. There is
a 30–40% association of renal anomalies. If a rudimentary horn is
identified, it is important to determine whether functional endometrium is present (usually with T2-­weighted MRI images). About two-­
thirds of rudimentary horns are noncommunicating, some with a
fibrous band connecting the two structures. Rudimentary horns can
also communicate with the contralateral uterus. A fertilized ovum
can implant and develop within a rudimentary horn. Pregnancies
within a rudimentary horn are incompatible with expectant management, and rupture of the horn could be life-­threatening. Rupture
tends to occur at a later gestation than with an ectopic pregnancy,
and hemorrhage is severe. Patients with rudimentary horns with
functioning endometrium can also present with pain caused by
accumulating menses. Because the contralateral uterine horn has
a normal outflow pathway, these patients present with cyclic pain
and/or a mass, not primary amenorrhea. Pregnancies that arise in a
unicornuate uterus are associated with increased preterm labor and
delivery, malpresentation, and miscarriage. The patient should be
counseled regarding these increased obstetric risks and be offered
a preconception consult with a high-­risk obstetric physician to best
manage pregnancy.

Uterus Didelphys

A uterus didelphys is the result of a complete failure of fusion and
represents 5% of Müllerian anomalies. There are two fallopian tubes,
two separate uterine cavities, two cervices, and often two vaginal
canals or two partial canals because of an associated longitudinal
vaginal septum (75% of the time). At times, the longitudinal septum attaches to one sidewall and obstructs one side of the vagina
(or hemivagina) (Fig. 591.4). Evaluation for renal anomalies should
be pursued because they are common as well. The combination of
uterine didelphys, obstructed hemivagina, and ipsilateral renal agenesis is a variant of the broad spectrum of Müllerian anomalies that is
referred to as obstructed hemivagina and ipsilateral renal anomaly
(OHVIRA) syndrome or Herlyn-­Werner-­Wunderlich syndrome.
Adolescents with this disorder usually present with abdominal pain
shortly after menarche. Although there still may be a risk of adverse
pregnancy outcomes with a uterine didelphys (preterm labor, malpresentation), overall pregnancy outcomes are good and are associated

Fig. 591.4 Coronal MRI demonstrating large volume hematocolpos

(asterisk) in a case of uterine didelphys with longitudinal vaginal septum. Black arrow, obstructed right uterus resulting in hematometra;
white arrow, unobstructed left uterus.

with less risk than in other uterine anomalies, but preconception
counseling and a consult with a high-­risk obstetric physician should
be offered.

Arcuate Uterus

An arcuate uterus is a uterine cavity that has a small midline septum
from lack of a small amount of resorption (<1 cm), and sometimes
a slight indentation of the uterine fundus. An arcuate uterus might
represent a variant of normal rather than a Müllerian anomaly.
Untoward pregnancy outcomes are rare, and surgical correction is
not warranted.

Treatment

Treatment depends on the specific diagnosis and should be determined
by a clinician with expertise in management of Müllerian anomalies.
Most treatments focus on relief of obstruction and consider a patient’s
reproductive goals and history. Hysteroscopic surgical resection of the
uterine septa was widely employed in the past, but a Cochrane systematic review shows no evidence to support surgical excision of the
septum. Each individual case should be discussed with the patient, and
a shared decision approach should be exercised based on the evidence
of the benefit of such surgery.
A noncommunicating horn with functional endometrium should be
resected to improve the quality of life or prevent future complications.
Opinions vary as to whether resection of a communicating horn or
one with no functional endometrium is warranted. Any surgical resection of a rudimentary horn requires careful surgical technique to protect the ipsilateral ovarian blood supply and the myometrium of the
remaining unicornuate uterus.
Although metroplasty (also known as the Strassman unification
method) had been employed with didelphic and bicornuate uteri in
the past, currently most clinicians feel there is not enough evidence to
support such a complicated procedure. Any obstruction to the outflow
tract must be relieved; this can necessitate creation of a vaginal window
or excision of the vaginal septum.

VAGINAL ANOMALIES
Abnormalities of the Hymen

An imperforate hymen is the most common obstructive anomaly,
and familial occurrences have been reported (see Fig. 591.1). Its
incidence is approximately 1 in 1,000. In the newborn period and
early infancy, it may be diagnosed by a bulging membrane caused
by a mucocolpos from maternal estrogen stimulation of the vaginal mucosa. This can eventually reabsorb if it is not too large or
symptomatic. More often, it is diagnosed at the time of menarche
when menstrual fluid accumulates (hematocolpos). The clinical manifestations often are a bulging blue-­black membrane, pain,
and/or primary amenorrhea in a setting of normal secondary sex

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies
characteristics. A mucocolpos or hematocolpos may obstruct urinary outflow. Depending on the circumstance, patients might have
cyclic abdominal pain or a pelvic mass. Other hymenal variations
can occur such as annular (most common) or crescentic configurations. In some cases, the hymenal membrane does not undergo
complete resorption or perforation, resulting in a microperforate,
cribriform, or septate-­shaped hymen. Age of recognition varies, but
hymenal variations are often discovered after menarche when it is
difficult for an adolescent to place or remove a tampon.

Congenital Absence of the Vagina and Mayer-­
Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser Syndrome

Vaginal agenesis or atresia results when the vaginal plate fails to
canalize. On physical exam, it appears as an extremely foreshortened vagina, sometimes referred to as a vaginal dimple. Isolated
(partial) vaginal agenesis involves an area of aplasia between the
distal vaginal portion and a normal upper vagina, cervix, and
uterus. These patients present with cryptomenorrhea and eventually have cyclic pain caused by obstructed outflow. Each subsequent
menses distends the upper vagina with menstrual blood. On initial
presentation it may be confused with a low transverse septum or
imperforate hymen, and therefore clear delineation of the anomaly with appropriate imaging is critical before attempting surgical
repair. Surgical repair and reconstruction are complicated and best
performed with consultation of specialists with expertise in managing these anomalies.
Uterine and vaginal agenesis/aplasia often occur together
because of their close association during development, when Müllerian ductal development fails early in the process. The most common
cause of uterovaginal agenesis/aplasia is Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­
Hauser (MRKH) syndrome, with an incidence reported at 1 in
5,000 female births. The etiology is believed to be multigenetic and
multifactorial. This condition is present at birth but often not diagnosed until mid-­adolescence. Females with MRKH syndrome have
normal ovarian function and undergo normal secondary sexual
development at puberty but do not have a menstrual cycle (primary
amenorrhea). The range and severity of MRKH syndrome can vary
greatly and the disorder may be type I (isolated uterovaginal anomaly) or type II, involving additional organ systems, including the
renal, skeletal, auditory, or cardiac systems. Absence of the vagina
and uterus has significant anatomic, physiologic, and psychologic
implications for the patient and family, and counseling is recommended. Although most patients with Müllerian agenesis have
small rudimentary Müllerian bulbs, approximately 2–7% of patients
can have active endometrium within these uterine structures. These
patients will often present with cyclic pelvic pain. MRI may be necessary to determine if any small uterine remnant is present (often
located on the pelvic sidewall or near the ovaries) and to clearly
delineate the anomaly. Laparoscopy is not necessary to diagnose
Müllerian agenesis but may be useful in the treatment of rudimentary uterine horns, particularly when removal of obstructed uterine
structures or associated endometriosis is indicated for pelvic pain.
Any diagnosis of Müllerian agenesis must be differentiated from
androgen insensitivity; karyotype, serum testosterone levels, and
pubic hair distribution help distinguish between the two because
testosterone levels and adrenarche will be normal in females with
MRKH syndrome.
Abnormalities involving other organ systems occur in association
with MRKH type II, or Müllerian duct aplasia, renal dysplasia, and
cervical somite anomalies (MURCS) association. The most common
are urinary tract anomalies (15–40%) primarily involving unilateral
absence of a kidney; a horseshoe or pelvic kidney; and skeletal anomalies (5–10%), which primarily involve vertebral development but can
also include cardiac anomalies and hearing impairment, and these
should be evaluated at the time of diagnosis.

Longitudinal Vaginal Septum

Longitudinal vaginal septa represent failure of complete canalization
of the vagina. These often occur in the presence of uterine anomalies.

3353

These septa can vary in length from the cervix or cervices caudally and
at times extend fully to the introitus. Patients may report menstruation
that overflows their tampon because they only have a single side of the
vagina occluded.

Transverse Vaginal Septum (Vertical Fusion Defects)

Vertical fusion defects can result in a transverse septum, which may
be imperforate and associated with hematocolpos or hematometra
in adolescents or with mucocolpos in infants. These are uncommon
anomalies, reportedly found in 1 in 80,000 females. Patients commonly present with primary amenorrhea and cyclical abdominal
pain around the time of menarche. However, patients who have a
small opening in the transverse septa might present with prolonged
vaginal drainage and mucopurulent or sanguineous discharge.
Transverse vaginal septa can vary in location (15–20% occur in the
lower third, but the majority are in the middle or upper third of the
vagina) and thickness (but are generally ≤1 cm). High locations,
thicker septa (>1 cm), and narrow vaginal orifices present challenging surgical cases.
Transverse vaginal septa may be associated with other congenital
anomalies, although this occurs less often than with Müllerian agenesis. These patients have a functional normal uterus, unlike females
with MRKH syndrome. In the majority of cases with outflow obstruction, there is also an increased incidence of endometriosis secondary
to retrograde menstruation.
Evaluation of transverse vaginal septa includes careful pelvic
examination and pelvic imaging, usually with MRI and ultrasound,
to delineate the anatomic abnormalities. MRI is especially helpful to
determine the thickness of the septum and verify the presence of a
cervix for surgical planning. Diagnosis and treatment plans should
be made as soon as possible after menarche because significant
accumulation of hematometra and/or hematosalpinx could affect
future reproductive success by negatively affecting uterine and/
or tubal function. Alternately, menstrual suppression is another
option to provide adolescent patients time to mature psychologically and participate in the treatment phase of the resection of the
transverse septum.

Treatment

An imperforate hymen requires resection to prevent or relieve the outflow tract obstruction. Many approach it with a horizontal, lunate, or
cruciate incision; excision of excess tissue; and approximation of the
mucosal edges. Repair should be done at time of diagnosis if the patient
is symptomatic, although the lesion may be repaired any time during
infancy, childhood, or adolescence. Elective surgery with general anesthesia is discouraged in the very young. Elective hymenal excision in
the prepubertal child may have improved healing if topical estrogen
is placed at the site postoperatively. Elective excision of an imperforate hymen can be performed after onset of thelarche but ideally before
menses. Variants in the hymen with microperforations or hymenal
septa may interfere with tampon use, and resection of this tissue is usually electively performed using local anesthesia or sedation according
to patient preference.
Treatment of congenital absence of the vagina is usually delayed
until the patient is mature enough to discuss and participate in the
treatment. The nonsurgical approach using vaginal dilation is the most
common first-­line therapy because it is safer, patient-­controlled, more
cost effective than surgery, and successful in 90–96% of patients. If done
correctly, it is possible to achieve a functional vaginal length (6-­8 cm),
width, and physiologic angle for intercourse in about 6-­8 months of
therapy. When the ultimate size that accommodates coitus is reached,
the patient must use the dilator or have coitus with a frequency that
maintains adequate length.
Surgical approaches require expertise and often some postoperative vaginal dilation to ensure a functional result. Controversy exists
as to when creation of a neovagina should occur. Surgery is indicated at any age if there is a medical indication such as mucocolpos
that causes urinary obstruction or any other surgical emergency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3354 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
However, literature reports better outcomes with delaying creation
of the neovagina to when the patient is interested in sexual activity
and can participate in the decision to have surgery and in their own
postoperative recovery. There is no consensus as to the best surgical
option. Surgery should be reserved for the rare patient for whom
primary dilator therapy was unsuccessful or for those who request
surgery after a thorough informed consent. Referral to centers with
expertise should be offered.
Future options for having children should be addressed, including
adoption and gestational surrogacy. Assisted reproductive techniques
using ovum retrieval, fertilization, and implantation of embryos into
gestational carriers (surrogates) have been successful. Female offspring
usually have normal reproductive tracts. Uterine transplantation has
resulted in live births, but this procedure remains rare. Opportunities
for family building enable patients and their families to appreciate the
potential for becoming parents and help cope with the diagnosis and
its implications.
Surgical resection of transverse vaginal septa should be undertaken only by surgeons with expertise. Some surgeons advocate
waiting for one or more menstrual cycles or using preoperative
dilators from below to increase the depth and circumference of
the distal vagina and to allow menstrual blood to accumulate and
dilate the upper portion of the vagina. Complete resection of the
septum, with primary anastomosis of the upper and lower mucosal
segments, should be attempted. A vaginal stent is sometimes placed
postoperatively in the vagina to maintain patency and allow squamous epithelialization of the upper vagina and cervix. Follow-­up
dilation may be necessary after the stent is removed. Careful preoperative assessment is important because surgeons who begin a
case believing they are operating on an imperforate hymen can find
themselves in entirely different and more complex surgical planes.
Regardless of the approach, vaginoplasty is often best deferred until
the patient is mature and physically and psychologically prepared
to participate in the healing process and postoperative dilator treatments. It can be challenging to differentiate a low transverse septum
from distal vaginal agenesis. If the distal vagina cannot be palpated
close to the anal sphincter by rectal examination, the patient should
be allowed to continue to menstruate to distend the upper vagina to
within 3 cm of the anal sphincter. This enables the surgeon to dissect up to the lower vagina and perform a pull-­through procedure,
anastomosing the upper vagina to the introitus. Proper timing and
surgical execution yield excellent outcomes.
Longitudinal vaginal septa themselves do not lead to adverse reproductive outcomes but may be symptomatic in a patient, causing dyspareunia, traumatic bleeding with intercourse, difficulties with tampon
insertion, or impedance during vaginal birth. Such complaints can
warrant a resection of the vaginal septa. A carefully planned incision
and resection of the oblique septum to maintain patency of the upper
tract is performed in cases of OHVIRA (Herlyn-­Werner-­Wunderlich
syndrome).

CERVICAL ANOMALIES

Congenital atresia or complete agenesis of the uterine cervix is
extremely rare and often manifests at puberty with amenorrhea and
pelvic pain. It is associated with significant renal anomalies in 5–10%
of patients. A pelvic MRI is often warranted to completely define the
abnormality. Usually, pain and obstruction are significant, and a hysterectomy is necessary. Attempts to reconnect the uterus to the vagina
are rarely successful and are associated with significant morbidity and
reoperation rates. The ovaries usually have normal function, and future
reproduction can still occur using in vitro fertilization and a gestational carrier.

VULVAR AND OTHER ANOMALIES
Complete Vulvar Duplication

Duplication of the vulva is a rare congenital anomaly that is seen in
infancy and consists of two vulvas, two vaginas, and two bladders, a
didelphic uterus, a single rectum and anus, and two renal systems.
Treatment is individualized and requires a multidisciplinary approach
with gynecology, urology, and plastic surgery.

Labial Asymmetry and Hypertrophy

With the onset of puberty, the labia minora enlarge and grow to an
adult size. A female’s labia can vary in size and shape. Asymmetry
of the labia, where the right and left labia are different in size and
appearance, is a normal variant. Some patients are uncomfortable
with what they perceive to be their asymmetric or enlarged labia
minora and complain about self-­
consciousness and discomfort
while wearing tight clothing, exercising, or having sex. The mature
labia minora can protrude beyond the labia majora, and this normal variant can be functionally or psychologically bothersome.
Local irritation, problems of personal hygiene with bowel movements or menses, or interference with sexual intercourse or while
sitting or exercising have resulted in requests for labial reduction.
Patients may find online procedures advertised to reduce uneven or
enlarged labia minora. Education and reassurance are very important for adolescents who have concerns about the appearance of
their labia. Surgery is not recommended unless there is significant
congenital malformation or persistent symptoms directly related to
the labia. Surgical alteration of the labia that is not necessary to the
health of the adolescent less than age 18 is considered a violation
of federal law in the United States. Complications of labial surgery
include loss of sensation, keloid formation, and dyspareunia.

Clitoral Abnormalities

Agenesis of the clitoris is rare. Clitoral duplication has been reported,
often associated with cloacal and bladder exstrophy. Exposure to male
hormones will result in clitoral enlargement and is often a sign of a difference of sex development, a testosterone-­producing tumor, or use of
exogenous steroids.

Cloacal Anomalies

Cloacal anomalies are rare lesions representing a common urogenital
sinus into which the gastrointestinal, urinary, and vaginal canals all
exit. Usually there is an abnormality in all or some of the processes of
fusion of the Müllerian ducts, development of the sinovaginal bulbs, or
development of the vaginal plate. The single opening (cloaca) requires
surgical correction, which is often done very early in life, preferably by
a multidisciplinary pediatric surgical team.

Ductal Remnants

Even though the opposite duct regresses in both sexes, there can
sometimes be a small portion of either the Müllerian or Wolffian
duct that remains in either the male or female, respectively. Such
remnants can form cysts, which are what make them clinically visible during surgery, examination, or imaging. Most do not cause
pain, although torsion of some has been reported, and small asymptomatic ones usually do not require resection. The most commonly
reported are hydatid of Morgagni cysts (remnant of a Wolffian duct
arising from the fallopian tube), cysts of the broad ligament, and
Gartner’s duct cysts, which can form an ectopic ureter or be found
along the cervix or vaginal walls.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 592 u Gynecologic Care for Adolescents with Special Needs

Chapter 592

Gynecologic Care for
Adolescents with Special
Needs
Elisabeth H. Quint and Melina L. Dendrinos
Adolescence presents challenges for all children and their families but
particularly for teens with special needs and their families. The start
of menstrual periods, the mood changes associated with puberty, the
concerns about sexual activity with possible unplanned pregnancies,
and worries about safety and abuse present teens with disabilities and
their families with additional issues.

SEXUALITY AND SEXUAL EDUCATION

Adolescents with special needs can have physical and/or developmental disabilities. These young people are often seen as asexual by their
families, care providers, and society and, therefore, sexual education
might not have been provided or considered necessary, even though
physically disabled teens report being sexually active. The care provider needs to assess the teen’s knowledge of anatomy and sexuality,
gender identity, social knowledge of relationships, ability to consent
to sexual and intimate activities, and sexual orientation, as well as any
previous sexual activity. Education regarding HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections, disease prevention, and contraception, including emergency contraception, should be offered at a developmentally
appropriate level.

ABUSE

The risk for sexual abuse in teens with disabilities is difficult to estimate.
Teens with disabilities may be more at risk for isolation and depression
during adolescence, leading to vulnerability.
Teens with disabilities are just as sexually active or even more
so than their nondisabled counterparts, but more of their activity is nonvoluntary. Patients with cognitive impairment are often
taught to be cooperative, which may make them more vulnerable
to coercion. Abuse prevention education can include the No! Go!
Tell! model. For teens with limited verbal capacity or developmental
delay, abuse may be very hard to detect; thus screening for abuse
is extremely important. The care provider needs to be vigilant in
looking for signs on physical exam, such as unexplained bruises or
scratches, or changes in behavior, such as regression, which may be
indications of sexual abuse (see Chapters 17.1 and 162).

PELVIC EXAMINATION

An internal pelvic exam is rarely indicated in teens, as Papanicolaou smears are not recommended to start until age 21. An external genital exam can be performed if there are vulvovaginal issues
such as discharge, irregular bleeding, suspicion for abuse, or foreign body. The frog-­leg position is usually favored over the use of
stirrups. If the vagina or cervix needs to be clearly visualized for a
medical indication, an exam under anesthesia by a gynecologist can
be considered. Testing for sexually transmitted infections can be
accomplished by urine testing or vaginal swabs (see Chapter 163).

MENSTRUATION

Irregular menstruation is common in teenagers, especially during the first 5 years after menarche, because of immaturity of the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian axis and subsequent anovulation

3355

(see Chapter 159). Several conditions in teens with disabilities are
associated with an even higher risk of irregular cycles. Thyroid
disease is more common in teens with Down syndrome. There
is a higher incidence of reproductive issues, including polycystic
ovarian syndrome, in teens with epilepsy or those taking certain
antiepileptic drugs. Antipsychotic medication can lead to hyperprolactinemia, which can affect menstruation.
For teens with disabilities, the main issue with menstrual cycles,
whether they are regular, irregular, or heavy, is the impact of menstruation on the patient’s life, health, and ability to perform their
normal activities. The history should focus on this aspect, and
menstrual calendars may be helpful to document the cycles, behavior, and impact of treatments. Most adolescents who self-­toilet can
learn to use menstrual hygiene products appropriately. Menstrual
underwear have been very helpful for many teens. Premenarchal
anticipatory guidance is recommended, but hormonal treatment
before menarche should be avoided.
The medical evaluation for abnormal bleeding is the same as for all
teens (see Chapter 159.2). Areas requiring particular attention for the
teen with special needs are the consideration of menstrual suppression for hygiene or cyclical behavioral issues, like crying, tantrums, or
withdrawal.

Treatment of Menstruation

If the impact of cycles, whether regular, irregular, or heavy, on the
patient’s well-­being is significant (often documented through menstrual or behavioral charting for several months), the care provider,
patient, and family may decide on menstrual intervention. Menstrual regulation or suppression is not much different from that
in the nondisabled teenager in general, although there are some
special considerations. Goals for treatment can be to decrease the
heaviness of flow, regulate cycles to predictable bleeding, relieve
pain or cyclical behavior symptoms, provide contraception, and/
or obtain amenorrhea. Menstrual suppression leading to complete
amenorrhea is usually difficult to obtain and infrequent scheduled
bleeds may be easier to manage than unpredictable spotting, a common side effect of any suppressive treatment, for certain patients.
After treatment has started, providers should continue to monitor
outcomes, ideally with continued menstrual or behavioral calendars
to assess efficacy and need for changes.

Nonhormonal Methods

If menorrhagia or dysmenorrhea (occasionally leading to cyclical
behavior changes in nonverbal teens) is the main concern, the patient
can be started on scheduled nonsteroidal anti-­inflammatory drugs.
These can decrease the flow by up to 20% in adequate doses and can be
used alone or in combination with other treatments. Use of tranexamic
acid during the first 5 days of menses can also be used to decrease
heavy bleeding.

Estrogen-­Containing Methods

All estrogen-­containing medication can be used in a cyclical fashion
with scheduled medication breaks to allow for monthly menses; in a
more extended fashion, where the active hormonal method is used for
3 months with a scheduled break; or a more flexible schedule, where
the hormones are used until bleeding starts, and a break for withdrawal
bleeding can be done at that time.

Oral Contraceptives

Cyclical oral contraceptives usually lead to regular, lighter cycles with
less cramping. Continuous daily use of active oral contraceptives can
suppress cycles, with amenorrhea rates improving with time. Some
unpredictable spotting is usually unavoidable, and often teens with
special needs prefer to have predictable cycles several times a year.
Chewable oral contraceptives are available for those with swallowing
issues.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3356 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Contraceptive Ring

The contraceptive ring can be used in a pattern of 3 weeks in and 1
week out, but it can also be used (off-­label) in a continuous 4-­week
pattern, which leads to less bleeding. However, the contraceptive ring
may be difficult to use for a teen with dexterity problems, and help with
placement has obvious privacy issues.

Contraceptive Patch

The weekly patch can also be used in a cyclic or extended fashion. Some
teens with developmental disabilities and sensory issues may remove
their patch erratically, and placement out of reach (e.g., on buttocks or
shoulder) is advised.

Estrogen Use, Venous Thromboembolism, and Mobility Issues

Whether immobility and wheelchair use can lead to an increased
risk of venous-­thromboembolic events (VTEs) in association with
estrogen-­containing contraceptives remains controversial. The risk
of thrombosis in young females is very low overall, but the use of
combined hormonal contraceptives by adolescents who are immobile
or who have limited mobility has not been studied. Immobility per
se is not a contraindication to estrogen-­containing contraceptives;
however, it may increase the risk of VTE. There are limited data to
support the concern that higher-­dose oral estrogen and the third­and fourth-­generation progestin preparations may have a higher
risk for VTE. It is important to assess for other VTE risk factors in
the patient’s history before initiating estrogen therapy. Careful use of
lower-­dose (30 or 20 μg) ethinyl estradiol preparations after appropriate counseling may be advisable, and third-­generation progestin
combinations should only be used if second-­generation medications
have failed.

Progestin-­Only Methods
Intramuscular Medroxyprogesterone Acetate

Intramuscular depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) has
long been used for menstrual suppression. Two issues are particularly relevant to teens with disabilities. Studies documenting a
decrease in bone density associated with longer-­term use of DMPA
and a black box warning by the FDA have raised concerns about use
of these products in young females, although research indicates that
the bone density improves after the medication is stopped. For teens
with mobility issues or those with very low body weight who are
already at risk for low bone density, decreased bone density is a real
concern, although the risk of fractures is unclear. Adequate calcium
and vitamin D is recommended. The second issue for teens with
mobility issues is weight gain associated with DMPA, especially
among obese teens, which can lead to transfer and mobility issues.
The potential health risks associated with the effects of DMPA on
bone density and weight must be balanced against the need for
menstrual suppression and the likelihood of unintended pregnancy.
Weight should be monitored closely. Routine bone density scanning
(DEXA) is not recommended in adolescents.

Oral Progestins

Continuous oral progestins can also be very effective in obtaining
amenorrhea. The contraceptive progestin-­only pill (norethindrone
0.35 mg) can cause significant irregular spotting, so if full suppression is the goal, then other progestins can be used daily, such as
drospirenone 4 mg, norethindrone 2.5 or 5 mg, or micronized progesterone 200 mg.

Progesterone Intrauterine Device

The 8-­year levonorgestrel-­intrauterine device is used for many teenagers for contraception, as well as heavy menses and dysmenorrhea
(off-­label use). Teens with special needs might require anesthesia
for insertion if the exam is difficult because of discomfort, contractures, or a narrow vagina. Checking for strings in a clinic setting
may be challenging; however, the intrauterine device location can
be confirmed by sonography. There may be a significant amount of
irregular bleeding and spotting in the first several months, but there
is 20% rate of amenorrhea after insertion and up to 50% rate of
amenorrhea after 1 year of use. The bleeding profile of the smaller
and lower dose 3-5 year levonorgestrel-­intrauterine devices may not
be as helpful for menstrual suppression; the amenorrhea rates from
the initial studies by the manufacturer are 8–12% at 1 year, but more
studies are needed.

Implants

Progestin subdermal implants have relatively low amenorrhea rates
and higher rates of unscheduled bleeding; therefore they are often less
desirable for menstrual suppression for teens with special needs. They
also require significant patient cooperation for insertion.

Hormones and Antiepileptic Drugs

Certain enzyme-­
inducing seizure medications can interfere with
estrogen-­containing contraceptives, change their contraceptive effectiveness, and/or lead to intermittent bleeding. Higher estrogen dose or
shorter injection intervals for DMPA may be considered. The only antiepileptic medication that is affected by combined oral contraceptives
is lamotrigine; consequently, the dose of that medication may need to
be adjusted if used in conjunction with hormones, so discussion with
other providers is needed.

Surgical Methods

Surgical procedures, such as endometrial ablation, a procedure where
the lining of the uterus is surgically removed, and hysterectomy, are
available for treatment of abnormal and heavy bleeding in adults, but
they should only rarely be used in extreme situations for teenagers
where all other methods have failed, and the patient’s health is severely
compromised by their cycles. Endometrial ablation only leads to
amenorrhea approximately 30% of the time, has a higher failure rate in
females younger than 40 years of age, and is not recommended in the
adolescent population. Ethical considerations around these methods
leading to infertility and consent issues are complicated, and state law
varies on this topic.

CONTRACEPTION

See also Chapter 160.
The menstrual management methods discussed above can also
be used for contraception. A request for birth control, especially
coming from a caregiver and not the teen, requires an evaluation of
the teen’s ability to consent to sexual activity and the safety of their
environment. The method chosen should be the safest method for
their situation with the highest protection rate. Therefore a long-­
acting reversible contraceptive method may be advisable. Sexually
transmitted infections and condom use should be addressed with
the teen and specific guidelines on how to obtain condoms and
negotiate their use may be needed. A discussion about emergency
contraception is recommended, as well as ways to help the teen
obtain this if indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 593 u Female Genital Mutilation

Chapter 593

Female Genital Mutilation
Deborah Hodes and Sarah M. Creighton
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is a worldwide human rights issue
that constitutes violence against women and children. It is defined by
the World Health Organization (WHO) as procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury
to the female genital organs for nonmedical reasons. In September
2015 the United Nations adopted the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), which includes the elimination of FGM by 2030. UNICEF
(United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund) estimates
that at least 200 million women and young females in 30 countries
have undergone FGM. There has been a decline in the prevalence of
FGM, but current trends suggest that actual numbers will rise because
of population growth. FGM is commonly performed in Africa, the
Middle East, and Asia, with data suggesting an estimated 40 million
young females in Indonesia have undergone FGM. According to the
UNICEF report 2020, the COVID-­19 pandemic has caused disruption
to the protection of young females from FGM leading to an estimated 2
million additional cases than would otherwise have occurred.
The migration of FGM-­practicing communities means that FGM is
a global problem, although there are scant data on the practice in high-­
income countries. Despite estimates, a British pediatric surveillance
unit study found low numbers presenting to pediatricians; there were
very few illegal cases and only one successful prosecution in the UK by
2021. FGM is almost always carried out on children, and pediatricians
must be familiar with the identification of FGM, the impact on health,
and ways to protect young females from this widespread form of child
abuse.
FGM has no health benefits and can cause lifelong damage to physical and psychologic health. The WHO has classified FGM into four
types, depending on the extent and type of genital tissue removed
(Table 593.1). The traditional practitioner performs FGM without
anesthetic or sterile conditions, and in some countries, it is done as part
of a wider ritual related to early child marriage. The child is restrained
whilst the external genitalia are removed or damaged using a knife,
scalpel, or other sharp instrument. An increasing number of procedures are performed at a younger age, and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) estimates that around one in five young females
subjected to FGM were cut by a trained healthcare provider. Table
593.2 lists potential risks and protective factors for FGM.

COMPLICATIONS

Immediate complications of FGM include hemorrhage and infection.
Deaths have been reported, although numbers are unknown. Infections

3357

include immediate wound infection, tetanus, and gangrene. FGM has
been implicated in the transmission of blood-­borne infections because
of the use of shared and unsterile tools. Although procedure-­related
blood-­borne infection is probable, there are no good studies to confirm
this; infections such as hepatitis B and HIV are endemic in areas where
FGM is prevalent. FGM leads to obstetric, gynecologic, and psychologic consequences in adult women. Gynecologic symptoms include
painful and unsightly scarring, clitoral cysts, and recurrent urinary
infections. Menstrual difficulties and infertility are reported, although
the underlying mechanisms of these are unclear apart from type 3
FGM, where the vagina is narrowed. FGM damages sexual function
by removing sensitive sexual tissue and narrowing the vagina. Mental
health problems such as anxiety and depression have been linked to
FGM. FGM also has a detrimental impact on obstetric outcomes for
both the mother and baby, leading to increased risks of postpartum
hemorrhage, perineal trauma, and perinatal death.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF FGM

Most pediatricians will not see a child who is acutely unwell due to
FGM. Management of FGM in the acute situation should include
assessment for blood loss, sepsis, and urinary retention and treatment
with antibiotics, analgesia, tetanus toxoid, and urinary catheterization. Pediatricians are more likely to see a child in whom FGM has
been found during the investigation of other often vague symptoms
as well as recurrent urinary tract infections and vulvovaginitis. FGM
may also be alleged by the child or family member, or concerns may
be raised by other health and social care professionals, particularly if
the mother herself has undergone FGM and has little support from the
husband (see Table 593.2). Pediatricians may be asked to confirm FGM
on genital examination; it should be performed using a colposcope for
magnification and video documentation, which can be used for peer
review and in a court of law. The examination must be done in a sensitive and gentle manner by an appropriately trained clinician and in an
age-­appropriate setting. It is often assumed that FGM will be obvious.
However, whilst type 3 FGM, in which the vagina is sealed, is usually
easy to detect, other types of FGM can be more difficult to diagnose.
This is particularly true for type 4 FGM, which may involve a prick or
small scratch on or adjacent to the clitoris and may heal without a trace.
General assessment of the child's health should include screening for
blood-­borne viruses.
If the child has type 3 FGM, then a deinfibulation procedure will be
required at some point. Deinfibulation is a minor surgical procedure to
divide any scar tissue that obscures the vaginal introitus. If the child is
asymptomatic, this can be deferred until adolescence or before sexual
activity. Deinfibulation procedures are usually performed under a local
anesthetic in adult women, but in children a brief general anesthetic
is more appropriate. The psychologic impact of FGM on a child may
be severe, and flashbacks and nightmares have been reported. Input
from a child psychologist or psychotherapist with experience in working with children with FGM and their families should be available. If a
child is confirmed to have FGM, then other children in the family may
be at risk, and local safeguarding pathways should be activated. Pediatricians must be advocates against FGM and contribute to training

Table 593.1  	 Summary of WHO Classification of FGM
Type 1: Clitoridectomy: Partial or total removal of the clitoris (a small
sensitive and erectile part of the female genitals) and, in rare cases,
only the prepuce (the fold of skin surrounding the clitoris).
Type 2: Excision: Partial or total removal of the clitoris and labia
minora with or without removal of the labia majora (the labia are
the “lips” that surround the vagina).
Type 3: Infibulation: Narrowing of the vaginal opening through
the creation of a covering seal. The seal is formed by cutting and
repositioning the labia minora or majora with or without removal of
the clitoris.
Type 4: Other: All other harmful procedures to the genitalia for
nonmedical reasons (e.g., pricking, piercing, incision, scraping, and
cauterizing the genital area).
From the World Health Organization Female Genital Mutilation Fact Sheet.
https://www.who.int/news-­room/fact-­sheets/detail/female-­genital-­mutilation

Table 593.2  Factors That Influence Whether or Not a Child
May Have FGM
RISK FACTORS
Mother or sister cut
Isolated mother
Grandmother influential
Little information and discussion about FGM
PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Discussing with husband or friend
Knowing the law has been implemented
TV, global debate, media
Men's attitude and knowledge
Knowing an uncut person

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3358 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
healthcare workers who may treat patients. In developed countries,
there are concerns that the emphasis on prosecution has stigmatized
and alienated communities in the diaspora who have abandoned
the practice; because of this, experts emphasize the need for a more

community-­centric approach to current and future FGM prevention
efforts.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Endocrine System
Section 1

PART

XXIV

VASCULAR SUPPLY

Disorders of the
Hypothalamus and
Pituitary Gland
Chapter 594

Hormones of the
Hypothalamus and
Pituitary

The arterial blood supply of the pituitary gland originates from the
internal carotid via the inferior, middle, and superior hypophyseal
arteries. This network of vessels forms a unique portal circulation
connecting the hypothalamus and pituitary. The branches of the
superior hypophyseal arteries penetrate the stalk and form a network of vessels that traverse the pituitary stalk and terminate in
a network of capillaries within the anterior lobe. It is through this
portal venous system that hypothalamic hormones are delivered to
the anterior pituitary gland. Anterior pituitary hormones, in turn,
are secreted into a secondary plexus of portal veins that drain into
the dural venous sinuses.

ANTERIOR PITUITARY CELL TYPES

A series of sequentially expressed transcriptional activation factors
directs the differentiation and proliferation of anterior pituitary cell
types. These proteins are members of a large family of DNA-­binding
proteins resembling homeobox genes. The consequences of pathogenic
variants in several of these genes are evident in human forms of multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. Five cell types in the anterior pituitary produce six peptide hormones. Somatotropes produce growth

Eric I. Felner and Briana C. Patterson
The pituitary and hypothalamus are the major regulators of an elaborate hormonal system. The pituitary gland receives signals from the
hypothalamus and responds by sending pituitary hormones to target
glands. The target glands produce hormones that provide negative
feedback at the level of the hypothalamus and pituitary (Figs. 594.1 and
594.2). This feedback mechanism enables the pituitary to regulate the
amount of hormone released into the bloodstream by the target glands.
The pituitary’s central role in this hormonal system and its ability to
interpret and respond to a variety of signals have led to its designation
as the master gland. Table 594.1 lists the hypothalamic and pituitary
hormones and their functions.

Glucocorticoid receptors
Thyroid hormone receptors
Leptin receptors

Paraventricular
nucleus

TRH
neuron

Brainstem
catecholaminergic
inputs

CRH
Temperature
Energy
state

NPY/
AGRP
neurons

Arcuate
nucleus

Hypothalamus
tanycytes
T4
T3

POMC/
CART
neurons

ANATOMY

The pituitary gland is located at the base of the skull in a saddle-­shaped
cavity of the sphenoid bone called the sella turcica. The bony structure protects and surrounds the pituitary bilaterally and inferiorly. The
dura, a dense layer of connective tissue, forms the roof of the sella
turcica. An external layer of the dura continues into the sella turcica
to form its lining. As a result, the pituitary is extradural and is not
normally in contact with cerebrospinal fluid. The pituitary gland is
connected to the hypothalamus by the pituitary stalk. The pituitary
gland is composed of an anterior (adenohypophysis) and a posterior
(neurohypophysis) lobe. The anterior lobe constitutes approximately
80% of the gland.

TRH

Somatostatin

Pituitary
T4
T3

TSH
T4

EMBRYOLOGY

The anterior pituitary gland originates from Rathke’s pouch as an
invagination of the oral ectoderm. It then detaches from the oral epithelium and becomes an individual structure of rapidly proliferating
cells. By 6 weeks of gestation, the connection between Rathke’s pouch
and oropharynx is completely obliterated. The pouch establishes a
direct connection with the downward extension of the hypothalamus,
which gives rise to the pituitary stalk. Persistent remnants of the craniopharyngeal duct, the original connection between Rathke’s pouch
and the oral cavity, can develop into adamantinous craniopharyngiomas (see Chapter 546).

T3
Thyroid

Fig. 594.1 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
thyroid axis.

AGRP, Agouti-­
related peptide; CART, cocaine-­and amphetamine-­
regulated transcript; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; NPY, neuropeptide Y; POMC, proopiomelanocortin; T3, triiodothyronine; T4,
thyroxine; TRH, thyrotropin-­releasing hormone; TSH, thyrotropin. (From
Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR,
Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.9.)

3359
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3360 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Hippocampus
Prefrontal
cortex

Processive
(Neurogenic)
Stress
(fear, restraint)

Glucocorticoid
receptors
Cytokine receptors
Leptin receptors

Raphe nucleus
Lateral
septum

Hypothalamic
GABAergic inputs

BST

Paraventricular
nucleus

GABA

MeA

5-HT

Hypothalamic
glutamatergic
inputs

Hypothalamic
glutamatergic
inputs

Brainstem
catecholaminergic
inputs
NTS

CRH
neuron
Subfornical org.
OVLT
MePO

Systemic
(Physiologic)
Stress
(osmotic challenge,
macromolecules)

Prostaglandins
Brainstem
vasculature

Arcuate,
NPY, and POMC
neurons

Systemic
(Physiologic)
Stress
(cytokines,
hypoxia,
hemorrhage)

Hypothalamus

to
CNS
CRH
AVP

CRIF?

IL-1, IL-2,
IL-6, TNFα

Pituitary
Immune
cells

ACTH

Cortisol

Adrenal

Fig. 594.2 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
adrenal axis.

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; AVP, arginine vasopressin; BST,
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis; CNS, central nervous system; CRH,
corticotropin-­releasing hormone; CRIF, corticotropin release–inhibiting
factor; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid; 5-­HT, 5-­hydroxytryptamine; IL-­1, interleukin 1; MeA, medial amygdala; MePO, medial preoptic nucleus;
NPY, neuropeptide Y; NTS, nucleus of the tractus solitarius; OVLT, organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis; POMC, proopiomelanocortin;
TNF-­α, tumor necrosis factor-­α. (From Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In
Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.18.)

hormone (GH), lactotropes produce prolactin (PRL), thyrotropes
make thyroid-­
stimulating hormone (TSH), corticotropes express
proopiomelanocortin (POMC), the precursor of adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH), and gonadotropes express luteinizing hormone
(LH) and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH).

Growth Hormone

Human GH is a 191–amino acid, single-­chain polypeptide that is synthesized, stored, and secreted by somatotropes in the pituitary. Its gene
(GH1) is the first in a cluster of five closely related genes on the long
arm of chromosome 17 (q22-­24). The other four genes (CS1, CS2, GH2,
and CSP) have >90% sequence identity with the GH1 gene.
GH is secreted in a pulsatile fashion under the regulation of
hypothalamic hormones. The alternating secretion of GH-­releasing
hormone (GHRH), which stimulates GH release, and somatostatin, which inhibits GH release, accounts for the rhythmic secretion
of GH. Peaks of GH occur when peaks of GHRH coincide with
troughs of somatostatin. Ghrelin, a peptide produced in the arcuate
nucleus of the hypothalamus and in much greater quantities by the
stomach, also stimulates GH secretion. In addition to these three
hypothalamic hormones, physiologic factors play a role in stimulating and inhibiting GH. Sleep, exercise, physical stress, trauma, acute
illness, puberty, fasting, and hypoglycemia stimulate the release of
GH, whereas hyperglycemia, hypothyroidism, and glucocorticoids
inhibit GH release (Fig. 594.3).

GH binds to receptor molecules on the surface of target cells. The GH
receptor is a 620–amino acid, single-­chain molecule with an extracellular domain, a single membrane-­spanning domain, and a cytoplasmic
domain. Proteolytically cleaved fragments of the extracellular domain
circulate in plasma and act as a GH-­binding protein. Similar to other
members of the cytokine receptor family, the cytoplasmic domain of
the GH receptor lacks intrinsic kinase activity; instead, GH binding
induces receptor dimerization and activation of a receptor-­associated
Janus kinase (Jak2). Phosphorylation of the kinase and other protein
substrates initiates a series of events that leads to alterations in nuclear
gene transcription. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) plays a critical role in linking receptor activation to
changes in gene transcription.
The biologic effects of GH include increases in linear growth, bone
thickness, soft tissue growth, protein synthesis, fatty acid release from
adipose tissue, insulin resistance, and blood glucose. The mitogenic
actions of GH are mediated through increases in the synthesis of
insulin-­like growth factor 1 (IGF-­1), formerly named somatomedin
C, a 70–amino acid single-­chain peptide coded for by a gene on the
long arm of chromosome 12 with considerable homology to insulin.
Circulating IGF-­1 is synthesized primarily in the liver and formed
locally in mesodermal and ectodermal cells, particularly in the growth
plates of children, where its effect is exerted by paracrine or autocrine
mechanisms. Circulating levels of IGF-­1 are bound to several different
binding proteins and are related to blood levels of GH and nutritional
status. The major binding protein is a 150-­kDa complex (IGF-­BP3) that
is low in GH-­deficient children. Human recombinant IGF-­1 has been
developed as a therapeutic in conditions characterized by primary
IGF-­1 deficiency, end-­organ resistance to GH (e.g., Laron syndrome),
and the development of antibodies for those individuals administered
GH. Insulin-­like growth factor 2 (IGF-­2) is a 67–amino acid single-­
chain protein that is coded for by a gene on the short arm of chromosome 11 that is also homologous to insulin and IGF-­1. Less is known
about its physiologic role, but it appears to be an important mitogen in
bone cells, where it occurs in a concentration many times higher than
that of IGF-­1.

Prolactin

PRL is a 199–amino acid peptide made in pituitary lactotropes. The
regulation of PRL is unique because PRL is constitutively secreted
by the pituitary unless it is actively inhibited by dopamine, a peptide produced by neurons in the hypothalamus. Disruption of the
hypothalamus or pituitary stalk can result in elevated PRL levels.
Dopamine antagonists, states of primary hypothyroidism, administration of thyrotropin-­releasing hormone (TRH), hypothalamic
injury secondary to radiation therapy, and pituitary tumors result
in increased serum levels of PRL. Dopamine agonists and processes
causing destruction of the anterior pituitary gland can reduce levels
of PRL.
The primary physiologic role for PRL is the initiation and maintenance of lactation. PRL prepares the breasts for lactation and stimulates milk production postpartum. During pregnancy, PRL stimulates
the development of the milk secretory apparatus, but lactation does not
occur because of the high levels of estrogen and progesterone. After
delivery, the estrogen and progesterone levels drop, and physiologic
stimuli such as suckling and nipple stimulation signal PRL release and
initiate lactation.

Thyroid-­Stimulating Hormone

TSH consists of two glycoprotein chains (α, β) linked by hydrogen
bonding: the α-­subunit, which is composed of 89 amino acids and
is identical to other glycoproteins (FSH, LH, and human chorionic
gonadotropin), and the β-­subunit, composed of 112 amino acids, that
is specific for TSH.
TSH is stored in secretory granules and released into circulation
primarily in response to TRH, which is produced by the hypothalamus. TRH is released from the hypothalamus into the hypothalamic-­
pituitary portal system and ultimately stimulates TSH release from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 594 u Hormones of the Hypothalamus and Pituitary 3361
Table 594.1  Hormones of the Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
HORMONES

LOCATION

S/I

FUNCTION

ACTH

Anterior pituitary

S

Production and secretion of GCs, MCs, and androgens from adrenal gland

ADH

Posterior pituitary

S

Reabsorption of water into the bloodstream via renal collecting ducts

CRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of ACTH

Dopamine

Hypothalamus

I

Secretion of PRL

FSH (females)

Anterior pituitary

S

Secretion of estrogen from ovary

FSH (males)

Anterior pituitary

S

Production of sperm from testis

GH

Anterior pituitary

S

Secretion of IGF-­1

GHRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of GH

Ghrelin

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of GH

GnRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of FSH and LH

LH (females)

Anterior pituitary

S

Ovulation and development of the corpus luteum

LH (males)

Anterior pituitary

S

Production and secretion of testosterone

Oxytocin

Posterior pituitary

S

Contractions of uterus at birth and release of milk from breast

PRL

Anterior pituitary

S

Promotion of milk synthesis

Somatostatin

Hypothalamus

I

Secretion of GH and TSH

TRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of TSH and PRL

TSH

Anterior pituitary

S

Secretion of T4 and T3

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; ADH, antidiuretic hormone; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GCs, glucocorticoids; GH, growth
hormone; GHRH, growth hormone–releasing hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; IGF-­1, insulin-­derived growth factor 1; LH, luteinizing hormone; MCs,
mineralocorticoids; PRL, prolactin; S/I, stimulate/inhibit; T3, triiodothyronine; T4, thyroxine; TRH, thyrotropin-­releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone (thyrotropin).

pituitary thyrotropes. TSH stimulates release of thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3) from the thyroid gland through the formation
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and the G protein second messenger system. In addition to the negative feedback inhibition by T3, the
release of TRH and TSH is inhibited by dopamine, somatostatin, and
glucocorticoids.
Deficiency of TSH results in inactivity and atrophy of the thyroid
gland, whereas excess TSH results in hypertrophy and hyperplasia of
the thyroid gland.

Adrenocorticotropic Hormone

ACTH is a 39–amino acid single-­chain peptide that is derived by proteolytic cleavage from POMC, which is a 240–amino acid precursor
glycoprotein product of the pituitary gland. POMC also contains the
sequences for the lipotropins, melanocyte-­stimulating hormones (α, β,
γ), and β-­endorphin.
Secretion of ACTH is regulated by corticotropin-­releasing hormone (CRH), a 41–amino acid peptide found predominantly in the
median eminence but also in other areas in and outside of the brain.
ACTH is secreted in a diurnal pattern. It acts on the adrenal cortex to stimulate cortisol synthesis and secretion. ACTH and cortisol
levels are highest in the morning at the time of waking, are low in
the late afternoon and evening, and reach their nadir within the first
2 hours after beginning sleep. Similar to TRH and TSH, CRH and
ACTH function through the formation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and the G protein second messenger system. Although
CRH is the primary regulator of ACTH secretion, other hormones
play a role. Arginine vasopressin, oxytocin, angiotensin II, and cholecystokinin stimulate release of CRH and ACTH, whereas atrial
natriuretic peptide and opioids inhibit release of CRH and ACTH.
Similar to the feedback inhibition T3 has on TRH and TSH, cortisol also inhibits CRH and ACTH. Physiologic conditions, such as
stress, fasting, and hypoglycemia, also stimulate release of CRH and
ACTH.

Luteinizing Hormone and Follicle-­Stimulating
Hormone

Gonadotropic hormones include two glycoproteins: LH and FSH.
They contain the same α subunit as TSH and human chorionic
gonadotropin but distinct β subunits. Receptors for FSH on the
ovarian granulosa cells and on testicular Sertoli cells mediate FSH
stimulation of follicular development in the ovary and of gametogenesis in the testis. On binding to specific receptors on ovarian
theca cells and testicular Leydig cells, LH promotes luteinization
of the ovary and Leydig cell function of the testis (Fig. 594.4). The
receptors for LH and FSH belong to a class of receptors with seven
membrane-­spanning protein domains. Receptor occupancy activates adenylyl cyclase through the mediation of G proteins.
LH-­releasing hormone, a decapeptide, has been isolated, synthesized, and widely used in clinical studies. Because it leads to the
release of LH and FSH from the same gonadotropic cells, it appears
that it is the only gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH).
Secretion of LH is inhibited by androgens and estrogens, and secretion of FSH is suppressed by gonadal production of inhibin, a 31-­kDa
glycoprotein produced by ovarian granulosa cells (females) and testicular Sertoli cells (males). Inhibin consists of α and β subunits joined
by disulfide bonds. The β-­β dimer activin also exists, and its actions
generally oppose that of inhibin by stimulating FSH secretion. In addition to its endocrine effect, activin has paracrine effects in the testis.
It facilitates LH-­induced testosterone production, indicating a direct
effect of Sertoli cells on Leydig cells.

POSTERIOR PITUITARY CELL TYPES

The posterior lobe of the pituitary is part of a functional unit, the
neurohypophysis, that consists of the neurons of the supraoptic and
paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus; neuronal axons, which
form the pituitary stalk; and neuronal terminals in the median eminence or in the posterior lobe. Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3362 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
GH receptors
GHS receptors
GHRH receptors
SST receptors

SST
neuron

Raphe
nucleus

Periventricular
nucleus

5-HT

CRH
neuron

Brainstem
catecholaminergic
inputs

Basal
forebrain
ACh

GHRH
neuron
NPY
neuron
SST
neuron

Arcuate
nucleus

DA
Galanin

Hypothalamus
to CNS

GHRH

Leptin

SST
Ghrelin

Fat

Pituitary
FFA

GH

IGF-1
Stomach

Liver
Ghrelin

Fig. 594.3 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­growth hormone (GH) axis. GH secretion by the pituitary is stimulated by GH-­releasing hor-

mone (GHRH) and is inhibited by somatostatin (SST). Negative feedback control of GH secretion is exerted at the pituitary level by insulin-­like growth
factor 1 (IGF-­1) and by free fatty acids (FFAs). GH itself exerts a short-­loop negative feedback through activation of SST neurons in the hypothalamic
periventricular nucleus. These SST neurons directly synapse on arcuate GHRH neurons and project axon collaterals to the median eminence. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) neurons in the arcuate nucleus also indirectly modulate GH secretion by integrating peripheral GH, leptin, and ghrelin signals and
projecting to periventricular SST neurons. Ghrelin is secreted from the stomach and is a natural ligand for the GH secretagogue (GHS) receptor that
stimulates GH secretion at both the hypothalamic and pituitary levels. On the basis of indirect pharmacologic data, it appears that release of GHRH
is stimulated by galanin, γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA), and α2-­adrenergic and dopaminergic inputs and inhibited by SST. Secretion of SST is inhibited
by muscarinic acetylcholine (ACh) and 5-­HT-­1D receptor ligands and increased by β2-­adrenergic stimuli and corticotropin-­releasing hormone (CRH).
CNS, Central nervous system; DA, dopamine; 5-­HT, serotonin (5-­hydroxytryptamine). (From Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In Melmed S, Polonsky
KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.22.)

[ADH]) and oxytocin are the two hormones produced by neurosecretion in the hypothalamic nuclei and released from the posterior pituitary. They are octapeptides and differ by only two amino
acids.

Vasopressin

Vasopressin (ADH) regulates water conservation at the level of the
kidney by increasing the permeability of the renal collecting duct to

water. It stimulates translocation of water channels through its interaction with vasopressin 2 (V2) receptors in the collecting duct, which act
through G proteins to increase adenylyl cyclase activity and increase
permeability to water. These V2 receptors also mediate von Willebrand
factor and tissue plasminogen activator. At higher concentrations,
ADH activates vasopressin 1 (V1) receptors in smooth muscle cells
and hepatocytes and exerts pressor and glycogenolytic effects through
mobilization of intracellular calcium stores. Separate vasopressin 3

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 594 u Hormones of the Hypothalamus and Pituitary 3363

NE
GnRH
neuron

Stress,
Nutrition,
Exercise,
Seasonal cues

Progesterone receptors
Estrogen receptors
Androgen receptors
Inhibin receptors
Leptin receptors

CRH

Kisspeptin
neuron

NPY

Anteroventral
Periventricular
nucleus
Hypothalamus

GABA

GALP

Glutamate

Arcuate
nucleus
β-endorphins

Kisspeptin
neuron

to CNS

to CNS

Pituitary

Inhibin

Testosterone

Estradiol
LH and
FSH

Inhibin

Testis

Progesterone

Ovary

Fig. 594.4 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis. Schematic diagram of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis showing neural

systems that regulate gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion and feedback of gonadal steroid hormones at the level of the hypothalamus
and pituitary. CNS, Central nervous system; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid;
GALP, galanin-­like peptide; LH, luteinizing hormone; NE, norepinephrine; NPY, neuropeptide Y. (From Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In Melmed S,
Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.30.)

(V3) receptors mediate stimulation of ACTH secretion. These effects
involve phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis rather than cyclic adenosine
monophosphate production.
Vasopressin and its accompanying protein neurophysin II are
encoded by the same gene. A single preprohormone is cleaved, and
both are transported to neurosecretory vesicles in equimolar amounts
in the posterior pituitary.
Vasopressin has a short half-­life and responds quickly to changes
in hydration. The stimuli for its release are increased plasma osmolality, perceived by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, and decreased
blood volume, perceived by baroreceptors in the carotid sinus of the
aortic arch.

Oxytocin

Oxytocin stimulates uterine contractions at the time of labor and
delivery in response to distention of the reproductive tract and stimulates smooth muscle contraction in the breast during suckling, which
results in milk letdown. Studies suggest that oxytocin also plays a role
in orgasm, social recognition, pair bonding, anxiety, trust, love, and
maternal behavior. Most recently, through the interaction with its G
protein–coupled receptor in pancreatic and adipose tissue, oxytocin
appears to play a significant role in appetite regulation and obesity by
inducing anorexia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3364 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 595

Hypopituitarism
Briana C. Patterson and Eric I. Felner
Hypopituitarism denotes underproduction of one or more pituitary
hormones. Affected children have postnatal growth impairment and
other endocrine deficiencies that are specifically corrected by hormone
replacement. The incidence of congenital hypopituitarism is thought
to be between 1 in 4,000 and 1 in 10,000 live births. An epidemiologic
association between hypopituitarism and breech delivery has been
reported, but the causal relationship is not understood. With expanding knowledge of the genes that direct pituitary development or hormone production, an increasing proportion of cases can be attributed
to specific genetic alterations. Monogenic causes can only be identified
in about 10% of persons with congenital hypopituitarism. The likelihood of finding a genetic alteration is increased by consanguinity and
occurrence in siblings or across generations; however, in most cases
of isolated growth hormone deficiency (GHD) and sporadic multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency (MPHD), no specific single-­gene cause
can be identified. It is likely that polygenic and/or environmental factors regularly play a role in the development of congenital hypopituitarism. The genes, hormonal phenotypes, associated abnormalities,
and modes of transmission of several single-­gene disorders causing
congenital MPHD are shown in Table 595.1. Causes of acquired hypopituitarism, which usually has a later onset, has different causes (Table
595.2). Single-­gene alterations causing disruption of the GH axis primarily are shown in Table 595.3.

MULTIPLE PITUITARY HORMONE DEFICIENCY
Genetic Forms (see Table 595.1)

Sequentially expressed transcriptional activation factors direct the
differentiation and proliferation of anterior pituitary cell types. These
proteins are members of a large family of DNA-­binding proteins resembling homeobox genes. Alterations in different genes may produce different manifestations of MPHD. The PROP1 and POU1F1 genes are
expressed later in pituitary development only in cells of the anterior
pituitary and result in hypopituitarism without anomalies in other
organ systems. The HESX1, LHX3, LHX4, OTX2, SOX3, and PITX2
genes are expressed at earlier stages and are not restricted to the pituitary. Pathogenic alterations in these genes tend to produce phenotypes
that extend beyond hypopituitarism to include abnormalities in other
organs, and the degree of hypopituitarism is typically variable.

PROP1

PROP1 is found in the nuclei of somatotropes, lactotropes, and thyrotropes. Its roles include turning on POU1F1 expression and downregulating HESX1 expression. Although no genetic alteration can be
identified in most patients with MPHD, pathogenic variants of PROP1
are the most common explanation for recessive MPHD and are 10
times as common as the combined total of alterations in other pituitary
transcription factor genes. Deletions of one or two base pairs in exon
2 are most common, followed by missense, nonsense, and splice-­site
pathogenic mutations. Anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies may
not be evident in the neonatal period. The median age at diagnosis of
GHD is around 6 years. Recognition of thyroid-­stimulating hormone
(TSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH),
and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiencies is delayed relative to recognition of GHD. Anterior pituitary size is small in most
patients, but in others there is progressive enlargement of the pituitary.

POU1F1 (PIT1)

POU1F1 (formerly PIT1) is a nuclear protein that binds to the GH
and prolactin promoters. It is necessary for the emergence and mature
function of somatotropes, lactotropes, and thyrotropes. Dominant and

recessive pathogenic variants in POU1F1 are responsible for complete
deficiencies of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin and variable TSH
deficiency. Affected patients exhibit nearly normal fetal growth but
experience severe growth failure in the first year of life. With normal
production of LH and FSH, puberty develops spontaneously, although
at a later-­than-­normal age. These patients are not at risk for development of ACTH deficiency. Anterior pituitary size is normal to small.

HESX1

The HESX1 gene is expressed in precursors of all five cell types of
the anterior pituitary early in embryologic development. Pathogenic
genetic variations in HESX1 result in heterogeneous phenotypes with
differences in development of the optic nerve and pituitary. The anterior pituitary may be hypoplastic or aplastic, and the posterior pituitary may be orthotopic or ectopic. Patients may have isolated GHD
or MPHDs, with or without the optic nerve hypoplasia syndrome,
historically called septo-­optic dysplasia (incomplete development of the
septum pellucidum with optic nerve hypoplasia and pituitary insufficiency). However, the majority of patients with optic nerve hypoplasia
syndrome do not have HESX1 gene alterations.

LHX3 and LHX4

The phenotype produced by recessive loss-­of-­function alterations of
the LHX3 gene resembles that produced by PROP1 genetic variants.
There are deficiencies of GH, prolactin, TSH, LH, and FSH but not
ACTH. Some affected persons show enlargement of the anterior pituitary. The first patients to be described had the unusual findings of a
short neck and a rigid cervical spine. Dominantly inherited pathogenic variations in the structurally similar LHX4 gene consistently
produce GH deficiency, with the variable presence of TSH and ACTH
deficiencies. Additional findings can include a very small V-­shaped
pituitary fossa, Chiari I malformation, and an ectopic posterior
pituitary.

Other Congenital Forms

Pituitary hypoplasia can occur as an isolated phenomenon or in association with more extensive developmental differences such as anencephaly or holoprosencephaly. Midline facial anomalies (cleft lip,
palate; see Chapter 356) or the finding of a solitary maxillary central
incisor may indicate a higher likelihood of GH or other anterior or
posterior hormone deficiency (Fig. 595.1). At least 12 genes have been
implicated in the complex genetic etiology of holoprosencephaly.
Hall-­Pallister syndrome is caused by dominant loss-­of-­function
alterations in the GLI3 gene. Absence of the pituitary gland is accompanied by hypothalamic hamartoma, polydactyly, nail dysplasia, bifid
epiglottis, imperforate anus, and anomalies of the heart, lungs, and
kidneys. The combination of anophthalmia and hypopituitarism has
been associated with pathogenic variants in the SIX6, SOX2, and OTX2
genes.
Optic nerve hypoplasia syndrome may be detected as a result of
clinical observation of nystagmus and visual impairment in infancy.
Neuroimaging demonstrates optic nerve and brain abnormalities and
is associated with anterior and/or posterior pituitary hormone deficiencies in up to 75% of cases (Fig. 595.2). Although these patients
often show the triad of a small anterior pituitary gland, an attenuated
pituitary stalk, and an ectopic posterior pituitary bright spot, the primary etiology of the hypopituitarism in this condition is thought to be
hypothalamic dysfunction. GH deficiency is the commonly observed
hormone deficiency, and other anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies
are less common. Diabetes insipidus is reported in only about 5% of
cases. The etiology is likely multifactorial and may involve interaction
between genetic and environmental factors. In most cases, no single-­
gene alteration can be identified.
Severe, early-­onset MPHD, including deficiency of ACTH, is often
associated with the triad of anterior pituitary hypoplasia, absence or
attenuation of the pituitary stalk, and an ectopic posterior pituitary
bright spot seen on MRI. Most cases are sporadic, and there is a male
predominance. Some are caused by pathogenic variants of the SOX3
gene, located on the X chromosome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3365
Table 595.1  Etiologic Classification of Congenital and Genetic Forms of Multiple Pituitary Hormone Deficiency
GENE OR LOCATION

PHENOTYPE

INHERITANCE

GENETIC FORMS
POU1F1 (PIT1)

GH, PRL deficiencies, variable TSH deficiency

AR, AD

PROP1

GH, TSH, PRL, LH, FSH deficiencies, variable ACTH deficiency, variable AP

AR

LHX3

GH, TSH, PRL, LH, FSH deficiencies, variable AP, ± short neck, limited neck rotation,
sensorineural deafness

AR

LHX4

GH, TSH, ACTH deficiencies, small AP, EPP, variable Arnold-­Chiari, cerebellar abnormalities

AD

TPIT

ACTH deficiency, severe neonatal form

AR

HESX1

GH deficiency, variable for others, small AP, EPP, optic nerve hypoplasia; septo-­optic dysplasia

AR, AD

SOX2

LH, FSH deficiencies, variable GH deficiency, anophthalmia, microphthalmia, esophageal
atresia, sensorineural hearing loss

AD

SOX3

Variable deficiencies, ± MR, EPP, small AP and stalk, developmental delay

XL

PITX2

Axenfeld-­Rieger syndrome: hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, pituitary hypoplasia, anterior
chamber abnormalities of the eye, dental hypoplasia

AD

GLI2

Hypopituitarism, holoprosencephaly, midline defects, polydactyly

AD

GLI3

Hall-­Pallister syndrome, hypopituitarism

AD

SHH (Sonic Hedgehog)

GH deficiency with single central incisor

AD

OTX2

GH or combined deficiencies, anophthalmia or microphthalmia, coloboma, developmental delay

AD

TBX19

ACTH deficiency, neonatal hypoglycemia or cholestatic jaundice

AR

PC1

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, ACTH deficiency

AR

GIF, SHHT, SIX3

Pituitary stalk interruption syndrome: thin or absent pituitary stalk, hypoplasia of
adenohypophysis, ectopic neurohypophysis, neonatal hypoglycemia, cholestasis, micropenis

Holoprosencephaly
related gene group

FGF8

Hypopituitarism, holoprosencephaly

AD

FGFR1

Hypopituitarism, pituitary hypoplasia, agenesis of the corpus callosum, ocular defects

AD

PROKR2

GH, TSH and ACTH deficiencies, micropenis and neonatal hypoglycemia

AD, AR

UNKNOWN OR POLYGENETIC ETIOLOGY
Congenital absence of
pituitary gland
Optic nerve hypoplasia
syndrome/septo-­optic
dysplasia

Optic nerve hypoplasia, nystagmus, absent septum pellucidum, pituitary hypoplasia

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; AP, anterior pituitary; AD, autosomal dominant; EPP, ectopic posterior pituitary; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth hormone; LH,
luteinizing hormone; MR, mental retardation; PRL, prolactin; AR, autosomal recessive; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; XL, X-­linked.

Acquired Forms

Any lesion that damages the hypothalamus, pituitary stalk, or anterior
pituitary can cause pituitary hormone deficiency (see Table 595.2).
Because such lesions are not selective, multiple hormonal deficiencies
are usually observed. Diabetes insipidus is more frequent in acquired
than in congenital hypopituitarism. The most common structural
lesion of the pituitary causing childhood-­onset acquired MPHD is
craniopharyngioma (see Chapter 546). Central nervous system germinoma, optic pathway or hypothalamic glioma, histiocytosis, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, toxoplasmosis, meningitis, pituitary abscess, and
aneurysms can also cause hypothalamic-­
hypophyseal damage and
dysfunction. Additionally, children treated with radiation therapy for
central nervous system or nasopharyngeal tumors are at increased risk
for GHD and other pituitary hormone deficiencies to the extent that
the radiation field includes the hypothalamus and/or pituitary, even if
the tumor itself is anatomically remote from the pituitary and hypothalamus. The magnitude of the risk and the timing of the emergence
of pituitary hormone deficiencies depend on the dose of radiation to
the hypothalamic-­pituitary axis and the duration of elapsed time after
radiotherapy is complete. High doses of radiation (>50 Gy) are likely
to produce GH deficiency sooner than 1 year after irradiation, whereas
other anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies may not appear until

later. GH production appears to be particularly vulnerable to the effects
of irradiation, even at lower doses, whereas deficiencies of ACTH,
gonadotropins, and thyrotropin-­releasing hormone (TRH)/TSH occur
with declining frequency and typically occur at higher doses of radiation. Irradiation alone does not typically result in diabetes insipidus.
Traumatic brain injury, including abusive head trauma, motor vehicle
accidents, and chronic repetitive head injury, is an increasingly recognized cause of pituitary dysfunction related to damage to the pituitary,
its stalk, or the hypothalamus.

ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY AND
INSENSITIVITY
Genetic Forms of Growth Hormone Deficiency

Isolated GHD is caused by abnormalities of the GH-­releasing hormone
receptor, GH genes, and certain genes located on the X chromosome
(see Table 595.3).

Growth Hormone–Releasing Hormone Receptor

Recessive loss-­of-­function alterations in the receptor for GH-­releasing
hormone interfere with proliferation of somatotropes during pituitary
development and disrupt the most important signals for release of GH.
The anterior pituitary is small, in keeping with the observation that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3366 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 595.2  Causes of Acquired Pituitary Insufficiency
TRAUMATIC
Surgical resection
Radiation damage
Traumatic brain injury
INFILTRATIVE/INFLAMMATORY
Primary hypophysitis
Lymphocytic
Granulomatous
Xanthomatous
Secondary hypophysitis
Sarcoidosis
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Takayasu disease
Hemochromatosis
INFECTIONS
Tuberculosis
Pneumocystis jirovecii infection
Fungal (histoplasmosis, aspergillosis)
Parasites (toxoplasmosis)
Viral (cytomegalovirus)
VASCULAR
Pregnancy related
Aneurysm
Apoplexy
Diabetes
Hypotension
Arteritis
Sickle cell disease

GH1

The GH1 gene is one of a cluster of five genes on chromosome 17q22-­
24. This cluster arose through successive duplications of an ancestral
GH gene. Unequal crossing over at meiosis has produced a variety of
gene deletions. Small deletions (<10 kb) remove only the GH1 gene,
whereas large deletions (45 kb) remove one or more of the adjacent
genes (CSL, CS1, GH2, and CS2). The growth phenotype is identical
with deletion of GH1 alone or GH1 together with one or more of the
adjacent genes. Loss of the CS1, GH2, and CS2 genes without loss of
GH1 causes deficiency of chorionic somatomammotropin and placental GH in the maternal circulation, but it does not result in fetal or
postnatal growth retardation. Most children with GH1 gene deletions
respond very well to recombinant GH treatment, but some develop
antibodies to GH and cease growing despite treatment.
Recessively transmitted pathogenic variants in the GH1 gene produce a similar phenotype. Missense, nonsense, and frameshift alterations have been described. Autosomal dominant isolated GHD is also
caused by variants in GH1. These alterations usually involve splice-­site
errors in intron 3 and result in a variant protein that lacks the amino
acids normally encoded by exon 3. Accumulation of this protein interferes with the processing, storage, and secretion of the normal GH protein and may result in additional deficiencies of TSH and/or ACTH.
There are several reports of alterations in GH1 that lead to variant proteins with reduced biologic activity.

X-­Linked Isolated Growth Hormone Deficiency

NEOPLASTIC
Pituitary adenoma
Parasellar mass
Rathke cyst
Dermoid cyst
Meningioma
Germinoma
Suprasellar/optic pathway glioma
Craniopharyngioma
Hypothalamic hamartoma
Pituitary metastatic deposits
Hematologic malignancy
Leukemia
Lymphoma
FUNCTIONAL
Nutritional
Caloric restriction
Malnutrition
Excessive exercise
Nonspecific illness
Acute critical illness
Chronic renal failure
Chronic liver failure
Hormonal
Hyperprolactinemia
Hypothyroidism
Drugs
Anabolic steroids
Glucocorticoid excess
GnRH agonists
Estrogen
Dopamine
Somatostatin analog
Immune check-­point inhibitors
Modified from Kaiser U, Ho KKY. Pituitary physiology and diagnostic evaluation.
In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of
Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 8.5, p. 193.

somatotropes normally account for >50% of pituitary volume. There
is some compromise of fetal growth followed by severe compromise of
postnatal growth.

Two loci on the X chromosome have been associated with hypopituitarism. The first lies at Xq21.3-­q22 in the region of the BTK gene.
Pathogenic variants in this region produce hypogammaglobulinemia
and isolated GHD. The second locus maps farther out on the long arm,
at Xq24-­q27.1, a region containing the SOX2 transcription factor gene.
Abnormalities in this locus have been linked to isolated GHD with
intellectual disability and to MPHD with the triad of pituitary hypoplasia, missing pituitary stalk, and ectopic posterior pituitary gland.

Acquired Forms

The GH axis is more susceptible to disruption by acquired conditions
than are other hypothalamic-­
pituitary axes. Recognized causes of
acquired GHD include the use of radiotherapy for malignancy, meningitis, histiocytosis, and trauma.
Children who receive radiotherapy for central nervous system
tumors, leukemia, or total body irradiation before hematopoietic
stem cell transplant are at risk for developing GHD. Spinal irradiation
results in disproportionately poor growth of the axial skeleton relative
to the appendicular skeleton; this problem is not remediable with GH
treatment. Growth typically slows during radiation therapy or chemotherapy, may improve for 1-­2 years after cancer treatment, and then
declines with the development of GHD. The dose and frequency of
radiotherapy are important determinants of hypopituitarism. GHD is
almost universal 5 years after therapy with a total dose ≥35 Gy. More
subtle defects are seen with doses around 20 Gy. Deficiency of GH is
the most common defect, but deficiencies of TSH and ACTH can also
occur. The evaluation of GHD is more complicated when radiation-­
associated precocious puberty is also present. The clinician is likely to
encounter children in the 8-­to 10-­year age range who are growing at
rates that are normal for chronological age but subnormal for stage of
pubertal development.

GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY
Abnormalities of the Growth Hormone Receptor

GH insensitivity is caused by disruption of pathways distal to the production of GH (Table 595.4). Laron syndrome involves pathogenic
genetic variations in the GH receptor. Children with this condition
clinically resemble those with severe isolated GHD. Birth length tends
to be about 1 standard deviation (SD) below the mean, and severe
short stature with lengths >4 SD below the mean is present by 1 year
of age. Resting and stimulated GH levels tend to be high, and insulin-­
like growth factor (IGF) 1 levels are low. The GH receptor has an
extracellular GH-­binding domain, a transmembrane domain, and an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3367
Table 595.3  Established Genetic Defects of the GH-­IGF Axis Resulting in Isolated GH Deficiency, GH Insensitivity, or IGF-­1
Deficiency
GENE

INHERITANCE

PHENOTYPE

ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY
GHRHR
AR
Type IB form of isolated GHD; low levels of GH production, but less severe than type 1A isolated GHD; may also
be caused by pathogenic variants in GH1
GHS-­R

AD

GHD and ISS

GH1

AR

Type IA form of isolated GHD, in utero growth retardation; absent GH production caused by gene deletion,
antibodies to GH develop over time during treatment

GH1

AR

Type IB form of isolated GHD; low levels of GH production, but less severe than type 1A isolated GHD; may also
be caused by pathogenic variants in GHRHR

GH1

AD

Type II form of isolated GHD; dominant negative pathogenic variants in GH1, which decrease GH secretion

BTK

XL

Type III form of isolated GHD; hypogammaglobulinemia

GH1

AD

Bioinactive GH molecule; rare, dominant negative pathogenic variant in GH1 that interferes with GHR signaling

GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY
GHR
AR, AD
IGF-­I deficiency; high GH level; normal, decreased or increased GHBP (depending on which domain of the
receptor is affected); unresponsive to GH treatment
IGF-­1 DEFICIENCY
IGF1
AR

IGF-­1 deficiency; IUGR and postnatal growth failure, sensorineural deafness, insulin resistance, microcephaly

STAT5b

AR

IGF-­1 deficiency, variable immune defect, hyperprolactinemia, chronic pulmonary infections, eczema

ALS

AR

IGF-­1 deficiency; variable postnatal growth failure, delayed puberty

AD, Autosomal dominant; ALS, acid-­labile subunit; AR, autosomal recessive; GH, growth hormone; GHBP, GH-­binding protein; GHD, growth hormone deficiency; GHRHR, GH-­releasing
hormone receptor; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor; ISS, idiopathic short stature; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; XL, X-­linked.
Modified from Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Table 10.3, p. 333.

Fig. 595.1 Solitary median maxillary central incisor at age 16 mo.

(From Giannopoulou EZ, Rohrer T, Hoffmann P, et al. Solitary median
maxillary central incisor. J Pediatr. 2015;167:770, Fig. 2.)

intracellular signaling domain. Pathogenic alterations in the extracellular domain interfere with binding of GH. Serum GH-­binding protein
activity, representing the circulating form of the membrane receptor
for GH, is generally low. Variants in the transmembrane domain can
interfere with anchoring of the receptor to the plasma membrane.
In these cases, circulating GH-­binding protein activity is normal or
high. Alterations in the intracellular domain interfere with JAK/STAT
signaling.

Post-­Receptor Forms of Growth Hormone
Insensitivity

Some children with severe growth failure, high GH and low IGF-­1 levels, and normal GH-­binding protein levels have abnormalities distal to
the GH binding and activation of the GH receptor. Several have been

Fig. 595.2 Septo-­optic dysplasia with agenesis of the septum pel-

lucidum. Sagittal T1 weighted MR image shows that fornices are inferiorly positioned (long arrow). The optic apparatus is hypoplastic
(short arrow); there is no identifiable neurohypophysis. (From Rollins
N. Congenital brain malformations. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 31.13.)

found to have pathogenic variations in the gene-­encoding signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b). Disruption of this
key intermediate connecting receptor activation to gene transcription
produces growth failure similar to that seen in Laron syndrome. These
patients also suffer from immunodeficiency and chronic pulmonary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3368 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 595.4  Proposed Classification of Growth Hormone
Insensitivity

Table 595.5  Clinical Features of Growth Hormone
Insensitivity, Including Classic Laron Syndrome

PRIMARY GH INSENSITIVITY (HEREDITARY DEFECTS)
GH receptor defect (may be positive or negative for GH-­binding
protein)
• Extracellular alteration (e.g., Laron syndrome)
• Cytoplasmic alteration
• Intracellular alteration
GH signal transduction defects (distal to cytoplasmic domain of GH
receptor)
• Stat5b pathogenic variants
Insulin-­like growth factor-­1 defects
• IGF-­1 gene deletion
• IGF-­1 transport defect (pathogenic variant in ALS)
• IGF-­1 receptor defect
Bioinactive GH molecule (responds to exogenous GH)

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
Near-­normal birthweight
Slightly decreased birthweight
Severe postnatal growth failure
Delayed bone age (may be advanced relative to height age)
Micropenis in childhood; normal for body size in adults
Puberty may be delayed 3-­7 yr
Normal sexual function and fertility

SECONDARY GH INSENSITIVITY (ACQUIRED DEFECTS)
Circulating antibodies to GH that inhibit GH action
Antibodies to the GH receptor
GH insensitivity caused by malnutrition, liver disease, catabolic
states, diabetes mellitus
Other conditions that cause GH insensitivity
ALS, Acid-­labile subunit; GH, growth hormone; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor.
From Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Box 10.4.

infections, consistent with important roles for STAT5b in interleukin
cytokine signaling.

IGF-­1 Gene Abnormalities

Pathogenic alterations of the IGF-­1 gene produce severe prenatal
and postnatal growth impairment. Microcephaly, intellectual disability, and deafness are present in patients with exon deletion and
a missense variant. These patients can be expected to respond to
recombinant IGF-­1 treatment.

Insulin-­Like Growth Factor–Binding Protein
Abnormalities

Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding the acid-­labile subunit of the
circulating 165-­kDa IGF-­1, IGF-­BP3, acid-­labile subunit complex has
been associated with short stature. Total IGF-­1 levels were very low.
The index case, with homozygosity for an acid-­labile subunit alteration,
did not show an increase in IGF-­1 levels or an increase in growth rate
during GH treatment.

IGF-­1 Receptor Gene Abnormalities

Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding the IGF-­1 receptor also
compromise prenatal and postnatal growth. The phenotype does not
appear to be as severe as that seen with the absence of IGF-­1. Adult
heights are closer to the normal range, and affected patients do not
have intellectual disability or deafness.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Congenital Hypopituitarism

The child with congenital hypopituitarism is usually of normal size and
weight at birth, although those with MPHD and those with pathogenic
genetic variants in the GH1 or GHR gene have birth lengths that average 1 SD below the mean. Children with severe deficits in GH production or action typically fall more than 4 SD below the mean for length
by 1 year of age. Those with less severe deficiencies grow at rates below
the 25th percentile for age and gradually diverge from normal height
percentiles. Delayed closure of the epiphyses permits growth beyond
the normal age when growth should be complete. Features of GH
insensitivity, including Laron syndrome, are somewhat distinct from
GHD and MPHD and are noted in Table 595.5.
Infants with congenital dysfunction of the pituitary or hypothalamus may present with neonatal emergencies such as apnea, cyanosis,
or severe hypoglycemia with or without seizures. Prolonged neonatal
cholestatic jaundice is common. It involves elevation of conjugated and

OTHER PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Sparse hair (before age 7 yr)
Frontal bossing
Normal head circumference
Small facies (resulting in craniofacial disproportion)
Hypoplastic nasal bridge
Shallow orbits
Delayed dentition
Blue sclerae
High-­pitched voice
Hip dysplasia
Limited extension in elbows
LATE FINDINGS/OTHER COMPLICATIONS
Hypoglycemia in infants and children (fasting symptoms in some
adults)
Delayed walking and motor milestones
Avascular necrosis of femoral head
Thin, prematurely aged skin
Osteopenia
From Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Box 10.5.

unconjugated bilirubin and may be associated with giant cell neonatal hepatitis. Nystagmus can suggest optic nerve hypoplasia syndrome
(see Chapter 671). Micropenis with or without testicular maldescent
in males provides an additional diagnostic clue. Deficiency of GH may
be accompanied by hypoadrenalism (see Chapter 615.2) and hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603), along with gonadotropin deficiency (see
Chapters 623.2 and 626.2).
Toddlers and school-­age children tend to present with proportionate short stature. On physical examination, the head may be round and
the face short and broad. The frontal bone may be prominent, and the
bridge of the nose is often depressed and saddle shaped. The nose may be
small, but the nasolabial folds are well developed. The mandible and the
chin may be underdeveloped, and the teeth, which erupt late, are often
crowded. The neck is short, and the larynx is small. The voice is high-­
pitched and remains high after puberty. The extremities are well proportioned, with small hands and feet. Weight for height is often normal, but
there may be an imbalance of lean mass and adipose tissue. The genitals
are usually small for age in males, and sexual maturation may be delayed
or absent as the child ages.
In teens with undiagnosed congenital hypopituitarism, short stature is
expected. Additionally, facial, axillary, and pubic hair may be decreased,
and the scalp hair is fine. Intelligence is usually normal for age, unless
there are other structural brain abnormalities, and the children may
seem precocious compared with younger children of a similar size.

Acquired Hypopituitarism

The child is normal initially, and manifestations similar to those seen in
idiopathic pituitary growth failure gradually appear and progress. When
complete or almost complete destruction of the pituitary gland occurs,
signs of pituitary insufficiency are present. Atrophy of the adrenal cortex,
thyroid, and gonads results in loss of weight, asthenia, sensitivity to cold,
mental torpor, and absence of sweating. Sexual maturation fails to take
place or regresses if already present. There may be atrophy of the gonads
and genital tract with amenorrhea and loss of pubic and axillary hair.
There is a tendency to hypoglycemia. Growth slows dramatically. Diabetes insipidus (see Chapter 596) may be present but can by obscured by
the development of yet untreated central adrenal insufficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3369
If the lesion is an expanding tumor, symptoms such as headache,
vomiting, visual disturbances, pathologic sleep patterns, decreased
school performance, seizures, polyuria, and growth failure can occur.
Documented slowing of growth can antedate neurologic signs and
symptoms, especially with craniopharyngioma, yet neurologic and
ophthalmologic complaints are more often the presenting problems.
In other cases, evidence of pituitary insufficiency may first appear after
surgical intervention. In children with craniopharyngioma, visual field
defects, optic atrophy, papilledema, obesity, and cranial nerve palsy are
common. Skeletal age may be delayed in acquired MPHD but may be
relatively normal if the pituitary dysfunction is of very recent onset.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

MPHD and/or GHD should be suspected in infants with hypoglycemia, micropenis, congenital nystagmus, and prolonged conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia and in older children with severe postnatal growth
failure (Table 595.6). Criteria for short stature include height below
Table 595.6  Evaluation of Suspected Growth Hormone
Deficiency
History

• Birthweight and length
• Obstetric complications
• Breech presentation
• Neonatal hypoglycemia
• Prolonged neonatal jaundice/cholestasis
• Review of systems for systemic illness
• Diet history

Physical exam

• Linear growth failure (may be the only
clinical feature present)
Proportionate short stature
Low height velocity
• Weight for length appropriate or increased
• Micropenis with or without testicular
maldescent in males
• Small midface
• Cleft palate
• High-­pitched voice
• Delayed dental eruption
• Optic nerve hypoplasia

Imaging

• Radiologic evaluation of bone age
• Central nervous system imaging to evaluate
the hypothalamus/pituitary and to exclude
other conditions

Laboratory
evaluation

• Measurements of IGF-­1 and IGF-­binding
protein levels
• Assess thyroid function
• Exclude chronic medical illness
CBC, metabolic profile, inflammatory
markers, celiac testing, urinalysis
• Determination of peak GH levels after
stimulation test

Treatment
considerations

• Replacement with rhGH
• Dosage adjustment
IGF-­1
Height velocity
Pubertal status
Body weight
• Predictors of improved response to
treatment
Early initiation of treatment
Higher rhGH dose
• Monitor during treatment
Height velocity
IGF-­1 levels
Glucose metabolism
Skeletal age
Thyroid function, adrenal function

GH, Growth hormone; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor; rhGH, recombinant human growth
hormone.

the first percentile for age and sex or height >2 SD below sex-­adjusted
mid-­parent height. Acquired GHD can occur at any age, and when it
is of acute onset, height may be within the normal range. In both congenital and acquired GH deficiency, height velocity will be low relative to sex-­and bone age–matched peers. A strong clinical suspicion
is important in establishing the diagnosis because laboratory measures
of GH sufficiency lack specificity. Random GH levels are not helpful in
the evaluation of toddlers and older children because of the pulsatile
secretion of GH, whereas measurement of GH may be useful in the first
2 weeks of life when levels are tonically increased. Observation of low
serum levels of IGF-­1 and the GH-­dependent IGF-­BP3 can be helpful,
but IGF-­1 and IGF-­BP3 levels should be matched to normal values for
skeletal age and sexual maturity rating, rather than chronological age.
Values in the upper part of the normal range for age effectively exclude
GHD. IGF-­1 values in the lower part of the normal range may occur in
normally growing children, children with impaired nutrition, or those
with hypopituitarism. The expected range for IGF-­1 in normal and
GH-­deficient children overlaps somewhat during infancy and early
childhood. IGF-­1 levels in isolation should not be used to diagnose
GH deficiency.
After infancy, a definitive diagnosis of GHD traditionally requires
demonstration of absent or low levels of GH in response to stimulation, but provocative testing may be omitted if the patient has the
expected auxologic findings, a documented hypothalamic or pituitary
defect, and at least one other pituitary hormone deficiency. A variety
of provocative tests have been devised that rapidly increase the level of
GH in normal children. These include administration of insulin, arginine, clonidine, levodopa, or glucagon. Macimorelin is an oral ghrelin
agonist approved in the United States for growth hormone stimulation testing in adults, but not in children. Because thyroid hormone is
a prerequisite for normal GH synthesis, it must always be assessed and
replaced, if needed, before provocative GH testing. In chronic GHD, the
demonstration of subnormal linear growth, a delayed skeletal age, and
low peak levels of GH (<10 ng/mL) in each of two provocative tests are
compatible with the diagnosis. In acute GHD, a high clinical suspicion
of GHD and low peak levels of GH (<10 ng/mL) in each of two provocative tests are compatible with the diagnosis. This rather arbitrary
cutoff point is higher than the criteria used for diagnosis of adult GHD.
There is no consensus regarding adoption of criteria that account for
age, sex, and GH assay characteristics. Some studies indicate that many
GH-­sufficient prepubertal children fail to achieve GH values >10 ng/
mL with two pharmacologic tests; pretest, short-­term sex steroid priming has been proposed to increase the diagnostic specificity of this
testing.
In addition to establishing the diagnosis of GHD, it is necessary to
examine other pituitary functions. Levels of TSH, free thyroxine or total
thyroxine with T3 resin uptake, ACTH, cortisol, gonadotropins, and
gonadal steroids might provide evidence of other pituitary hormonal
deficiencies. Antidiuretic hormone deficiency may be established by
appropriate studies (see Chapter 596). Infants with clear clinical and
biochemical evidence of multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies and
supportive anatomic variants demonstrated on MRI of the brain may
not require provocative GH testing.

RADIOLOGIC FINDINGS

Neurologic imaging should be obtained when the cause of hypopituitarism is not known. CT is appropriate for recognizing suprasellar
calcification associated with craniopharyngiomas and bony changes
accompanying histiocytosis. However, MRI is usually used as the initial test to anatomically characterize the pituitary and hypothalamus,
as MRI provides a much more detailed view of the relevant anatomy.
Many cases of severe early-­onset MPHD show the triad of a small
anterior pituitary gland, a missing or attenuated pituitary stalk, and
an ectopic posterior pituitary bright spot at the base of the hypothalamus (Fig. 595.3). Subnormal anterior pituitary height, implying a small
anterior pituitary, is common in genetic and idiopathic causes of isolated GHD. Craniopharyngiomas are rare tumors in childhood, but
common causes of acquired hypopituitarism, whereas pituitary adenomas rarely cause hypopituitarism in children. Both hypoplastic and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3370 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Fig. 595.3 Sagittal T1 weighted MRI shows an ectopic posterior pi-

tuitary (white arrow) and a small anterior pituitary (black arrow). (From
Giannopoulou EZ, Rohrer T, Hoffmann P, et al. Solitary median maxillary
central incisor. J Pediatr. 2015;167:770, App Fig. 1.)

markedly enlarged anterior pituitary glands are seen in patients with
PROP1 or LHX3 gene alterations. Structural lesions causing isolated,
acquired GHD are not common, but are important from a therapeutic
perspective, such that MRI is usually recommended at the time of the
diagnosis of GHD.
Skeletal maturation may be assessed with a plain film of the hand
(bone age) and is delayed in patients with isolated GHD and may be
even more delayed when there is combined GH and TSH deficiency.
Importantly, in very recent or acute onset of hypopituitarism, initial
assessment of skeletal age may not demonstrate the delay classically
reported in congenital or long-­standing hypopituitarism. Further,
comorbid central precocious puberty may accelerate skeletal development when both precocious puberty and GHD are present, as
may be seen in some patients with GHD after cranial irradiation.
Dual-­
photon x-­
ray absorptiometry shows deficient bone mineralization, deficiencies in lean body mass, and a corresponding
increase in adiposity, but it is not routinely recommended in the
initial evaluation of pediatric GHD.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The causes of growth disorders are numerous. The differential diagnosis can be summarized broadly as follows: hormonal disorders, chronic
illness, undernutrition, genetic conditions, nonsyndromic family trait,
and constitutional delay of growth and development. Hormonal disorders include primary hypothyroidism and Cushing disease. Systemic
conditions, such as inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, occult
renal disease, and anemia, must be considered. Patients with systemic
conditions often have a greater deficit of weight than length. Severe
psychosocial deprivation may result in growth failure that mimics GH deficiency. Numerous syndromic genetic conditions include
short stature as a manifestation, among other findings, whereas some
specific genetic alterations may present with isolated short stature.
These include Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.4), pathogenic variants and deletions in SHOX, ACAN, PTPN11, and IHH, the skeletal
dysplasias (see Chapter 735), and identifiable syndromes including
Donohue (INSR), Kabuki (KMT2D, KDM6A), Noonan (RASopathy),
Smith-­Lemli Opitz (DHCR7), and Cornelia de Lange (NIPBL, SMC1A,
HDAC8, RAD21, SMC3). Prenatal-­onset short stature associated with
being small for gestational age that persists during childhood may also
be syndromic. Whole exome sequencing is helpful in identifying the
specific syndrome.

Some otherwise normal children are short (i.e., >2.25 SD below
the mean for age) and grow 5 cm/year or less but have normal levels of GH in response to provocative tests and normal spontaneous
episodic secretion; this is often termed idiopathic short stature.
Most of these children show increased rates of growth when treated
with GH in doses comparable with those used to treat children with
hypopituitarism. Plasma levels of IGF-­1 in these patients may be
normal or low. Several groups of treated children have achieved
final or near-­
final adult heights. Different studies have found
changes in adult height that range from −2.5 to +7.5 cm compared
with pretreatment predictions. There are no methods that can reliably predict which of these children will become taller in adulthood
as a result of GH treatment and which will have compromised adult
height despite treatment.
Diagnostic strategies for distinguishing between permanent GH
deficiency and other causes of impaired growth are imperfect. Children with a combination of genetic short stature and constitutional
delay of growth have short stature, below-­average growth rates, and
delayed bone ages. Many of these children exhibit minimal GH
secretory responses to provocative stimuli and may be treated with
GH therapy. When children in whom idiopathic or acquired isolated GHD is diagnosed are treated with recombinant human GH
and retested as adults, the majority have peak GH levels within the
normal range.

Constitutional Growth Delay

Constitutional growth delay is one of the variants of normal growth
commonly encountered by the pediatrician. Length and weight
measurements of affected children are normal at birth, and growth
is normal for the first 4-­12 months of life. Height is sustained at
a lower percentile during childhood. The pubertal growth spurt is
delayed, so their growth rates persist at a lower prepubertal rate
after their classmates have begun to accelerate. Detailed questioning often reveals other family members (often one or both parents)
with histories of short stature in childhood, delayed puberty, and
eventual normal stature. IGF-­1 levels tend to be low for chronological age but within the normal range for bone age and sexual maturation rating. GH responses to provocative testing tend to be lower
than in children with a more typical timing of puberty. The prognosis for these children to achieve normal adult height is guarded. Predictions based on height and bone age tend to overestimate eventual
height to a greater extent in males than in females. Males with >2
years of pubertal delay can benefit from a short course of testosterone therapy to hasten puberty after 14 years of age. The cause of this
variant of normal growth is thought to be persistence of the relative
hypogonadotropic state of childhood.

TREATMENT

Although well-­established treatments are available to replace the
classical anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies, treatment must
take into account patient age, pubertal maturation, and patient
goals. Lifelong attention to correct administration of hormone
replacement and monitoring for comorbidities are needed to optimize patient outcomes.
Recombinant human GH (rhGH) has been available by prescription
since the 1980s. Multiple brands are marketed in the United States,
which are therapeutically equivalent, with the major differences consisting of proprietary devices for subcutaneous injection and availability of solubilized liquid forms versus powders needing reconstitution
before injection. Long-­acting forms are under development and will
need to demonstrate comparable efficacy, safety, and tolerability to the
daily injections currently available.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
eight pediatric indications for rhGH treatment to promote linear growth. They are GHD, Turner syndrome, chronic renal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3371
failure before transplantation, idiopathic short stature, small-­for-­
gestational-­age short stature, Prader-­Willi syndrome, SHOX gene
abnormality, and Noonan syndrome. In the United States, FDA
approval for a given indication does not ensure that a patient’s
insurance carrier will approve payment for the drug. Treatment
should be started as soon as possible to narrow the gap in height
between patients and their classmates during childhood and to have
the greatest effect on mature height. For some infants with MPHD,
initiation of rhGH treatment may be urgent to reduce the frequency
and severity of episodes of hypoglycemia. The recommended initial
dose of rhGH for treatment of GHD is 0.16-­0.24 mg/kg/wk (22-­35
μg/kg/day). Higher doses have been used during puberty and for
non-­GHD indications. Most currently available forms of rhGH are
administered subcutaneously once daily, but a weekly preparation
has been recently FDA approved for use in the United States.
Maximal response to rhGH occurs in the first year of treatment.
Growth velocity during this first year is typically above the 95th percentile for age. With each successive year of treatment, the growth rate
tends to decrease until it approximates a typical height velocity for
skeletal age. If the growth rate drops below the 25th percentile, adherence should be evaluated before the dose is increased. IGF-­1 may be
measured as an objective assessment of adherence. GH therapy should
be continued until near-­final height is achieved. Criteria for stopping
GH treatment include a decision by the adolescent that they are tall
enough, a growth rate less than 1 inch per year, and a bone age greater
than 14 years in females and greater than 16 years in males. Adolescents who have completed treatment for promotion of adult stature
should be reevaluated for GHD based on adult criteria after treatment
is complete. Some adolescents or young adults, particularly those with
profound GHD and/or MPHD, may benefit from continuation of
rhGH treatment as adults. The dose of rhGH is much lower in adults
relative to growing teens. Children with hypopituitarism require coordinated transition to adult care and lifelong attention to their endocrine deficiencies.
Concurrent treatment with rhGH and a gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone agonist has been used in the hope that interruption of
puberty will delay epiphyseal fusion and prolong growth. This strategy may increase adult height. Risks include increasing the discrepancy in physical maturity between GH-­deficient children and their
age peers, decreasing the upper to lower segment ratio, and impairing
bone mineralization. There have also been attempts to forestall epiphyseal fusion in males by giving aromatase inhibitors, which inhibit
the enzyme responsible for converting androgens to estrogens. These
agents are not approved for this purpose in the United States, but
some clinical trials have demonstrated an increase in predicted adult
height with this approach.
Some patients develop either primary or central hypothyroidism
while under treatment with GH. Similarly, there is a risk of developing adrenal insufficiency as an associated component of hypopituitarism. If unrecognized, this can be fatal. Periodic evaluation of
thyroid and adrenal function is indicated for all patients diagnosed
with GHD.
rhGH treatment may enhance the growth of non-­GHD children
as well. Intensive investigation is in progress to determine the full
spectrum of short children who may benefit from treatment with
GH. The FDA approval for use of GH in idiopathic short stature
specifies a height below the 1.2 percentile (−2.25 SD) for age and
sex, a predicted height below the 5th percentile, and open epiphyses. Studies of the effect of GH treatment on adult height suggest
a median gain of 2-­3 inches, depending on dose and duration of
treatment.

In children with MPHD, replacement should also be directed at
other hormonal deficiencies. In TSH-­deficient patients, thyroid hormone replacement (levothyroxine) is given in full replacement doses.
In ACTH-­
deficient patients, hydrocortisone should be prescribed
in physiologic doses, about 8-­12 mg/m2/day. In patients deficient in
both TSH and ACTH, initiation of adrenal replacement before thyroid hormone replacement is mandatory to reduce the risk of adrenal crisis. Individualized dose adjustment of hydrocortisone is needed
to minimize the risk of side effects associated with excess glucocorticoid administration and prevent symptoms of adrenal insufficiency.
Increased doses of hydrocortisone are required to support vital functions
and prevent adrenal crisis during illness or during and after surgical procedures (so-­called “stress dosing.”)
In patients with a deficiency of gonadotropins, gonadal steroids
are given at the appropriate time. Consideration of chronological age,
height age, bone age, and psychosocial development may all play a role
in determining the timing of initiation of low-­dose sex steroid replacement in young adolescents. For infants with micropenis, one or two
3-­month courses of monthly intramuscular injections of 25 mg of testosterone cypionate or testosterone enanthate can bring the penis to
near-­normal size without an inordinate effect on osseous maturation.
Recombinant IGF-­1 (mecasermin) is approved for use in the United
States for primary IGF-­1 deficiency. It is given subcutaneously twice a
day. Side effects are similar to rhGH, except that mecasermin can cause
hypoglycemia. The risk of hypoglycemia is reduced by giving the injections concurrently with a meal or snack. In some situations, its use may
be more efficacious than use of GH. These conditions include abnormalities of the GH receptor and STAT5b genes that alter GH signaling
downstream. It may have utility for severe GHD in the rare patients
who have developed clinically significant antibodies to administered
rhGH. However, mecasermin is not an indicated treatment for most
patients with GHD.

COMPLICATIONS AND ADVERSE EFFECTS OF
GROWTH HORMONE TREATMENT

GH treatment influences glucose homeostasis. Fasting and postprandial insulin levels are characteristically low before treatment, and they
normalize during GH replacement. GH treatment is associated with an
increase in the risk for type 2 diabetes and no significant increase in the
risk for type 1 diabetes.
Concerns have been raised about the safety of GH treatment in
children who become deficient after treatment of brain tumors, leukemia, and other neoplasms. Long-­term studies show no increase in
risk of recurrence of craniopharyngioma, other brain tumors, or leukemia. Some studies indicate an increased risk of second neoplasms
in cancer survivors treated with GH. However, other studies have
found no increased risk for secondary brain tumors after adjustment
for radiation therapy. Looking more broadly at young adults treated in
childhood with GH for a variety of indications, the Safety and Appropriateness of Growth hormone treatments in Europe consortium
(SAGhE) has reported an increase in cause-­specific mortality due to
circulatory and hematologic conditions, but no increase in all-­cause
mortality for youth treated with GH.
Other reported side effects include pseudotumor cerebri, slipped
capital femoral epiphysis, gynecomastia, coarsening of features, and
worsening of scoliosis. The risk of late development of Creutzfeldt-­
Jakob disease was limited to recipients of contaminated lots of extracted
pituitary GH. No comparable risks have been seen with rhGH, which is
the only pharmacologic form of hGH currently in clinical use.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3372 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 596

Diabetes Insipidus
Carmen L. Soto-­Rivera, David T. Breault,
and Joseph A. Majzoub
Diabetes insipidus (DI) manifests clinically with polyuria and polydipsia
and can result from either vasopressin deficiency (central DI, also known
as arginine vasopressin [AVP] deficiency) or vasopressin insensitivity
at the level of the kidney (nephrogenic DI [NDI], also known as AVP
resistance). Both central DI and NDI can arise from inherited defects of
congenital or neonatal onset or can be secondary to a variety of causes
(Table 596.1).

PHYSIOLOGY OF WATER BALANCE

The control of extracellular tonicity (osmolality) and volume within
a narrow range is critical for normal cellular structure and function
(see Chapter 73.2). Extracellular fluid tonicity is regulated almost
exclusively by water intake and excretion, whereas extracellular
volume is regulated by sodium intake and excretion. The control
of plasma tonicity and intravascular volume involves a complex
integration of endocrine, neural, behavioral, and paracrine systems
(Fig. 596.1). Vasopressin, secreted from the posterior pituitary, is
the principal regulator of tonicity, with its release largely stimulated by increases in plasma osmolality over 283 mOsm/kg H2O.
Volume homeostasis is largely regulated by the renin-­angiotensin-­
aldosterone system, with contributions from both vasopressin and
the natriuretic peptide family.
Vasopressin, a 9–amino acid peptide, has both antidiuretic and
vascular pressor activity and is synthesized in the paraventricular
and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus. It is transported to the
posterior pituitary via axonal projections, where it is stored awaiting
release into the systemic circulation. The half-­life of vasopressin in
the circulation is 5-­10 minutes, as it is rapidly degraded by a cysteine
aminoterminal peptidase. The carboxyterminus of the vasopressin
precursor, copeptin, is more stable than vasopressin, and blood concentrations of the two peptides are highly correlated when evaluating
response to osmotic stimuli.
In addition to responding to osmotic stimuli, vasopressin is secreted
in response to significant decreases in intravascular volume and pressure (minimum of 8% decrement) via afferent baroreceptor pathways
arising from the aortic arch (carotid sinus) and volume receptor pathways in the cardiac atria and pulmonary veins. Osmotic and hemodynamic stimuli interact synergistically. Nausea is also a potent stimulus
for vasopressin secretion.
The sensation of thirst and the release of vasopressin are regulated by cortical and hypothalamic neurons. The thirst threshold is
approximately 10 mOsm/kg H2O higher (i.e., 293 mOsm/kg H2O)
than the osmotic threshold for vasopressin release. Consequently,
under conditions of hyperosmolality, vasopressin is released
before thirst is initiated, allowing ingested water to be retained.
Subsequently, anticipation of water ingestion by cortical and
vasopressin-­secreting neurons leads to a decrease in vasopressin
release immediately before water ingestion, presumably to prevent
subsequent hyponatremia. Chemoreceptors present in the oropharynx also downregulate vasopressin release after water ingestion. In
addition, thirst drive decreases even before the ingested fluid lowers blood osmolality, presumably to prevent overdrinking leading
to hyponatremia.
Vasopressin exerts its principal effect on the kidney via V2
(AVPR2) receptors located primarily in the collecting tubule, the
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, and the periglomerular
tubules. The human V2 receptor gene (AVPR2) is located on the
long arm of the X chromosome (Xq28) at the locus associated with

Table 596.1  Causes of Hypotonic Polyuria
CENTRAL (NEUROGENIC) DIABETES INSIPIDUS (DI)
Congenital (congenital malformations, autosomal dominant, arginine
vasopressin [AVP] neurophysin pathogenic variants)
Drug or toxin induced (ethanol, diphenylhydantoin, snake venom)
Granulomatous (histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
Neoplastic (craniopharyngioma, germinoma, lymphoma, leukemia,
meningioma, pituitary tumor, metastases)
Infectious (meningitis, tuberculosis, encephalitis)
Inflammatory, autoimmune (lymphocytic
infundibuloneurohypophysitis, immune check point inhibitors)
Trauma (neurosurgery, deceleration injury)
Vascular (cerebral hemorrhage or infarction, brain death)
Idiopathic
OSMORECEPTOR DYSFUNCTION
Granulomatous (histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
Neoplastic (craniopharyngioma, pinealoma, meningioma,
metastases)
Vascular (anterior communicating artery aneurysm or ligation,
intrahypothalamic hemorrhage)
Other (hydrocephalus, ventricular or suprasellar cyst, trauma,
degenerative diseases)
Idiopathic
INCREASED AVP METABOLISM
Pregnancy
NEPHROGENIC DIABETES INSIPIDUS
Congenital (X-­linked recessive, AVP V2 receptor pathogenic variants,
autosomal recessive or dominant, aquaporin-­2 water channel
pathogenic variants)
Drug induced (lithium, demeclocycline, cisplatin, methoxyflurane)
Hypercalcemia
Hypokalemia
Infiltrating lesions (sarcoidosis, amyloidosis)
Vascular (sickle cell anemia)
Mechanical (polycystic kidney disease, bilateral ureteral obstruction)
Solute diuresis (glucose, mannitol, sodium, radiocontrast dyes)
Idiopathic
PRIMARY POLYDIPSIA
Psychogenic (schizophrenia, obsessive-­compulsive behaviors)
Dipsogenic (downward resetting of thirst threshold, idiopathic or
similar lesions, as with central DI)
From Verbalis JG. Disorders of water balance. In Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA,
et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table
16.2.

congenital, X-­linked, vasopressin-­resistant DI. Activation of the
V2 receptor results in increases in intracellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate, which leads to the insertion of the aquaporin­2 water channel into the apical (luminal) membrane. This allows
water movement along its osmotic gradient into the hypertonic
inner medullary interstitium from the tubule lumen and excretion
of concentrated urine. In contrast to aquaporin-­2, aquaporin-­3 and
aquaporin-­4 are expressed on the basolateral membrane of the collecting duct cells, and aquaporin-­1 is expressed in the proximal
tubule. These channels may also contribute to urinary concentrating ability.
Atrial natriuretic peptide, initially isolated from cardiac atrial
muscle but also expressed in the brain, has several important effects
on salt and water balance, including stimulation of natriuresis, inhibition of sodium resorption, inhibition of vasopressin secretion, and
inhibition of vasopressin and aldosterone action in the renal tubules.
Atrial natriuretic peptide is expressed in endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle, where it appears to regulate relaxation of arterial
smooth muscle. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), synthesized and
secreted by cardiac ventricular tissue, similarly induces natriuresis,
whereas the physiologic role of C-­type natriuretic peptide (CNP) has
yet to be defined.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 596 u Diabetes Insipidus 3373
Both cases may be associated with a large volume (>200 mL/m2/hr) of
dilute urine, although in patients with DI, the serum osmolality is high
in comparison with patients undergoing postoperative diuresis.

Nausea
Hypoglycemia
Pain
VP secretion

Renal water
reabsorption

CAUSES OF HYPERNATREMIA

Hypernatremia is discussed in Chapter 73.3.

Osmosensor
Barosensor

Central Diabetes Insipidus

Thirst

Hyperosmolality
Hypotension
Hypovolemia

Drinking

Fig. 596.1 Regulation of vasopressin secretion and serum osmolality.

Hyperosmolality, hypovolemia, and hypotension are sensed by osmosensors, volume sensors, and barosensors, respectively. These stimulate
both vasopressin secretion and thirst. Vasopressin, acting on the kidney,
causes increased reabsorption of water (antidiuresis). Thirst causes increased water ingestion. The results of these dual negative feedback
loops cause a reduction in hyperosmolality or in hypotension or hypovolemia. Additional stimuli for vasopressin secretion include nausea,
hypoglycemia, and pain. (From Srivasta A, Majzoub JA. Disorders of the
posterior pituitary. In: Sperling MA, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 12.6.)

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH POLYURIA,
POLYDIPSIA, AND HYPERNATREMIA

The cause of pathologic polyuria or polydipsia (exceeding 2 L/m2/24
hr) may be difficult to establish in children. Infants can present with
irritability, failure to thrive, and intermittent fever. Patients with suspected DI should have a careful history taken, which should quantify the child’s daily fluid intake and output and establish the voiding
pattern, nocturia, and primary or secondary enuresis. A complete
physical examination should establish the patient’s hydration status,
and the physician should search for evidence of visual and central
nervous system dysfunction, as well as for other pituitary hormone
deficiencies.
If pathologic polyuria or polydipsia is present, the following should
be obtained: serum for osmolality, sodium, potassium, blood urea
nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, hemoglobin A1c, and calcium and urine
for osmolality, specific gravity, and glucose determination. The diagnosis of DI is established if the serum osmolality is >300 mOsm/kg H2O
and the urine osmolality is <300 mOsm/kg. A baseline copeptin level
above 20 pmol/L in this setting can confirm nephrogenic DI.
DI is unlikely if the serum osmolality is <270 mOsm/kg H2O or the
urine osmolality is >600 mOsm/kg. If the patient’s serum osmolality is
<300 mOsm/kg H2O (but >270 mOsm/kg H2O) and pathologic polyuria and polydipsia are present, a water deprivation test is indicated to
establish the diagnosis of DI and to differentiate central from nephrogenic causes by assessing response to aqueous vasopressin at the end
of the test.
Now that copeptin measurement is clinically available, test protocols aim to measure copeptin instead of AVP during water deprivation.
Hypertonic saline infusion (3% saline) can also be given as an osmotic
stimulus for copeptin secretion (instead of water deprivation tests), with
a potentially higher diagnostic accuracy than water deprivation alone.
In the inpatient postneurosurgical setting, central DI is likely if hyperosmolality (serum osmolality >300 mOsm/kg) is associated with urine
osmolality less than serum osmolality. It is important to distinguish
between polyuria resulting from postsurgical central DI and polyuria
resulting from the normal diuresis of fluids received intraoperatively.

Central DI can result from multiple etiologies, including pathogenic
variants in the vasopressin (AVP) gene; trauma (accidental or surgical)
to vasopressin neurons; congenital malformations of the hypothalamus or pituitary; neoplasms; infiltrative, autoimmune, and infectious
diseases affecting vasopressin neurons or fiber tracts; and increased
metabolism of vasopressin. In approximately 10% of children with central DI, the etiology is idiopathic. Other pituitary hormone deficiencies
may be present (see Chapter 595). Over time, up to 35% of those with
idiopathic central DI will develop other hormone deficiencies or have an
underlying etiology identified.
Autosomal dominant central DI usually occurs within the first 5
years of life and results from pathogenic variants in AVP. A number of these genetic variants can cause gene-­processing defects in
a subset of vasopressin-­e xpressing neurons, which have been postulated to result in endoplasmic reticulum stress and cell death.
Wolfram syndrome, which includes DI, diabetes mellitus, optic
atrophy, and deafness, also results in vasopressin deficiency. Autosomal recessive pathogenic variants in the WFS1 (most common)
or WFS2 (CISD2) genes, which give rise to endoplasmic reticulum proteins, are associated with this condition. Congenital brain
abnormalities (see Chapter 631) such as optic nerve hypoplasia
syndrome with agenesis of the corpus callosum, Niikawa-­Kuroki
syndrome, holoprosencephaly, and familial pituitary hypoplasia
with absent stalk may be associated with central DI and defects in
thirst perception (adipsia). Empty sella syndrome, possibly resulting from unrecognized pituitary infarction, can be associated with
DI in children.
Trauma to the base of the brain and neurosurgical intervention
in the region of the hypothalamus or pituitary are common causes
of central DI. The triphasic response after surgery refers to an initial phase of transient DI, lasting 12-­48 hours, followed by a second
phase of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD), lasting
up to 10 days, which may be followed by permanent (or partial)
DI. The initial phase may be the result of local edema interfering
with normal vasopressin secretion; the second phase results from
unregulated vasopressin release from dying neurons, whereas in the
third phase, permanent DI results if more than 90% of the neurons
have been destroyed.
Given the anatomic distribution of vasopressin neurons over a
large area within the hypothalamus, tumors causing DI must either
be very large and infiltrative or be strategically located near the
base of the hypothalamus, where vasopressin axons converge before
their entry into the posterior pituitary. Germinomas and pinealomas typically arise in this region and are among the most common
primary brain tumors associated with DI. Germinomas can be very
small and undetectable by MRI for several years after the onset of
polyuria. Quantitative measurement of α-­fetoprotein and β-­human
chorionic gonadotropin, often secreted by germinomas, should be
performed in children with idiopathic or unexplained DI in addition to serial MRI scans. Craniopharyngiomas and optic gliomas
can also cause central DI when they are very large, although this is
more often a postoperative complication of the treatment for these
tumors (see Chapter 546). Hematologic malignancies, such as acute
myelocytic leukemia, can cause DI via infiltration of the pituitary
stalk and sella.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 556.2) and lymphocytic
hypophysitis are common types of infiltrative disorders causing central DI, with hypophysitis as the cause in 50% of cases of “idiopathic”
central DI. Infections involving the base of the brain (see Chapter
643), including meningitis (meningococcal, cryptococcal, listerial,
toxoplasmal), congenital cytomegalovirus infection, and nonspecific

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3374 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
inflammatory diseases of the brain, may give rise to central DI that
is often transient. Drugs associated with the inhibition of vasopressin
release include ethanol, phenytoin, opiate antagonists, halothane, and
α-­adrenergic agents.

Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus

NDI can result from genetic or acquired causes. Genetic causes
are less common but more severe than acquired forms of NDI.
The polyuria and polydipsia associated with genetic NDI usually
occur within the first several weeks of life but may become apparent
only after weaning or with longer periods of nighttime sleep. Many
infants initially present with fever, vomiting, and dehydration. Failure to thrive may be secondary to the ingestion of large amounts
of water, resulting in caloric malnutrition. Long-­standing ingestion
and excretion of large volumes of water can lead to nonobstructive
hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and megabladder.
Congenital X-­linked NDI results from inactivating pathogenic
variants of the vasopressin V2 receptor, AVPR2. Congenital autosomal
recessive NDI results from defects in the aquaporin-­2 gene, AQP2. An
autosomal dominant form of NDI is associated with processing variants of the AQP2 gene.
Acquired NDI can result from hypercalcemia or hypokalemia and
is associated with lithium, demeclocycline, foscarnet, clozapine,
amphotericin, methicillin, and rifampin. Impaired renal concentrating ability can also be seen with ureteral obstruction, chronic
renal failure, polycystic kidney disease, medullary cystic disease,
Sjögren syndrome, and sickle cell disease. Decreased protein or
sodium intake or excessive water intake, as in primary polydipsia,
can lead to diminished tonicity of the renal medullary interstitium,
which impairs water reabsorption and thus the ability to concentrate the urine, leading to NDI.

TREATMENT OF CENTRAL DIABETES INSIPIDUS
Fluid Therapy

With an intact thirst mechanism and free access to oral fluids, a person with complete DI can maintain plasma osmolality and sodium in
the high-­normal range, although at great inconvenience. Neonates and
young infants are often best treated solely with fluid therapy, given their
requirement for large volumes (∼3 L/m2/24 hr) of nutritive fluid. The
use of vasopressin analogs in patients with obligate high fluid intake
is difficult given the risk of life-­threatening hyponatremia. Although
not FDA approved, the use of DDAVP (desmopressin) administered
to infants with central DI, both as the diluted parenteral form given
subcutaneously and as the diluted intranasal form given via the buccal mucosa, has been successful without causing severe hyponatremia.
Patients with both central DI and NDI should ingest a diet without
excessive solute (e.g., sodium chloride) to help decrease urine output
when vasopressin action wanes.

Vasopressin Analogs

Treatment of central DI in older children is best accomplished with
the use of DDAVP. DDAVP is available in an intranasal preparation (onset 5-­10 minutes) and more commonly as tablets (onset
15-­30 minutes). The intranasal preparation of DDAVP (10 μg/0.1
mL) can be administered by rhinal tube (allowing dose titration)
or by nasal spray (10 μg/puff). Use of DDAVP oral tablets requires
at least a 10-­fold increase in the dosage compared with the intranasal preparation. Oral dosages of 25-­300 micrograms every 8-­12
hours are safe and effective in children. The appropriate dosage and
route of administration are determined empirically based on the
desired length of antidiuresis and patient preference. The use of oral

DDAVP for the treatment of enuresis in older children should be
regarded as a temporizing measure, given that it does not affect the
underlying condition, and should be used with great caution given
the risk of hyponatremia if water intake exceeds the capacity for
renal clearance. To prevent water intoxication, patients should have
at least 1 hour of urinary breakthrough between doses each day and
be advised to drink only in response to thirst sensation, if present.
The use of DDAVP nasal spray for childhood enuresis is no longer
approved because of its risk of causing hyponatremia.

Aqueous Vasopressin

Central DI of acute onset after neurosurgery is best managed
with continuous administration of synthetic aqueous vasopressin
(Pitressin). Under most circumstances, total fluid intake must be
limited to 1 L/m2/24 hr during antidiuresis. A typical dosage for
intravenous vasopressin therapy is 1.5 mU/kg/hr, which results in
a blood vasopressin concentration of approximately 10 pg/mL. On
occasion, after hypothalamic (but not transsphenoidal) surgery,
higher initial concentrations of vasopressin may be required to treat
acute DI, which has been attributed to the release of a vasopressin inhibitory substance. Vasopressin concentrations >1,000 pg/mL
should be avoided because they can cause cutaneous necrosis, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac rhythm disturbances, and hypertension. Postneurosurgical patients treated with vasopressin infusion should be
switched from intravenous to oral fluids as soon as possible to allow
thirst sensation, if intact, to help regulate osmolality.
Individuals with central DI caused by intracranial tumors that
require chemotherapy often need hyperhydration with large amounts
of intravenous fluids to prevent nephrotoxicity during treatment. Using
a low-­dose vasopressin continuous infusion to minimally concentrate
urine above baseline can allow infusion of fluids over 1 L/m2/day, while
preventing the discomfort of full diuresis if done under careful monitoring of volume status and sodium levels.

TREATMENT OF NEPHROGENIC DIABETES
INSIPIDUS

The treatment of acquired NDI focuses on eliminating, if possible,
the underlying disorder, such as offending drugs, hypercalcemia,
hypokalemia, or ureteral obstruction. Congenital NDI is often difficult to treat. The main goals are to ensure the intake of adequate
calories for growth and to avoid severe dehydration. Foods with the
highest ratio of caloric content to osmotic load (Na <1 mmol/kg/24
hr) should be ingested to maximize growth and to minimize the urine
volume required to excrete the solute load. However, even with the
early institution of therapy, growth failure and developmental disabilities are common.
Pharmacologic approaches to the treatment of NDI include the
use of thiazide diuretics and are intended to decrease the overall
urine output. Thiazides appear to induce a state of mild volume
depletion by enhancing sodium excretion at the expense of water
and by causing a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate, which
results in proximal tubular sodium and water reabsorption. Indomethacin and amiloride may be used in combination with thiazides
to further reduce polyuria. High-­dose DDAVP therapy, in combination with indomethacin, has been used in some subjects with NDI.
This treatment could prove useful in patients with genetic defects
in the V2 receptor associated with a reduced binding affinity for
vasopressin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 597 u Other Abnormalities of Arginine Vasopressin Metabolism and Action

3375

Runner’s Hyponatremia

Chapter 597

Other Abnormalities of
Arginine Vasopressin
Metabolism and Action
Carmen L. Soto-­Rivera, David T. Breault,
and Joseph A. Majzoub
Hyponatremia (serum sodium <130 mEq/L) in children is usually
associated with severe systemic disorders and is most often a result of
intravascular volume depletion, excessive salt loss, or hypotonic fluid
overload, especially in infants (see Chapter 73).
The initial approach to the patient with hyponatremia begins with
determination of the volume status. A careful review of the patient’s
history, physical examination (including changes in weight), and vital
signs helps to determine whether the patient is hypovolemic or hypervolemic. Supportive evidence includes laboratory data such as serum
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, uric acid, urine sodium,
specific gravity, and osmolality (Tables 597.1 and 597.2; see Chapter 73).

CAUSES OF HYPONATREMIA
Systemic Dehydration

The initial manifestation of systemic dehydration is often hypernatremia and hyperosmolality, which subsequently lead to the activation of vasopressin secretion and a decrease in water excretion. As
dehydration progresses, hypovolemia and/or hypotension become a
major stimulus for vasopressin release, further decreasing free water
clearance. Excessive free water intake (orally or intravenous infusion
of hypotonic fluids) with ongoing salt loss can produce hyponatremia. Urinary sodium excretion is low (usually <20 mEq/L), owing
to a low glomerular filtration rate and concomitant activation of the
renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system unless primary renal disease or
diuretic therapy is present.
Table 597.1  Differential Diagnosis of Hyponatremia
DISORDER

INTRAVASCULAR
VOLUME STATUS

URINE
SODIUM

Systemic dehydration

Low

Low

Decreased effective
plasma volume

Low

Low

Primary salt loss (nonrenal)

Low

Low

Primary salt loss (renal)

Low

High

Adrenal insufficiency

Low

High

SIAD

High

High

Cerebral salt wasting

Low

Very high

Decreased free water
clearance

Normal or high

Normal or high

Primary polydipsia

Normal or high

Normal

Runner’s hyponatremia

Low

Low

NSIAD

High

High

Pseudohyponatremia

Normal

Normal

Factitious hyponatremia

Normal

Normal

NSIAD, Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis; SIAD, syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuresis.

Excess hypotonic fluid ingestion during long-­distance running (e.g., marathon running) can result in severe hyponatremia from hypovolemia-­
induced activation of arginine vasopressin secretion coupled with
excessive water ingestion and is correlated with weight gain, long racing
time, and extremes of body mass index.

Decreased Effective Plasma Volume

Hyponatremia can result from decreased effective plasma volume, as
found in congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, positive
pressure mechanical ventilation, severe burns, bronchopulmonary dysplasia in neonates, cystic fibrosis with obstruction, and severe asthma.
The resulting decrease in cardiac output leads to reduced water and salt
excretion, as with systemic dehydration, and an increase in vasopressin
secretion. In patients with impaired cardiac output and elevated atrial
volume (congestive heart failure, lung disease), atrial natriuretic peptide
concentrations are elevated further, leading to hyponatremia by promoting natriuresis. However, owing to the marked elevation of aldosterone
in these patients, their urine sodium remains low (<20 mEq/L) despite
this. Unlike dehydrated patients, these patients also have excess total
body sodium from activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system and can demonstrate peripheral edema as well.

Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD) is characterized
by hyponatremia, an inappropriately concentrated urine (often >800
mOsm/kg H2O), normal or slightly elevated plasma volume, normal-­
to-­high urine sodium, and low serum uric acid. SIAD is uncommon
in children, and most cases result from excessive administration of
vasopressin in the treatment of central diabetes insipidus (vasopressin deficiency). It can also occur with increased intracranial pressure, encephalitis, brain tumors, head trauma, psychiatric disease,
prolonged nausea, pneumonia, tuberculous and bacterial meningitis, AIDS, and in the postictal phase after generalized seizures (Table
597.3). SIAD is the cause of the hyponatremic second phase of the triphasic response seen after hypothalamic-­pituitary surgery. It is found
in up to 35% of patients 1 week after surgery and can result from
retrograde neuronal degeneration with cell death and vasopressin
release. Common drugs that have been shown to increase vasopressin secretion or mimic vasopressin action, resulting in hyponatremia,
include oxcarbazepine, carbamazepine, chlorpropamide, vinblastine,
vincristine, and tricyclic antidepressants.

Nephrogenic Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the V2 vasopressin receptor gene, AVPR2, on chromosome Xq28 have been described in male
Table 597.2  Clinical Parameters to Distinguish Among
Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis
(SIAD), Cerebral Salt Wasting, and Central
Diabetes Insipidus (DI)
CLINICAL
PARAMETER

SIAD

CEREBRAL
SALT WASTING

CENTRAL DI

Serum sodium

Low

Low

High

Urine output

Normal or low

High

High

Urine sodium

High

Very high

Low

Intravascular
volume status

Normal or high

Low

Low

Blood pressure

Normal

Decreased/
orthostatic
hypotension

Decreased/
orthostatic
hypotension

Vasopressin
level

High

Low

Low

BUN

Low

High

High

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3376 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 597.3  Disorders Associated with Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis
CANCER

PULMONARY DISORDERS

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS

OTHER DISORDERS

Thymoma
Lymphoma
Ewing sarcoma
Oropharyngeal
tumor

Viral pneumonia
Bacterial pneumonia
Pulmonary abscess
Tuberculosis
Aspergillosis
Positive pressure ventilation
Asthma
Pneumothorax
Cystic fibrosis

Encephalitis (viral or bacterial)
Meningitis (viral, bacterial, tuberculous, fungal)
Head trauma
Brain abscess
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Subarachnoid hemorrhage or subdural hematoma
Cerebellar and cerebral atrophy
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Neonatal hypoxia
Shy-­Drager syndrome
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Delirium tremens
Cerebrovascular accident (cerebral thrombosis or
hemorrhage)
Acute psychosis
Peripheral neuropathy
Multiple sclerosis

AIDS
Prolonged exercise
Idiopathic (in older individuals)
Nephrogenic
Acute intermittent porphyria

Modified from Verbalis JG. Disorders of water balance. In Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al., eds, Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 16.6.

neonates with an SIAD-­like clinical picture with undetectable vasopressin levels. Females are most often asymptomatic carriers. It is most
commonly treated by fluid restriction, but oral urea has also been used
to promote osmotic diuresis and increase water clearance. Germline
activating pathogenic variants in GNAS have also been found in infants
presenting with hyponatremia. Activating variants in the aquaporin-­2
gene (AQP2) also give rise to the same syndrome.

Cerebral Salt Wasting

Cerebral salt wasting appears to be the result of hypersecretion of
natriuretic peptides and is seen primarily with central nervous system
disorders, including brain tumors, head trauma, hydrocephalus, neurosurgery, cerebrovascular accidents, and brain death. Hyponatremia is
accompanied by elevated urinary sodium excretion (often >150 mEq/L),
excessive urine output, hypovolemia, normal or high uric acid, and elevated atrial natriuretic peptide concentrations (>20 pmol/L). Thus it is
distinguished from SIAD, in which normal or decreased urine output,
normal or elevated blood volume, only modestly elevated urine sodium
concentration, and an elevated vasopressin level occur. The distinction
between cerebral salt wasting and SIAD is important because the treatment of the two disorders differs markedly. The existence of cerebral
salt wasting has been controversial; however, current data support this
entity as different from SIAD.

Primary Polydipsia (Increased Water Ingestion)

In patients with normal renal function, the kidney can excrete dilute urine
with an osmolality as low as 50 mOsm/kg H2O. To excrete a daily solute
load of 500 mOsm/m2 under these circumstances, the kidney must produce 10 L/m2 of urine per day. Therefore to avoid hyponatremia, the maximum amount of water a person with normal renal function can consume
daily is 10 L/m2, or less if solute intake is lower. However, neonates cannot
dilute their urine to this degree, putting them at risk for water intoxication if water intake exceeds 4 L/m2/day (approximately 60 mL/hr in a newborn). Infants may develop transient hyponatremic seizures after being fed
pure water without electrolytes rather than breast milk or formula.

Primary Salt Loss

Hyponatremia can result from the primary loss of sodium chloride, as
seen in specific disorders of the kidney (congenital polycystic kidney
disease, acute interstitial nephritis, chronic renal failure), gastrointestinal tract (gastroenteritis), and sweat glands (cystic fibrosis). The
hyponatremia is not solely caused by salt loss, as it is often associated
with hypovolemia, leading to an increase in vasopressin. Mineralocorticoid deficiency (hypoaldosteronism), pseudohypoaldosteronism
(genetic or sometimes seen in children with urinary tract obstruction
or infection), and diuretics can also result in loss of sodium chloride

(Table 597.4). Low aldosterone states, such as primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), are associated with salt wasting, hypovolemia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and failure to thrive.

Decreased Free Water Clearance

Hyponatremia as a consequence of decreased renal free water clearance, even in the absence of an increase in vasopressin secretion, can
result from adrenal insufficiency or thyroid deficiency or can be related
to a direct effect of drugs on the kidney. Glucocorticoids are required
for normal free water clearance in a vasopressin-­independent manner.
In patients with unexplained hyponatremia, adrenal and thyroid insufficiency should be considered. Patients with coexisting adrenal failure
and diabetes insipidus might have no symptoms of the latter until glucocorticoid therapy unmasks the need for vasopressin replacement.
Certain drugs can inhibit renal water excretion through direct effects
on the nephron, thus causing hyponatremia; these drugs include high-­
dose cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, cisplatinum, carbamazepine, and
oxcarbazepine.

Pseudohyponatremia and Other Causes of
Hyponatremia

Pseudohyponatremia can result from hypertriglyceridemia (see Chapter 73.3). Elevated lipid levels result in a relative decrease in serum
water content. As electrolytes are dissolved in the aqueous phase of the
serum, they appear low when expressed as a fraction of the total serum
volume. However, as a fraction of serum water, electrolyte content is
normal. Modern laboratory methods that measure sodium concentration directly, independent of sample volume, do not cause this anomaly. Factitious hyponatremia can result from obtaining a blood sample
downstream to the site of intravenous hypotonic fluid infusion.
Hyponatremia is also associated with hyperglycemia, which causes
the influx of water into the intravascular space. Serum sodium decreases
by ∼1.6 mEq/L for every 100 mg/dL increment in blood glucose >100
mg/dL. Glucose is not ordinarily an osmotically active agent and does
not stimulate vasopressin release, probably because it can equilibrate
freely across plasma membranes. However, in the presence of insulin
deficiency and hyperglycemia, glucose acts as an osmotic agent, presumably because its normal intracellular access to osmosensor sites
is prevented. Under these circumstances, an osmotic gradient exists,
stimulating vasopressin release.

TREATMENT

Patients with systemic dehydration and hypovolemia should be rehydrated
with salt-­containing fluids such as normal saline or lactated Ringer’s solution. Because of activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system,
the administered sodium is avidly conserved, and water diuresis quickly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 597 u Other Abnormalities of Arginine Vasopressin Metabolism and Action

3377

Table 597.4  Pathogenic Gene Variants Associated with Hypoaldosteronism/ Pseudohypoaldosteronism (Type IV Renal
Tubular Acidosis)
GENE CHROMOSOME OMIM
PRIMARY HYPOALDOSTERONISM
CYP21A2—cytochrome P450,
subfamily XXIA, polypeptide 2
6p21.3 613815
CYP11B2—cytochrome P450,
subfamily XIB, polypeptide 2 8q21
124080

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

PATHOGENIC VARIANT–CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS–OMIM–INHERITANCE

P450c21—steroid 21-­hydroxylase that converts 17
α-­hydroxyprogesterone to 11-­deoxycortisol and
progesterone to 11-­deoxycorticosterone in the
adrenal zona fasciculata

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants decrease
synthesis of cortisol and aldosterone, the
latter resulting in the salt-­losing form of classic
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, AR–201910

P450c11B2—aldosterone synthase/corticosterone
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants associated
methyloxidase types I and II expressed only in the
with severe salt loss and volume depletion but
zona glomerulosa; hydroxylates deoxycorticosterone
not with abnormalities of genital formation or
at carbon-­11 and corticosterone at carbon-­18 and
glucocorticoid synthesis AR (CMOI 203400;
oxidizes 18-­hydroxycorticosterone to aldosterone
CMOII 610600)

PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM TYPE I (PHA1)
NR3C2—nuclear receptor subfamily
Ligand-­activated nuclear transcription factor that
3, group C, member 2 (MR-­
transmits aldosterone-­mediated control of gene
mineralocorticoid receptor), 4q31.1
expression by binding to the mineralocorticoid
600983
response element in the promoter region of the
target gene

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the MR
lead to mineralocorticoid resistance and salt
wasting, PHA1A, AD–177735

SCNN1A—sodium channel, non–
voltage-­gated, α-­subunit 12p13.31
600228

Inactivating pathogenic variant of α-­subunit of the
epithelial sodium channel

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
the epithelial sodium channel lead to
mineralocorticoid resistance and salt wasting,
PHA1B, AR–264350

SCNN1B—sodium channel, non–
voltage-­gated, β-­subunit 16p12.2
600760

Inactivating mutation of β-­subunit of the epithelial
sodium channel

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
the epithelial sodium channel lead to
mineralocorticoid resistance and salt wasting,
PHA1B, AR–264350

SCNN1G—sodium channel, non–
voltage-­gated, γ-­subunit 16p12.2
600761

Inactivating mutation of γ-­subunit of the epithelial
sodium channel

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
the epithelial sodium channel lead to
mineralocorticoid resistance and salt wasting,
PHA1B AR–264350

PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM TYPE II (PHA2) (GORDON SYNDROME)
WNK4—protein kinase, lysine-­
Multifunctional serine-­threonine protein kinase whose
deficient 4 17q21.31 601844
substrate is SLC12A3, the thiazide-­sensitive sodium/
chloride co-transporter (NCCT)—OMIM 600968—
that also regulates lysosomal degradation of NCCT
and endocytosis of the KCNJ1 potassium channel

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2B,
AD–614491

WNK1—protein kinase, lysine-­
deficient 1 12p13.33 605232

Serine-­threonine protein kinase that inactivates WNK4
by phosphorylating its kinase domain

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2C,
AD–614492

KLH3—Kelch-­like 3 5q31.2 605775

Adaptor protein within the ubiquitination sequence
that links WNK1 and WNK4 to CUL3

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2D, AD/
AR–614495

CUL3—Cullin 3 2q36.2 603136

Scaffold protein that links to RING-­box E3 ligase
facilitating WNK4 ubiquitination and proteasomal
destruction of WNK4

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2E,
AD–614496

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CMO, corticosterone methyloxidase; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
From Root AW. Disorders of aldosterone synthesis, secretion, and cellular function. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2014;26:480–486, Table 1.

ensues as volume is restored and vasopressin concentrations decrease.
Under these conditions, caution must be taken to prevent a too-­rapid correction of hyponatremia (with a goal increase of <0.5 mEq/L/hr), which
can result in central pontine myelinolysis characterized by discrete regions
of axonal demyelination and the potential for irreversible brain damage.
Hyponatremia from a decrease in effective plasma volume caused
by cardiac, hepatic, renal, or pulmonary dysfunction is more difficult
to reverse. The most effective therapy is treatment of the underlying
systemic disorder. Patients weaned from positive pressure ventilation
undergo a prompt water diuresis and resolution of hyponatremia as
cardiac output is restored and vasopressin concentrations decrease.
Vaptans are a class of small-­molecule arginine vasopressin V2 receptor antagonists (aquaretics) useful for the treatment of hypervolemic hyponatremia associated with severe congestive heart failure
and chronic liver failure. Although these agents successfully increase

plasma sodium, they also lead to increased thirst and plasma vasopressin levels, which can limit their effectiveness, can increase serum
sodium more rapidly than is safe, and may cause hepatoxicity.
Patients with hyponatremia from primary salt loss require supplementation with sodium chloride and fluids. Initially, intravenous replacement
with isotonic fluids containing sodium chloride (150 mEq/L) may be necessary. Hypertonic fluids (450 mEq/L sodium choride) should be reserved
for treatment of acute neurologic deterioration caused by severe hyponatremia. Oral salt supplementation may be required subsequently. This
treatment contrasts with that of SIAD, in which water restriction without
sodium supplementation is the mainstay.

Emergency Treatment of Hyponatremia

The development of acute hyponatremia (onset <12 hr) or a serum
sodium concentration <120 mEq/L may be associated with lethargy,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3378 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
psychosis, coma, or generalized seizures, especially in younger children.
Acute hyponatremia can cause cell swelling and lead to neuronal dysfunction or to cerebral herniation. The emergency treatment of cerebral
dysfunction resulting from acute hyponatremia includes water restriction
and can require rapid correction with hypertonic 3% sodium chloride. If
hypertonic saline treatment is undertaken, the serum sodium should
be raised only high enough to cause an improvement in mental status
and, in no case, faster than 0.5 mEq/L/hr or 12 mEq/L/24 hr.

Treatment of Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

Chronic SIAD is best treated by oral fluid restriction. With full antidiuresis (urine osmolality of 1,000 mOsm/kg H2O), a normal daily obligate renal solute load of 500 mOsm/m2 would be excreted in 500 mL/
m2 water. This, plus a daily nonrenal water loss of 500 mL/m2, would
require that oral fluid intake be limited to 1,000 mL/m2/24 hr to avoid
hyponatremia. In young children, this degree of fluid restriction might
not provide adequate calories for growth. In this situation, a vaptan
such as tolvaptan, although not FDA approved in children and may
cause initial correction of hyponatremia too rapidly, may allow sufficient fluid intake for normal growth without concomitant hyponatremia. Urea has also been safely used to induce an osmotic diuresis in
infants and children.

Treatment of Cerebral Salt Wasting

Treatment of patients with cerebral salt wasting consists of restoring
intravascular volume with sodium chloride and water, as for the treatment of other causes of systemic dehydration. The underlying cause of
the disorder, which is usually the result of acute brain injury, should
also be treated if possible. Treatment involves the ongoing replacement
of urine and sodium losses volume for volume.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 598

Hyperpituitarism
Omar Ali
Hyperpituitarism is defined as the excessive secretion or production
of one or more of the hormones produced by the pituitary gland.
The anterior pituitary normally produces prolactin, growth hormone
(GH), thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and the gonadotropin hormones (luteinizing hormone
[LH] and follicle-­stimulating hormone [FSH]); overproduction of any
of these hormones is possible, though all are relatively rare. The posterior pituitary stores and releases antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and
oxytocin, both produced by neurons in the hypothalamus. Although
extremely rare cases of hypothalamic neurocytomas producing excess
ADH have been reported (mostly in adults), these are vanishingly rare
and will not be considered any further. Hyperpituitarism refers to the
overproduction of one or more of the anterior pituitary hormones.

SECONDARY HYPERPITUITARISM

Several of the anterior pituitary hormones (all except GH and prolactin) act on other endocrine glands and regulate their secretion. They
are regulated by negative feedback loops from their target glands, and
their secretion increases if the end organ is not producing enough hormone. This can lead in extreme cases to severe hypertrophy of the relevant anterior pituitary cells and is a normal physiologic response to
target hormone deficiencies resulting in decreased hormonal feedback,
such as in hypogonadism, hypoadrenalism, or hypothyroidism. In these
cases of secondary hyperpituitarism, chronic pituitary hypersecretion
occurs in response to target hormone deficiencies that leads to pituitary

hyperplasia; in extreme cases this can even enlarge and erode the sella
and, on rare occasions, increase intracranial pressure. Such enlargements
should not be confused with primary pituitary tumors; they disappear,
and elevated pituitary hormone levels readily suppress to normal when
the underlying hormone deficiency is treated by replacement of end-­
organ hormones.
Primary hypersecretion of pituitary hormones is uncommon in childhood. The most commonly diagnosed adenoma during childhood is prolactinoma, followed by corticotropinoma, and then somatotropinoma,
which secrete prolactin, corticotropin, and GH, respectively. There are a
handful of case reports of thyrotropinoma in children and adolescents.
There are no pediatric reports of gonadotropinoma, but hypothalamic
hamartomas that secrete excess gonadotropin-­releasing hormone are
one cause of precocious puberty. In very rare cases, pituitary hyperplasia
can also occur in response to stimulation by ectopic production of releasing hormones such as that seen occasionally in patients with Cushing
syndrome secondary to corticotropin-­releasing hormone excess or in
children with acromegaly secondary to growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) produced by a variety of systemic tumors.
The monoclonal nature of most pituitary adenomas implies that
most originate from a clonal event in a single cell. In some cases, the
pituitary tumors result from stimulation with hypothalamic-­releasing
hormones and in other instances, as in McCune-­Albright syndrome
(MAS), the tumor is caused by activating pathogenic variants of the
GNAS1 gene that codes for the α subunit of Gsα, a guanine nucleotide-­
binding protein. The clinical presentation typically depends on the
pituitary hormone that is hypersecreted. In addition, disruptions of
growth regulation and/or sexual maturation are common as a result
of either hormone hypersecretion or local compression by the tumor.
MAS also features polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone and café-­au-­lait
spots in a distinct distribution.

EXCESS GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION AND
PITUITARY GIGANTISM

In young persons with open epiphyses, overproduction of GH results
in gigantism; in persons with closed epiphyses, the result is acromegaly. Often some acromegalic features are seen with gigantism, even in
children and adolescents. After closure of the epiphyses, the acromegalic features become more prominent.
Gigantism is rare, with only several hundred reported cases worldwide to date. It must be emphasized that the vast majority of patients
with tall stature will not have gigantism. The normal distribution of
height predicts that 2.3% of the population will be taller than 2 standard deviations (SD) (97.7%) above the mean, and many cases of tall
stature will therefore be normal-­variant familial tall stature; if their
growth is in line with their midparental height and no other concerning features are present, then no further investigation is needed. In
cases where the tall stature is unexpected or extreme, other etiologies
of rapid linear growth such as precocious puberty and hyperthyroidism should be carefully excluded. Coexisting findings (e.g., dysmorphic facial features, neurocognitive problems, hemihypertrophy) may
suggest syndromic or chromosomal causes of tall stature, such as Sotos,
Weaver, Klinefelter, or XYY syndrome.
The cardinal clinical feature of gigantism is longitudinal growth
acceleration secondary to GH excess. The usual manifestations consist of coarse facial features and enlarging hands and feet. In young
children, rapid growth of the head can precede linear growth. Some
patients have behavioral and visual problems. In most recorded cases,
the abnormal growth became evident at puberty, but the condition has
been established as early as the newborn period. Giants have rarely
been reported to grow to a height of over 8 feet. In some cases, the
patient may present with local effects of the pituitary tumor (headache,
visual field defects, and other pituitary hormone deficiencies) as the
main complaint, and there is at least one report of a patient presenting
with diabetic ketoacidosis induced by GH excess. The presentation of
gigantism is usually dramatic, unlike the insidious onset of acromegaly
in adults.
Pituitary adenomas secreting GH are more common in males, but
females may present at an earlier age. Tumors with AIP pathogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3378 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
psychosis, coma, or generalized seizures, especially in younger children.
Acute hyponatremia can cause cell swelling and lead to neuronal dysfunction or to cerebral herniation. The emergency treatment of cerebral
dysfunction resulting from acute hyponatremia includes water restriction
and can require rapid correction with hypertonic 3% sodium chloride. If
hypertonic saline treatment is undertaken, the serum sodium should
be raised only high enough to cause an improvement in mental status
and, in no case, faster than 0.5 mEq/L/hr or 12 mEq/L/24 hr.

Treatment of Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

Chronic SIAD is best treated by oral fluid restriction. With full antidiuresis (urine osmolality of 1,000 mOsm/kg H2O), a normal daily obligate renal solute load of 500 mOsm/m2 would be excreted in 500 mL/
m2 water. This, plus a daily nonrenal water loss of 500 mL/m2, would
require that oral fluid intake be limited to 1,000 mL/m2/24 hr to avoid
hyponatremia. In young children, this degree of fluid restriction might
not provide adequate calories for growth. In this situation, a vaptan
such as tolvaptan, although not FDA approved in children and may
cause initial correction of hyponatremia too rapidly, may allow sufficient fluid intake for normal growth without concomitant hyponatremia. Urea has also been safely used to induce an osmotic diuresis in
infants and children.

Treatment of Cerebral Salt Wasting

Treatment of patients with cerebral salt wasting consists of restoring
intravascular volume with sodium chloride and water, as for the treatment of other causes of systemic dehydration. The underlying cause of
the disorder, which is usually the result of acute brain injury, should
also be treated if possible. Treatment involves the ongoing replacement
of urine and sodium losses volume for volume.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 598

Hyperpituitarism
Omar Ali
Hyperpituitarism is defined as the excessive secretion or production
of one or more of the hormones produced by the pituitary gland.
The anterior pituitary normally produces prolactin, growth hormone
(GH), thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and the gonadotropin hormones (luteinizing hormone
[LH] and follicle-­stimulating hormone [FSH]); overproduction of any
of these hormones is possible, though all are relatively rare. The posterior pituitary stores and releases antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and
oxytocin, both produced by neurons in the hypothalamus. Although
extremely rare cases of hypothalamic neurocytomas producing excess
ADH have been reported (mostly in adults), these are vanishingly rare
and will not be considered any further. Hyperpituitarism refers to the
overproduction of one or more of the anterior pituitary hormones.

SECONDARY HYPERPITUITARISM

Several of the anterior pituitary hormones (all except GH and prolactin) act on other endocrine glands and regulate their secretion. They
are regulated by negative feedback loops from their target glands, and
their secretion increases if the end organ is not producing enough hormone. This can lead in extreme cases to severe hypertrophy of the relevant anterior pituitary cells and is a normal physiologic response to
target hormone deficiencies resulting in decreased hormonal feedback,
such as in hypogonadism, hypoadrenalism, or hypothyroidism. In these
cases of secondary hyperpituitarism, chronic pituitary hypersecretion
occurs in response to target hormone deficiencies that leads to pituitary

hyperplasia; in extreme cases this can even enlarge and erode the sella
and, on rare occasions, increase intracranial pressure. Such enlargements
should not be confused with primary pituitary tumors; they disappear,
and elevated pituitary hormone levels readily suppress to normal when
the underlying hormone deficiency is treated by replacement of end-­
organ hormones.
Primary hypersecretion of pituitary hormones is uncommon in childhood. The most commonly diagnosed adenoma during childhood is prolactinoma, followed by corticotropinoma, and then somatotropinoma,
which secrete prolactin, corticotropin, and GH, respectively. There are a
handful of case reports of thyrotropinoma in children and adolescents.
There are no pediatric reports of gonadotropinoma, but hypothalamic
hamartomas that secrete excess gonadotropin-­releasing hormone are
one cause of precocious puberty. In very rare cases, pituitary hyperplasia
can also occur in response to stimulation by ectopic production of releasing hormones such as that seen occasionally in patients with Cushing
syndrome secondary to corticotropin-­releasing hormone excess or in
children with acromegaly secondary to growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) produced by a variety of systemic tumors.
The monoclonal nature of most pituitary adenomas implies that
most originate from a clonal event in a single cell. In some cases, the
pituitary tumors result from stimulation with hypothalamic-­releasing
hormones and in other instances, as in McCune-­Albright syndrome
(MAS), the tumor is caused by activating pathogenic variants of the
GNAS1 gene that codes for the α subunit of Gsα, a guanine nucleotide-­
binding protein. The clinical presentation typically depends on the
pituitary hormone that is hypersecreted. In addition, disruptions of
growth regulation and/or sexual maturation are common as a result
of either hormone hypersecretion or local compression by the tumor.
MAS also features polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone and café-­au-­lait
spots in a distinct distribution.

EXCESS GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION AND
PITUITARY GIGANTISM

In young persons with open epiphyses, overproduction of GH results
in gigantism; in persons with closed epiphyses, the result is acromegaly. Often some acromegalic features are seen with gigantism, even in
children and adolescents. After closure of the epiphyses, the acromegalic features become more prominent.
Gigantism is rare, with only several hundred reported cases worldwide to date. It must be emphasized that the vast majority of patients
with tall stature will not have gigantism. The normal distribution of
height predicts that 2.3% of the population will be taller than 2 standard deviations (SD) (97.7%) above the mean, and many cases of tall
stature will therefore be normal-­variant familial tall stature; if their
growth is in line with their midparental height and no other concerning features are present, then no further investigation is needed. In
cases where the tall stature is unexpected or extreme, other etiologies
of rapid linear growth such as precocious puberty and hyperthyroidism should be carefully excluded. Coexisting findings (e.g., dysmorphic facial features, neurocognitive problems, hemihypertrophy) may
suggest syndromic or chromosomal causes of tall stature, such as Sotos,
Weaver, Klinefelter, or XYY syndrome.
The cardinal clinical feature of gigantism is longitudinal growth
acceleration secondary to GH excess. The usual manifestations consist of coarse facial features and enlarging hands and feet. In young
children, rapid growth of the head can precede linear growth. Some
patients have behavioral and visual problems. In most recorded cases,
the abnormal growth became evident at puberty, but the condition has
been established as early as the newborn period. Giants have rarely
been reported to grow to a height of over 8 feet. In some cases, the
patient may present with local effects of the pituitary tumor (headache,
visual field defects, and other pituitary hormone deficiencies) as the
main complaint, and there is at least one report of a patient presenting
with diabetic ketoacidosis induced by GH excess. The presentation of
gigantism is usually dramatic, unlike the insidious onset of acromegaly
in adults.
Pituitary adenomas secreting GH are more common in males, but
females may present at an earlier age. Tumors with AIP pathogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 598 u Hyperpituitarism 3379
variants (familial isolated pituitary adenoma) are more common in
males, are larger and invasive, and secrete GH or prolactin. X-­LAG
syndrome (X-­linked acrogigantism) is a recognized cause of familial
pituitary adenomas, and in these patients the rapid growth begins in
infancy and is more frequent in females. Patients with MAS will usually
exhibit other features, including polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, café-­au-­
lait spots, and precocious puberty.
Pituitary tumors secrete extremely high levels of GH; approximately
50% of pituitary adenomas also exhibit hyperprolactinemia because
they secrete both GH and prolactin. Adenomas can compromise
other anterior pituitary function through growth or cystic degeneration. Secretion of gonadotropins, thyrotropin, or corticotropin may
be impaired. Delayed sexual maturation or hypogonadism can occur.
When GH hypersecretion is accompanied by gonadotropin deficiency,
accelerated linear growth can persist for decades. In some cases, the
tumor spreads outside the sella, invading the sphenoid bone, optic
nerves, and brain. GH-­secreting tumors in pediatric patients are more
likely to be locally invasive or aggressive than are those in adults.
Acromegalic features consist chiefly of enlargement of the distal
parts of the body, but manifestations of abnormal growth involve all
portions. The circumference of the skull increases, the nose becomes
broad, and the tongue is often enlarged, with coarsening of the facial
features. The mandible grows excessively, and the teeth become separated. Visual field defects and neurologic abnormalities are common;
signs of increased intracranial pressure appear later. The fingers and
toes grow chiefly in thickness. There may be dorsal kyphosis. Fatigue
and lassitude are early symptoms. GH levels are elevated and occasionally exceed 100 ng/mL. There is usually no suppression of GH levels by the hyperglycemia of a glucose tolerance test, and insulin-­like
growth factor 1 (IGF1) and insulin-­like growth factor binding protein 3
(IGFBP-­3) levels are consistently elevated in acromegaly and pituitary
gigantism.

Diagnosis

GH hypersecretion should be screened for by testing IGF1 and IGFBP­3 levels. An elevated IGF1 level in a patient with appropriate clinical
suspicion usually indicates GH excess. Potential confusion can arise in
the evaluation of normal adolescents because significantly higher IGF1
levels occur during puberty than in adulthood; the IGF1 level must
be age and gender matched. Serum IGFBP-­3 levels are also sensitive
markers of GH elevations and will be elevated in almost all cases. If
IGF1 and/or IGFBP-­3 levels are elevated, then the next step is to test for
GH excess by doing an oral glucose-­suppression test. The gold standard
for the diagnosis of GH excess in adults is the failure to suppress serum
GH levels to <1 ng/dL at any time during a 2-­hour oral glucose tolerance test with 1.75 g/kg oral glucose challenge (maximum: 75 g). GH
levels may not be suppressed to this level in normal adolescents, and a
cutoff of 5 ng/mL may be more appropriate in this age-­group. If laboratory findings suggest GH excess, the presence of a pituitary adenoma
should be confirmed by MRI of the brain. In rare cases, a pituitary mass
is not identified. This might be from an occult pituitary microadenoma
or ectopic production of GHRH or GH. CT is acceptable when MRI is
unavailable.
Genetic causes: Genetic pathogenic variants are recognized as being
present in ∼50% of cases, though many are sporadic. In a large series,
detailed genetic testing revealed pathogenic variants in AIP in 29% of
cases, X-­LAG due to microdeletions at Xq26.3 in 10% of the cases, and
MAS in 5% of the cases. No genetic abnormality was identified in 54%
of the cases. Although GH-­secreting adenomas eventually develop in
up to 60% of patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 (MEN1),
most of these occur in adults and therefore cause acromegaly rather
than gigantism. Increased GH secretion and GH-­secreting adenomas
may also be seen in neurofibromatosis; tuberous sclerosis; MEN4; Carney complex; and the paraganglioma, pheochromocytoma, and pituitary adenoma association known as 3PA.
A genetics consultation and appropriate genetic testing is therefore
indicated in all cases of pituitary gigantism.

Treatment

The goals of therapy are to remove or shrink the pituitary mass, to
restore GH and secretory patterns to normal, to restore IGF1 and
IGFBP-­3 levels to normal, to retain the normal pituitary secretion of
other hormones, and to prevent recurrence of disease.
For well-­circumscribed pituitary adenomas, trans-­sphenoidal surgery is the treatment of choice and may be curative. The tumor should
be removed completely. The likelihood of surgical cure depends greatly
on the surgeon’s expertise and on the size and extension of the mass.
Intraoperative GH measurements can improve the results of tumor
resection. Trans-­sphenoidal surgery to resect the tumors is as safe in
children as in adults. At times, a transcranial approach might be necessary. The primary goal of treatment is to normalize GH and IGF1
levels. GH levels (<1 ng/mL within 2 hours after a glucose load) and
serum IGF1 levels (age-­adjusted normal range) are the best tests to
define a biochemical cure.
If GH secretion and IGF1 levels are not normalized by surgery, the
options include pituitary irradiation and medical therapy. Further
growth of the tumor is prevented by irradiation in >99% of patients.
The main disadvantage is the delayed efficacy in decreasing GH levels.
GH is reduced by approximately 50% from the initial concentration by
2 years, by 75% by 5 years, and approaches 90% by 15 years. Multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency is a predictable result of pituitary radiation, occurring in 40–50% of patients 10 years after irradiation.
Surgery fails to cure a significant number of patients, and radiotherapy may not work fast enough, so medical therapy has an important
role in treating patients with GH excess. Treatment is effective and well
tolerated with GH antagonists, long-­acting somatostatin analogs, and
in some cases, by dopamine agonists.
Pegvisomant is a GH-­
receptor antagonist that competes with
endogenous GH for binding to the GH receptor. It effectively suppresses GH and IGF1 levels in patients with acromegaly caused by
pituitary tumors and ectopic GHRH hypersecretion. Normalization of
IGF1 levels occurs in up to 90% of patients treated daily with this drug
for 3 months or longer. The adult dosage is 10-­40 mg via subcutaneous
injection once daily, although twice-­weekly protocols have also been
reported as highly successful. IGF1 levels and hepatic enzymes must be
monitored. Combined therapy with somatostatin analogs and weekly
pegvisomant injections also is effective. Pediatric experience is limited,
but case reports indicate that it can successfully suppress IGF1 levels
when used in doses of 10-­30 mg/day.
The somatostatin analogs are frequently effective in the treatment of patients with GH excess. Octreotide suppresses GH to <2.5
ng/mL in 65% of patients with acromegaly and normalizes IGF1
levels in 70%. The effects of octreotide are well sustained over time.
Tumor shrinkage also occurs with octreotide but is generally modest. Consistent GH suppression can be obtained with a continuous
subcutaneous (SC) pump infusion of octreotide or with long-­acting
formulations, including long-­
acting octreotide and lanreotide.
Octreotide injection in the pediatric population has been used at
doses of 1-­40 μg/kg/24 hr. In adults the long-­acting form is used in
a dose of 10-­40 mg every month, but no pediatric dose range has
been established.
For patients with both GH and prolactin oversecretion, dopamine
agonists, such as bromocriptine and cabergoline, which bind to
pituitary dopamine type 2 receptors and may also suppress GH secretion, can also be considered. Prolactin levels are often adequately suppressed, but GH levels and IGF1 levels are rarely normalized with this
treatment modality alone. Tumor shrinkage occurs in a minority of
patients. The effectiveness of these agents may be additive to that of
octreotide. Cabergoline therapy at doses of 0.25-­4.0 mg/wk (given 1-­2
times per week) has been used in adults with acromegaly, and because
of its less frequent dosing and lower incidence of side effects as compared to bromocriptine, this is now considered the dopamine agonist
of choice in both adults and children. Side effects can include nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, arrhythmias, nasal stuffiness, orthostatic
hypotension, sleep disturbances, and fatigue.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3380 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

A

B

TREATMENT OF NORMAL-­VARIANT TALL STATURE

Patients who have familial tall stature and no other underlying pathology usually require no treatment other than reassurance. The use of the
bone age to predict adult height might provide some comfort for them,
as will general supportive discussions on the social acceptability of this
condition. Although treatment is possible for females and males with
excessive growth, its use should be restricted to patients with predicted
adult height >3-­4 SD above the mean (79 inches or 200 cm in males, 73
inches or 185 cm in females) and evidence of significant psychosocial
impairment.
Sex steroids have been used in the treatment of tall stature and are
designed to accelerate puberty and to promote epiphyseal fusion;
these are therefore of little benefit when given in late puberty. The
lack of extensive experience with this form of therapy and the risks
of estrogen or androgen treatment for tall stature should be carefully
weighed and discussed with the family, and treatment should be discouraged except in the most extreme cases. Detailed discussion with
the child at the child’s level is also advisable, as up to 40% of those
who underwent such treatments are dissatisfied as adults and feel they
were not sufficiently consulted about this course of action. Therapy is
initiated ideally before puberty or in early puberty (no later than bone
age of 14). In the extremely rare instances where treatment is desired,
testosterone enanthate is used at a dose of 250-­500 mg intramuscularly every 2 weeks for 6 months in males. In females, oral estrogens
in various doses have been used to reduce the predicted height, but
average height reduction may be only 1.1-­2.4 cm. Therapy must begin
before the bone age has reached 12 years. In the rare case where treatment is advised, oral ethinyl estradiol has been used at a dose of 0.15-­
0.5 mg/day until cessation of growth occurs. Short-­term side effects
have included benign breast disease, cholelithiasis, hypertension,
menstrual irregularities, weight gain, nausea, limb pain, galactorrhea,
and thrombosis. Reduced fertility later in life may be a potential long-­
term complication. An alternative to sex-­steroid therapy is the use
of epiphysiodesis (destruction of the growth plates) around the knee
to limit linear growth, but this intervention also remains controversial, and its long-­term safety profile and psychologic risks and benefits
remain unknown.

HYPERSECRETION OF OTHER PITUITARY
HORMONES
Prolactinoma

Prolactin-­secreting pituitary adenomas are the most common pituitary tumors in adolescents. With the use of MRI, more of these
tumors, particularly microadenomas (<1 cm in diameter), are being
detected (Fig. 598.1). The most common presenting manifestations
are headache, primary or secondary amenorrhea, and galactorrhea.
The disorder affects more than twice as many females as males; most

Fig. 598.1 Sagittal (A) and coronal
(B) post-­gadolinium T1-­weighted
MRI scans of a female with a microprolactinoma on the right side
of the sella, who presented with
amenorrhea and galactorrhea. Her
serum prolactin was 89 ng/mL.
(From Wong A, Eloy JA, Couldwell
WT, Liu JK. Update on prolactinomas. Part 1: clinical manifestations
and diagnostic challenges. J Clin
Neurosci. 2015;22:1562–1567, Fig.
1, p. 1563.)

patients have undergone normal puberty before becoming symptomatic. Only a few have delayed puberty. In some kindreds with type
I multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome, prolactinomas are the
presenting feature during adolescence. Familial cases and sporadic
cases with de novo pathogenic variants of the AIP gene and X-­LAG
are being recognized more often as genetic testing becomes more
common.
Prolactin levels may be elevated mildly (40-­50 ng/mL) or markedly (10,000-­15,000 ng/mL), and there is a correlation between
tumor size and prolactin levels. Most prolactinomas in children
are large (macroadenomas), cause the sella to enlarge, and, in some
cases, cause visual field defects. Approximately 30% of patients with
macroadenomas develop other pituitary hormone deficiencies, particularly GH deficiency. Alternatively, prolactin-­secreting adenomas might also stain for and secrete excess GH and/or TSH.
Prolactinomas should not be confused with the hyperprolactinemia
and pituitary hyperplasia that can occur in patients with primary
hypothyroidism, which is readily treated with thyroid hormone (see
Chapter 603). Moderate elevations (<200 ng/mL) of prolactin are
also associated with a variety of medications (antipsychotics, metoclopramide, phenothiazines, verapamil, opioids), with pituitary stalk
dysfunction such as can occur with craniopharyngioma, with chronic
renal failure, with chronic stress (rarely >40 ng/mL), and with nipple
stimulation; hyperprolactinemia may also remain idiopathic in some
cases (Table 598.1).
Drug-­induced hyperprolactinemia is especially common,
and in most cases the level is less than 100 ng/mL, though risperidone can cause elevations up to 300 ng/mL. No further investigation is needed if elevations in these ranges are seen in patients on
antipsychotic medications who do not have any other suspicious
features.
In extremely rare cases, prolactin may be produced by tumors outside the pituitary; in these cases there will be hyperprolactinemia with
no sign of a pituitary tumor on imaging and no response to cabergoline
treatment.
In some cases, extreme hyperprolactinemia is associated with a hook
effect that leads to factitiously low values on blood tests. In cases where
clinical features are compatible with hyperprolactinemia, serial dilution of the laboratory specimen should be done to rule out this kind of
measurement error. On the other hand, patients may have factitiously
elevated prolactin levels on immunoassay as a result of the presence
of prolactin polymers and dimers (macroprolactinemia) that are not
physiologically active. In cases where an elevated prolactin is detected
in an asymptomatic patient, unnecessary diagnostic workup and treatment can be avoided by performing polyethylene glycol precipitation
to exclude the presence of macroprolactinemia, which is clinically
benign.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 598 u Hyperpituitarism 3381
Table 598.1  Causes of Hyperprolactinemia
PHYSIOLOGIC
Pregnancy and lactation/nipple stimulation
Stress
Exercise
Sexual intercourse
PHARMACOLOGIC
Antipsychotics
Typical
Phenothiazines
Haloperidol
Atypical
Risperidone
Clozapine
Olanzapine
Antidepressants
Tricyclics
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Antihypertensives
Verapamil
Reserpine
α-­Methyldopa
Antiemetics
Metoclopramide
Domperidone
H2 blockers
Cimetidine
Ranitidine

in such cases and is not associated with any other clinical finding.
No further treatment or investigation is indicated in these cases,
and minimal galactorrhea can be left untreated. If the amount of
milk discharge is bothersome, then low-­dose cabergoline (0.25 mg
once or twice weekly) may be effective even if elevated prolactin
levels are not present.
In most patients where the hyperprolactinemia is secondary to
an adenoma, it can be effectively treated with dopamine agonists.
Treatment leads to lowering of prolactin levels and tumor shrinkage
in the vast majority of patients and even large adenomas can usually
be treated without surgical intervention. Because of its greater efficacy and lower incidence of side effects, cabergoline is considered
the drug of choice for treatment of hyperprolactinemia. The usual
protocol is to begin with 0.25 mg twice weekly and then increase
as needed to 1 mg twice weekly. Even higher doses may be needed
in some patients but should be carefully monitored; high doses of
cabergoline used for long periods in older patients with parkinsonism are associated with cardiac valvular abnormalities, though this
has not been reported with the doses used in pediatric hyperprolactinemia; monitoring of cardiac valves with echocardiography may
be advisable if high doses are used for a prolonged period.
When dopamine agonist treatment has been unsuccessful in lowering the serum prolactin concentration or the size of the adenoma,
and when symptoms or signs attributable to hyperprolactinemia or
adenoma size persist during treatment, trans-­sphenoidal surgery
may be considered. Very rare cases of malignant prolactinomas may
require chemotherapy with temozolomide, but a cure is difficult in
such cases.

Corticotropinoma

Opiates
Morphine
Methadone
Others
Estrogens
Cocaine
Heroin
Alcohol
Anesthetics
Marijuana
PATHOLOGIC
Prolactinoma
Nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma causing stalk effect
Craniopharyngioma
Meningioma
Germinoma
Empty sella syndrome
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Hypothalamic-­pituitary disease
Infiltrative diseases
Sarcoidosis
Histiocytosis X
Tuberculosis
Metastasis
OTHER DISEASE STATES
ROHHAD
Primary hypothyroidism
Chronic renal failure
Cirrhosis, severe hepatic insufficiency
Ectopic secretion of prolactin
Chest-­wall lesions (trauma, surgery, herpes zoster virus)
ROHHAD, rapid-onset obesity, hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic
dysregulation.
From Wong A, Eloy JA, Couldwell WT, Liu JK. Update on prolactinomas. Part 1: clinical
manifestations and diagnostic challenges. J Clin Neurosci. 2015;22:1562–1567, Table 2.

It should be noted that there are occasional cases of galactorrhea
where the prolactin level is completely normal (even after serial
dilution to rule out the hook effect); the galactorrhea is usually mild

Corticotropinoma is very rare in children, but unlike other types
of pituitary adenomas, its incidence is higher in younger children
and decreases with age. Cushing disease refers specifically to an
ACTH-­producing pituitary adenoma that stimulates excess cortisol production and secretion (see Chapter 619). It is more common than primary adrenal causes of Cushing syndrome, except in
younger children (younger than 5 years of age), in whom adrenal
carcinomas and adrenal activating variants of MAS are rare but
dominant causes of the syndrome. Adenomas causing Cushing disease are almost always microadenomas with a diameter of <5 mm
and are significantly smaller than all other types of adenomas at
presentation. The most sensitive indicator of excess glucocorticoid
secretion in children is growth failure, which generally precedes
other manifestations. Patients develop weight gain that may be
centripetal rather than generalized. Pubertal arrest, hypertension,
large purplish striae, fatigue, and depression are also common.
In prepubertal children, males are more frequently affected than
females.
Midnight salivary cortisol measurements can be used as a screening test for cortisol excess, but confirmation requires at least one
additional test (either 24-­hour urinary free cortisol or an overnight
dexamethasone suppression test). Location of the microadenoma is
usually determined by MRI, and bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling may be needed in difficult cases. Trans-­sphenoidal surgery is the
treatment of choice for Cushing disease in children. Initial remission
rates of 70–98% of patients and long-­term success rates of 50–98% are
reported. Residual transient hypoadrenalism is often observed after
surgery, lasting as long as 30 months. Pituitary radiotherapy is used
if cortisol levels remain elevated and/or ACTH levels continue to be
detectable. Successful treatment may not correct the height deficit, and
GH deficiency may be present after treatment and should be treated as
required.
Thyrotropinomas are extremely rare, with only a few cases
reported in the pediatric age-­group. They present with symptoms of
hyperthyroidism as well as local symptoms such as headaches and
visual field defects. Laboratory testing reveals elevated thyroid hormone levels with inappropriately unsuppressed TSH levels. Treatment consists of trans-­sphenoidal surgery in most cases, though
radiation may be needed if surgery is unsuccessful.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3382 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

598.1 Overgrowth Syndromes
Jennifer M. Kalish

OVERGROWTH IN THE FETUS AND NEONATE

Maternal diabetes is the most common cause of infants being large
for gestational age. Even in the absence of clinical symptoms or a
family history, the birth of a large-­for-­gestational-­age infant should
lead to evaluation for maternal (or gestational) diabetes.
Overgrowth syndromes: A group of disorders associated with
excessive somatic growth and growth of specific organs has been
described and is collectively referred to as overgrowth syndromes.
These disorders are caused in many cases by excess production and
availability of IGF2 encoded by the gene IGF2. The best described of
these syndromes is Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), which is
an overgrowth malformation syndrome that occurs with an incidence
of 1:10,340 births, equal in males and females. It is caused by genetic
or epigenetic abnormalities in the 11p15 chromosomal region, with
most cases being the result of epigenetic abnormalities (loss or gain
of DNA methylation) of two imprinting control regions, IC1 and IC2.
Other causes include pathogenic variants, duplications, deletions, and
loss of heterozygosity in this region. The imprinted genes involved in
BWS and associated childhood tumors include, in addition to IGF2,
the noncoding RNA H19, which is involved in IGF2 suppression,
cyclin-­dependent kinase inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C), potassium channel
voltage-­gated KQT-­like subfamily member 1 (KCNQ1), and KCNQ1-­
overlapping transcript 1 (KCNQ1OT1, or long QT intronic transcript
1, LIT1). Approximately 10% of cases are familial, whereas the rest
appear to be sporadic. Cardinal clinical features of BWS include macroglossia, omphalocele, lateralized overgrowth (hemihypertrophy),
bilateral Wilms tumor, hyperinsulinism, and pathologic findings (adrenal cytomegaly, pancreatic adenomatosis, and mesenchymal dysplasia). Suggestive features include macrosomia, mid-­glabellar capillary
malformation (nevus flammeus), earlobe creases and pits, umbilical hernia or diastasis recti, hepatomegaly, nephromegaly, transient
hypoglycemia, and embryonal tumors (hepatoblastoma and unilateral
Wilms tumor) (Fig. 598.2). The hyperinsulinemia is a result of pancreatic β-­cell hyperplasia. These children are predisposed to embryonal
tumors, including Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma, and
adrenocortical carcinoma. Management focuses on the omphalocele,
airway issues (a result of macroglossia), neonatal hyperinsulinism/
hypoglycemia, leg length differences, and tumor screening. Because of
the cancer risk, screening is recommended until the seventh birthday.
Screening includes complete abdominal ultrasound and measurement
of α-­fetoprotein every 3 months through the fourth birthday and renal

Fig. 598.2 Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome in newborn infants. (Cour-

tesy Dr. Michael Cohen, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia. From
Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of
Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1, p. 221.)

ultrasounds every 3 months until the seventh birthday. Thereafter,
renal ultrasound is recommended in cases of renal malformation such
as medullary sponge kidney and nephrocalcinosis.
Pathogenic variants in GPC3 and GPC4, glypican genes (which
code for an IGF2–neutralizing membrane receptor), cause Simpson-­
Golabi-­Behmel syndrome (Fig. 598.3). Other syndromic causes of
fetal overgrowth include Costello syndrome, Weaver syndrome,
Sotos syndrome (Fig. 598.4), and Perlman syndrome (Tables 598.2
and 598.3 and Fig. 598.5).

Overgrowth in Childhood or Adolescence

Normal-­variant, familial, or constitutional tall stature is by far the most
common cause of tall stature. Almost invariably, a family history of tall
stature can be obtained, and no organic pathology is present. The child
is often taller than the child’s peers throughout childhood and has typical health. There are no abnormalities in the physical examination, and
laboratory studies, if obtained, are negative.
Exogenous obesity is associated with rapid linear growth and relatively early onset of puberty (more so in girls). Bone age is accelerated,
leading to relative tall stature in childhood but adult height is typically
normal.
Klinefelter syndrome (XXY syndrome) is a relatively common
(1 in 500-­1,000 live male births) chromosomal abnormality associated with tall stature, learning disabilities (including requirement
for speech therapy), gynecomastia, and decreased upper body:lower
body segment ratio. Affected boys can have hypotonia, clinodactyly,
and hypertelorism. The testes are invariably small, although androgen production by Leydig cells is often in the low-­normal range.
Spermatogenesis and Sertoli cell function are defective and lead to
infertility. Other genital abnormalities include relatively small phallus and an increased incidence of hypospadias and cryptorchidism.

Fig. 598.3 Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome. Affected 16-­yr-­old
male. Note the ocular hypertelorism, broad flat nose, 2-­3 syndactyly, and
nail hypoplasia. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022. Fig. 1, p. 225.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 598 u Hyperpituitarism 3383
Table 598.2  Differential Diagnosis of Tall Stature and
Overgrowth Syndromes
FETAL OVERGROWTH
Maternal diabetes mellitus
Sotos syndrome (NSD1)
Weaver syndrome (EZH2)
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (11p15 alterations)
Marshall-­Smith syndrome (NFIX)
POSTNATAL OVERGROWTH LEADING TO CHILDHOOD OR
ADULT TALL STATURE
Nonendocrine Causes
Familial (constitutional) tall stature
Exogenous obesity
Sotos syndrome (NSD1)
Weaver syndrome (EZH2)
Perlman syndrome (DIS3L2)
Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome (GPC3, GPC4)
Marfan syndrome (FBN1)
Homocystinuria
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (11p15 alterations)
Klinefelter syndrome (XXY)
Other syndromes with extra X or Y chromosomes
Overgrowth syndromes with intellectual disability (DNMT3A, CHD8,
HIST1H1E, EED)
Endocrine Causes
Excess GH secretion caused by adenomas (pituitary gigantism)
X-­linked acrogigantism (Xq26.3 duplication)
McCune-­Albright syndrome or MEN associated with excess GH
secretion
Aromatase deficiency and estrogen receptor defects
Precocious puberty (initial acceleration, ultimate short stature)
Hyperthyroidism (acceleration, but not adult tall stature)
GH, Growth hormone; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia.

Fig. 598.4 Cerebral gigantism (Sotos syndrome) in an 8-­yr-­old male.

The height age was 12 yr, and the bone age was 12 yr. IQ was 60. The
electroencephalogram had abnormal findings. Note the prominence of
the forehead and jaw and the large hands and feet. Sexual development was consistent with chronologic age. Hormone study results were
normal. The adult height was 208 cm (6 ft 10 in); his sexual development was normal. He wears size 18 shoes.

XYY syndrome is associated with tall stature, severe acne in adolescence, increased incidence of learning disabilities, and behavioral
problems, particularly impulsivity. Intelligence is usually in the
normal range but may be 10-­15 IQ points lower than their siblings.
Other rare chromosomal abnormalities in which an excess number
of X or Y chromosomes are present (e.g., XXX, XXXY, XYYY) are
also associated with increased height.
Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant connective tissue
disorder consisting of tall stature, arachnodactyly, thin extremities,
increased arm span, and decreased upper body:lower body segment
ratio (see Chapter 743). Additional abnormalities include ocular
abnormalities (e.g., lens subluxation), hypotonia, kyphoscoliosis, cardiac valvular deformities, and aortic root dilation.
Homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive inborn error of amino
acid metabolism caused by a deficiency of the enzyme cystathionine synthetase. It is characterized by intellectual disability when
untreated, and many of its clinical features resemble Marfan syndrome, particularly ocular manifestations (see Chapter 105).

SOTOS SYNDROME

Children with Sotos syndrome (see Fig. 598.4) are typically above
the 90th percentile for both length and weight at birth and may also
have an increased head size. In other cases, macrocephaly becomes
more apparent postnatally. Most cases of Sotos syndrome are caused

by pathogenic variants in NSD1, but in the Japanese population
most cases are attributable to microdeletions of the 5q35 region
that includes this gene. Inheritance is autosomal dominant, but 95%
of cases are a result of de novo (new) mutations. Incidence is estimated to be approximately 1 in 14,000 live births. The NSD1 gene is
thought to play a role in epigenetic regulation, but the exact mechanisms by which mutations lead to the features of Sotos syndrome
are not yet understood.
Although it is characterized by rapid growth, there is no evidence
that Sotos syndrome is caused by endocrine dysregulation. Growth is
markedly rapid; by 1 year of age, affected infants are often taller than
the 97th percentile in height. Accelerated growth continues for the first
4-­5 years and then returns to a normal rate. Puberty usually occurs at
the expected time but may occur slightly early. Adult height is usually
in the upper-­normal range.
Clinically the syndrome is characterized by a large (macrocephaly) dolichocephalic head, prominent forehead and jaw, hypertelorism, downslant of the palpebral fissures, high-­arched palate,
and large hands and feet with thickened subcutaneous tissue. Clumsiness and awkward gait are also noted, and affected children may
have difficulty in sports, in learning to ride a bicycle, and in other
tasks requiring coordination. Some degree of developmental disability affects most patients; in some affected children, perceptual
deficiencies may predominate. Many different types of nonfebrile
seizures have been reported, and up to 25% of patients with Sotos
syndrome have seizures at some point in their life. Hyperinsulinism can also occur. Affected patients may be at somewhat increased
risk for neoplasms, including neuroblastoma, hepatoblastoma,
and leukemia, with a lifetime risk of between 2% and 4%. Osseous
maturation is usually compatible with the patient’s height, although

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3384 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 598.3  Overgrowth Syndromes
SYNDROME

CLINICAL FEATURES

GENETIC ETIOLOGY

TUMOR SURVEILLANCE

Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome (BWS)

Hypoglycemia, macroglossia, ear pits,
omphalocele or umbilical hernia,
lateralized overgrowth, organomegaly, high
risk of embryonal tumors until age 7

Various genetic and epigenetic
abnormalities in 11p15, most
commonly in the IC2 region

Tumor surveillance until at
least age 7 yr

Perlman syndrome

Macrosomia, unusual facies, nephroblastosis,
severe hypotonia, very high risk of Wilms
tumor

DIS3L2 (DIS3 Like 3′-­5′ exoribonuclease 2) (autosomal recessive)

Routine tumor surveillance
recommended

Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel
syndrome

Coarse facial features, macroglossia, central
groove lower lip, supernumerary nipples,
cardiac and skeletal defects

GPC3 (glypican 3)
(X-­linked recessive)

Tumor surveillance
justified (per BWS
protocol)

Sotos syndrome

Excessive growth in first 4 yr, dolichoce­phaly,
macrocrania, typical facies, long limbs,
seizures, hypotonia

NSD1 deletion or variant (autosomal
dominant)
Rare familial cases
NFIX (Nuclear Factor I X) may cause
related Malan syndrome

Routine tumor screening
not recommended

Tatton-­Brown syndrome

Round face, heavy/horizontal eyebrows,
narrow palpebral fissures, intellectual
disability, and increased height

DNMT3A (DNA Methyltransferase
3 Alpha)

Routine tumor screening
not recommended

Weaver syndrome

Broad forehead, hypertelorism, small chin,
long philtrum, camptodactyly, redundant
nuchal skin, heart and brain defects

EZH2 (Enhancer of zeste homolog 2)
gene in some cases

Routine tumor screening
not recommended

PTEN-­hamartoma
syndromes (including
Bannayan-­Ruvalcaba-­Riley)

Macrocephaly, hypotonia, pigmented skin,
penile macules, lipomas, seizures

PTEN (phosphatase and TENsin
homolog)(sporadic or autosomal
dominant)

Tumor surveillance
recommended

PIK3CA-related overgrowth
spectrum

Brain overgrowth (megalencephaly),
microgyria, cutaneous vascular
malformations, syndactyly, seizures,
developmental delay

Pathogenic variants in various PIK3
­related genes, including P|I3R2,
AKT3, CCND2, PIK3CA, etc.

Tumor surveillance is
debated

Marfan syndrome

Facial gestalt, lens dislocation, arachno­
dactyly, scoliosis, pectus carinatum or
excavatum, aortic root dilation

FBN1 (Fibrillin 1)
(autosomal dominant)

None

Loeys-­Dietz syndrome

Marfan-­like habitus, aortic root dilation,
aortic dissection, vasculopathy (more
aggressive than Marfan syndrome)

TGF-­β pathway genes including
TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, and
TGFB2 (autosomal dominant)

None

Homocystinuria

Marfan-­like habitus, developmental delay,
lens dislocation

CBS gene (Cystathionine β-­
synthase) (autosomal recessive)

None

Lujan syndrome

Marfan-like habitus, intellectual
disability, no eye or cardiovascular
anomalies

MED12 (Mediator Complex Subunit
12) gene (X-linked recessive)

None

advanced bone age has been reported. Scoliosis develops in up to
30% of cases, usually starting in school-­age children. GH, IGF1,
and other endocrine studies are usually normal; there is no distinctive laboratory or radiologic marker for the syndrome. Abnormal
electroencephalograms are common; imaging studies often reveal
an enlarged ventricular system, but intracranial pressure is normal.
Genetic testing for NSD1 pathogenic variants (or fluorescence in
situ hybridization for 5q35 microdeletions in Japanese patients) is
available and should be routinely used. Management is symptomatic and includes paying special attention to developmental and
behavioral problems (which tend to improve with age), scoliosis,
and seizure disorder. No specific treatment is needed for the overgrowth itself. There is no consensus on the need for cancer surveillance at this time.

Tatton-­Brown Syndrome

Tatton-­Brown syndrome is characterized by distinctive facial appearance (round face, heavy/horizontal eyebrows, and narrow palpebral
fissures), intellectual disability, and increased height. It is caused by
pathogenic variants in DNMT3A, a methyltransferase. Pathogenic
variants in DNMT3A are also seen in hematologic malignances, which
like NSD1 and EZH2, show dual-­gene functionality in overgrowth syndromes and myeloid neoplasms.
Hyperthyroidism in adolescents is associated with rapid growth but
normal final adult height. It is almost always caused by Graves disease
and is much more common in girls (see Chapter 606).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 599 u Physiology of Puberty

3385

Height < +2SDS
but
typical dysmorphic features

Height SDS > +2SDS
or
Height-TH > +2SDS

Dysmorphic?

No

Yes

(Recent) growth acceleration?

Disproportionate?

No

Yes

Height-TH > +2SDS?

Puberty signs?

No

Yes

No

Pituitary gigantism
Hyperthyroidism
Familial tall stature

Obesity
Estrogen deficiency/insensitivity

Yes

Precocious puberty
Pseudoprecocious
puberty
Constitutional
advance in puberty

No

Yes

Overgrowth syndromes
Klinefelter syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Marfan type II syndrome
CCA/ Beals syndrome
Homocystinuria
Lujan-Fryns syndrome
Sotos syndrome
Weaver syndrome

Overgrowth syndromes
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum
PTEN-hamartoma syndrome
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome

Other
Estrogen deficiency or
insensitivity

Fig. 598.5 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of tall stature and overgrowth syndromes. CCA, congenital contractural arachnodac-

tyly; Height-­TH, current height percentile >2 SDS from target height percentile, the latter based on midparental height calculation; SDS, standard
deviation score. (Adapted from Neylon OM, Werther GA, Sabin MA. Overgrowth syndromes. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012;24:505–511, Fig. 1.)

Chapter 599

Physiology of Puberty
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
Between early childhood and approximately 8-­9 years of age (prepubertal stage), the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis is dormant, as
reflected by undetectable serum concentrations of luteinizing hormone
(LH) and sex hormones (estradiol in females, testosterone in males).
One to 3 years before the onset of clinically evident puberty, low serum
levels of LH during sleep become demonstrable. This sleep-­entrained
LH secretion occurs in a pulsatile fashion and reflects endogenous
episodic discharge of hypothalamic gonadotropin-­releasing hormone
(GnRH). Nocturnal pulses of LH continue to increase in amplitude
and, to a lesser extent, in frequency as clinical puberty approaches.
This pulsatile secretion of gonadotropins is responsible for enlargement and maturation of the gonads and the secretion of sex hormones.
The appearance of the secondary sex characteristics in early puberty is
the visible culmination of the sustained, active interaction occurring
among the hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads in the peripubertal
period. By mid-­puberty, LH pulses become evident even during the
daytime and occur at about 90-­to 120-­minute intervals. A second
critical event occurs in middle or late adolescence in females in whom

cyclicity and ovulation occur. A positive feedback mechanism develops whereby increasing levels of estrogen in midcycle cause a distinct
increase of LH.
The increasing secretion of hypothalamic GnRH in a pulsatile fashion thus underlies the onset of pubertal development. The GnRH pulse
generator is regulated by multiple neuropeptides, including glutamic
acid, kisspeptin, neurokinin-­
B (stimulatory); γ-­aminobutyric acid,
preproenkephalin, and dynorphin (inhibitory). Pathogenic variants of
KISS1R (previously known as GPR54, a G protein–coupled receptor
gene whose ligand is kisspeptin) are a rare cause of autosomal recessive
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants) or precocious puberty (gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants).
The imprinted paternally expressed gene makorin RING finger protein 3 (MKRN3) has been described as a brake for the onset of puberty.
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of this gene are responsible for
paternally transmitted familial precocious puberty in both sexes.
The interpretation of the hormonal changes of puberty is complex.
Challenges with interpreting LH and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH)
measurements include the presence of multiple gonadotropin isoforms,
immunoassay-­related variability, and problems inherent to their pulsatile
secretion, which mandate serial sampling in plasma. In addition, important sex differences exist in the maturation of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland because serum LH concentrations tend to increase earlier in
the course of the pubertal process in males than in females. Adrenocortical androgens also have a role in sexual maturation. Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEAS) begin to increase at
approximately 6-­8 years of age, before any increase in LH or sex hormones

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 599 u Physiology of Puberty

3385

Height < +2SDS
but
typical dysmorphic features

Height SDS > +2SDS
or
Height-TH > +2SDS

Dysmorphic?

No

Yes

(Recent) growth acceleration?

Disproportionate?

No

Yes

Height-TH > +2SDS?

Puberty signs?

No

Yes

No

Pituitary gigantism
Hyperthyroidism
Familial tall stature

Obesity
Estrogen deficiency/insensitivity

Yes

Precocious puberty
Pseudoprecocious
puberty
Constitutional
advance in puberty

No

Yes

Overgrowth syndromes
Klinefelter syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Marfan type II syndrome
CCA/ Beals syndrome
Homocystinuria
Lujan-Fryns syndrome
Sotos syndrome
Weaver syndrome

Overgrowth syndromes
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum
PTEN-hamartoma syndrome
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome

Other
Estrogen deficiency or
insensitivity

Fig. 598.5 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of tall stature and overgrowth syndromes. CCA, congenital contractural arachnodac-

tyly; Height-­TH, current height percentile >2 SDS from target height percentile, the latter based on midparental height calculation; SDS, standard
deviation score. (Adapted from Neylon OM, Werther GA, Sabin MA. Overgrowth syndromes. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012;24:505–511, Fig. 1.)

Chapter 599

Physiology of Puberty
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
Between early childhood and approximately 8-­9 years of age (prepubertal stage), the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis is dormant, as
reflected by undetectable serum concentrations of luteinizing hormone
(LH) and sex hormones (estradiol in females, testosterone in males).
One to 3 years before the onset of clinically evident puberty, low serum
levels of LH during sleep become demonstrable. This sleep-­entrained
LH secretion occurs in a pulsatile fashion and reflects endogenous
episodic discharge of hypothalamic gonadotropin-­releasing hormone
(GnRH). Nocturnal pulses of LH continue to increase in amplitude
and, to a lesser extent, in frequency as clinical puberty approaches.
This pulsatile secretion of gonadotropins is responsible for enlargement and maturation of the gonads and the secretion of sex hormones.
The appearance of the secondary sex characteristics in early puberty is
the visible culmination of the sustained, active interaction occurring
among the hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads in the peripubertal
period. By mid-­puberty, LH pulses become evident even during the
daytime and occur at about 90-­to 120-­minute intervals. A second
critical event occurs in middle or late adolescence in females in whom

cyclicity and ovulation occur. A positive feedback mechanism develops whereby increasing levels of estrogen in midcycle cause a distinct
increase of LH.
The increasing secretion of hypothalamic GnRH in a pulsatile fashion thus underlies the onset of pubertal development. The GnRH pulse
generator is regulated by multiple neuropeptides, including glutamic
acid, kisspeptin, neurokinin-­
B (stimulatory); γ-­aminobutyric acid,
preproenkephalin, and dynorphin (inhibitory). Pathogenic variants of
KISS1R (previously known as GPR54, a G protein–coupled receptor
gene whose ligand is kisspeptin) are a rare cause of autosomal recessive
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants) or precocious puberty (gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants).
The imprinted paternally expressed gene makorin RING finger protein 3 (MKRN3) has been described as a brake for the onset of puberty.
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of this gene are responsible for
paternally transmitted familial precocious puberty in both sexes.
The interpretation of the hormonal changes of puberty is complex.
Challenges with interpreting LH and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH)
measurements include the presence of multiple gonadotropin isoforms,
immunoassay-­related variability, and problems inherent to their pulsatile
secretion, which mandate serial sampling in plasma. In addition, important sex differences exist in the maturation of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland because serum LH concentrations tend to increase earlier in
the course of the pubertal process in males than in females. Adrenocortical androgens also have a role in sexual maturation. Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEAS) begin to increase at
approximately 6-­8 years of age, before any increase in LH or sex hormones

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3386 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and before the earliest physical changes of puberty are apparent; this process has been called adrenarche. DHEAS is the most abundant adrenal
C-­19 steroid in the blood, and its serum concentration remains fairly stable
over 24 hours. A single measurement of this hormone is commonly used
as a marker of adrenal androgen secretion. Although adrenarche typically
precedes the onset of gonadal activity (gonadarche) by a few years, the two
processes do not seem to be causally related, as evidenced by adrenarche
and gonadarche being dissociated in conditions such as central precocious
puberty and adrenocortical failure.
The effects of gonadal steroids (testosterone in males, estradiol in
females) on bone growth and osseous maturation are critical. Both
aromatase deficiency and estrogen receptor defects result in delayed
epiphyseal fusion and tall stature in affected males. These observations
suggest that estrogens, rather than androgens, are responsible for the
process of bone maturation that ultimately leads to epiphyseal fusion
and cessation of growth. Estrogens also mediate the increased production of growth hormone, which along with a direct effect of sex steroids
on bone growth, is responsible for the pubertal growth spurt.
The age of onset of puberty varies and is more closely correlated with
osseous maturation than with chronologic age (see Chapter 150). In
females, the breast bud (thelarche) is usually the first sign of puberty
(10-­11 years), followed by the appearance of pubic hair (pubarche) 6-­12
months later. The interval to the onset of menstrual activity (menarche)
is usually 2-­2.5 years but may be as long as 6 years. In the United States, at
least one sign of puberty is present in approximately 95% of females by 12
years of age and in 99% of females by 13 years of age. Peak height velocity
occurs early (at breast stage II-­III, typically between 11 and 12 years of age)
in females and always precedes menarche. The mean age of menarche is
about 12.75 years. However, there are wide variations in the sequence of
changes involving growth spurt, breast bud, pubic hair, and maturation of
the internal and external genitalia.
In males, growth of the testes (≥4 mL in volume or 2.5 cm in longest
diameter) and thinning of the scrotum are the first signs of puberty (11-­12
years). These are followed by pigmentation of the scrotum and growth of
the penis and by pubarche. Appearance of axillary hair usually occurs in
mid-­puberty. In males, unlike in females, acceleration of growth begins
after puberty is well underway and is maximal at genital stage IV-­V (typically between 13 and 14 years of age). In males, the growth spurt occurs
approximately 2 years later than in females, and growth may continue
beyond 18 years of age.
Genetic and environmental factors affect the timing for the onset of
puberty. Population-­based studies in the United States and Europe have
suggested secular trends for earlier onset of puberty over the past few
decades in females and, to a lesser degree, in males. African American,
and to a lesser extent Hispanic, females appear to be more advanced in the
development of secondary sex characteristics for age than White females.
However, the timing of menarche has advanced only marginally (2.5-­4
months) in White females and slightly more so (up to 6 months) in African
American females. The Copenhagen Puberty Study showed that the earlier
onset of breast development observed in females examined in 2006–2008
than those seen in 1991–1993 (means 10.9 years vs 9.9 years) was not associated with different levels of gonadotropins or estradiol when females of
similar chronologic ages were compared between the two groups. Hence
earlier breast development may not simply reflect earlier activation or
maturation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis but could also stem
from other factors such as increased adiposity or increased exposure to
certain environmental agents. Positive correlations between the degree of
adiposity and earlier pubertal development in females have been reported.
Conversely, female athletes in whom leanness and strenuous physical
activity have coexisted from early childhood frequently exhibit a marked
delay in puberty or menarche, and they frequently have oligomenorrhea or
amenorrhea as adults (see Chapter 732). Pubertal delay is also prevalent in
males who are physically very active. Thus energy balance is closely related
to the activity of the GnRH pulse generator and the mechanisms initiating
and sustaining puberty, possibly via hormonal signals such as leptin; other
adipokines; or by way of the central melanocortin-­4 receptor (MC4R),
which controls appetite, food intake, and energy expenditure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 600

Disorders of Pubertal
Development
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
INTRODUCTION

Precocious puberty is defined by the onset of secondary sexual characteristics before the age of 8 years in females and 9 years in males. The
variation in the age of the onset of puberty in normal children, particularly of different ethnicities, makes this definition somewhat arbitrary.
It remains in use by most clinicians.
Depending on the primary source of the hormonal production, precocious puberty may be classified as central (also known as gonadotropin
dependent, or true) or peripheral (also known as gonadotropin independent) (Table 600.1). Central precocious puberty (CPP) is always
isosexual and stems from hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal activation
with ensuing sex hormone secretion and progressive sexual maturation.
In peripheral precocious puberty, some of the secondary sex character­
istics appear, but there is no activation of the normal hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­gonadal interplay. In this latter group, the sex characteristics
may be isosexual or heterosexual (see Chapters 622-­628).
Peripheral precocious puberty can also induce maturation of the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis and trigger the onset of central
puberty at a later time. This mixed type of precocious puberty occurs
in congenital adrenal hyperplasia, particularly after adrenal androgens
are suppressed by treatment; McCune-­Albright syndrome; and familial male-­limited precocious puberty, when the bone age reaches the
pubertal range (10.5-­12.5 years).

600.1 Central Precocious Puberty
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
CPP is defined by the onset of pubertal development due to the early
activation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis before the ages
of 8 and 9 years in females and males, respectively. It occurs 5-­to 10-­
fold more frequently in females than in males and is usually sporadic.
Although at least 90% of females have an idiopathic form, a structural
central nervous system (CNS) abnormality may occur in 25–75% of
males with CPP. Genetic forms of CPP, such as the paternally transmitted types due to pathogenic variants of MKRN3 gene or, more rarely
DLK1, may account for 5–10% of all cases of CPP. A high prevalence of
CPP has been reported in females adopted from developing countries,
particularly if adopted several months or years after birth, possibly
related to undefined nutritional or environmental factors.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In females, CPP should be suspected when breast development is
noted before the age of 8 years. In males who have not been exposed
to gonadotoxic agents, CPP usually manifests first via increased testicular size (volume ≥4 mL) and scrotal thinning before the age of
9 years. Sexual development in affected individuals generally follows the sequence observed in normal puberty. In females, early
menstrual cycles may be more irregular than they are with normal
puberty. The initial cycles are usually anovulatory, but pregnancy has
been reported as early as 5.5 years of age (Fig. 600.1). In males, testicular biopsies have shown stimulation of all elements of the testes,
and spermatogenesis has been observed as early as 5-­6 years of age.
In affected females and males, height, weight, and height velocity are
accelerated. The increased rate of bone maturation results in early
closure of the epiphyses and compromised adult height, particularly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

3387

Table 600.1  Classification of Sexual Precocity
TRUE PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY OR COMPLETE ISOSEXUAL
PRECOCITY
(GNRH-­Dependent Sexual Precocity or Premature Activation of the
Hypothalamic GNRH Pulse Generator)
Idiopathic true precocious puberty
CNS tumors
Optic glioma associated with neurofibromatosis type 1
Hypothalamic astrocytoma
Other CNS disorders
Developmental abnormalities including hypothalamic hamartoma of
the tuber cinereum
Encephalitis
Static encephalopathy
Brain abscess
Sarcoid or tubercular granuloma
Head trauma
Hydrocephalus
Arachnoid cyst
Myelomeningocele
Vascular lesion
Cranial irradiation
True precocious puberty after late treatment of congenital virilizing
adrenal hyperplasia or other previous chronic exposure to sex
steroids
True precocious puberty caused by pathogenic variants in the following
genes:
KISS1R/GPR54
KISS1
MKRN3
DLK1
INCOMPLETE ISOSEXUAL PRECOCITY (HYPOTHALAMIC
GNRH-­INDEPENDENT)
Males
Gonadotropin-­secreting tumors
hCG-­secreting CNS tumors (e.g., chorioepitheliomas, germinoma,
teratoma)
hCG-­secreting tumors located outside the CNS (hepatoma, teratoma,
choriocarcinoma)
Increased androgen secretion by adrenal or testis
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CYP21 and CYP11B1 deficiencies)
Virilizing adrenal neoplasm
Leydig cell adenoma
Familial male-­limited precocious puberty (FMPP, “testotoxicosis”)
(autosomal dominant gonadotropin-­independent precocious
Leydig cell and germ cell maturation)
Cortisol resistance syndrome

Females
Ovarian cyst
Estrogen-­secreting ovarian or adrenal neoplasm
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome with sex cord tumor with annular tubules
(SCTAT)
Both Sexes
McCune-­Albright syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Iatrogenic or exogenous sexual precocity (including inadvertent
exposure to estrogens in food, drugs, or cosmetics)
VARIATIONS OF PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT
Premature thelarche
Premature isolated menarche
Premature adrenarche
Adolescent gynecomastia in males
Macroorchidism
HETEROSEXUAL PRECOCITY
Feminization in Males
Adrenal neoplasm
Chorioepithelioma
Testicular neoplasm (Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome)
Increased extraglandular conversion of circulating adrenal androgens
to estrogen
Iatrogenic (exposure to estrogens)
Virilization in Females
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
CYP21 deficiency
CYP11B1 deficiency
3β-­HSD deficiency
Virilizing adrenal neoplasm (with or without Cushing syndrome)
Virilizing ovarian neoplasm (e.g., arrhenoblastoma)
Iatrogenic (exposure to androgens)
Cortisol resistance syndrome
Aromatase deficiency

CNS, Central nervous system; CYP11B1, 11-­hydroxylase; CYP21, 21-­hydroxylase; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; 3β-­HSD, 3β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 4,5-­isomerase; KISS1R/GPR54, kisspeptin receptor/G protein–coupled receptor 54.
Modified from Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology,
13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.25, p. 1163.

if puberty begins at a very early age. Historically, approximately 30%
of females and an even larger percentage of males achieved a height
below the fifth percentile as adults without treatment. Mental development is usually compatible with chronological age. Emotional
behavior and mood swings are common, but serious psychologic
problems are rare.
Although the clinical course is variable, three main patterns of
pubertal progression can be identified. Most females (particularly
those younger than 6 years of age at the onset) and a large majority of
males have rapidly progressive puberty, characterized by rapid physical and osseous maturation, leading to a loss of height potential. An
increasing percentage of females (older than 6 years of age at the onset
with an idiopathic form) and, rarely, males have a slowly progressive
variant, characterized by parallel advancement of osseous maturation
and linear growth, with preserved height potential. Very rarely, central puberty may regress spontaneously (unsustained CPP). This variability in the natural course of sexual precocity underscores the need

for longitudinal observation at the onset of sexual development before
treatment is considered.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Sex hormone concentrations are usually appropriate for the stage of
puberty in both sexes (Table 600.2). Despite the availability of sensitive and
specific assays for sex hormones, random serum estradiol concentrations
are low or undetectable in the early phase of sexual precocity in females,
as they are in normal puberty. In males, serum testosterone levels are usually detectable or elevated by the time the parents seek medical attention,
provided that an early morning blood sample is obtained. With the use
of highly sensitive assays, serum LH concentrations are undetectable in
prepubertal children in random blood samples but become detectable in
50–75% of females and a higher percentage of males with CPP. Unfortunately, a number of hospitals use only moderately sensitive immunoenzymatic assays for LH and often insensitive assays for estradiol and
testosterone, which decreases the diagnostic yield of these measurements.
Measurement of LH in serial blood samples obtained during sleep has very

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3388 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
good diagnostic power and typically reveals a well-­defined pulsatile secretion of LH in early puberty; it is, however, difficult to implement in a clinical setting. Dynamic tests using gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH,
intravenously; unavailable in the United States) or a GnRH agonist (leuprolide, subcutaneously) are helpful diagnostic tools, particularly for males,
in whom a pubertal LH response (LH peak >5 IU/L) with predominance
of LH over follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) tends to occur early in the
course of precocious puberty. In females with sexual precocity, however,
the nocturnal LH secretion and the LH response to GnRH or GnRH agonist may be quite low at breast stages II to early III (LH peak, <5 IU/L), and
the LH to FSH ratio may remain low until mid-­advanced puberty. In such
females with low LH response, the central nature of sexual precocity can be
proven by detecting pubertal levels of estradiol (>50 pg/mL) 20-­24 hours
after stimulation with leuprolide.
Osseous maturation is variably advanced, often more than 2-­3 standard deviations (SD). Pelvic ultrasonography in females reveals progressive enlargement of the ovaries, enlargement of the fundus, and
then of the whole uterus to pubertal size. An MRI scan usually demonstrates physiologic enlargement of the pituitary gland, as seen in normal puberty; it may also reveal CNS pathology.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A

B

C

Fig. 600.1 Natural course of untreated idiopathic central precocious

puberty. Patient (A) at 311⁄12, (B) at 58⁄12, and (C) at 81⁄2 yr of age. Breast
development and vaginal bleeding began at 21⁄2 yr of age. Bone age
was 71⁄2 yr at 311⁄12 and 14 yr at 8 yr of age. Intelligence and dental age
were normal for chronological age. Growth was completed at 10 yr;
ultimate height was 142 cm (56 in). No effective therapy was available
at the time this patient sought medical attention.

Organic CNS causes of central sexual precocity are more likely in males
and in females who have rapid breast development, estradiol greater
than 30 pg/mL, or are younger than 6 years of age. All children in these
categories, and children with neurologic symptoms or signs, should
undergo MRI scans of the brain and pituitary gland. Criteria for brain
imaging in females older than 6 years are controversial, although some
authorities recommend MRI scans for all children with CPP.
Gonadotropin-­independent causes of isosexual precocious
puberty must be considered in the differential diagnosis (see Tables
600.1 and 600.2). For females, these include tumors of the ovaries, autonomously functioning ovarian cysts, feminizing adrenal

Table 600.2  Differential Diagnosis of Sexual Precocity
DISORDER

PLASMA
GONADOTROPINS

GONADOTROPIN DEPENDENT
True (central)
Prominent LH
precocious
pulses (premature
puberty
reactivation of
GnRH pulse
generator), initially
during sleep
GONADOTROPIN INDEPENDENT
Males
Chorionic
High hCG,
gonadotropin-­
low LH
secreting tumor in
males

LH RESPONSE
TO GNRH

SERUM SEX STEROID
CONCENTRATION

Pubertal LH
response

GONADAL SIZE

MISCELLANEOUS

Pubertal values of
testosterone or
estradiol

Normal pubertal
testicular enlargement
or ovarian and uterine
enlargement

MRI of brain to rule out
CNS tumor or other
abnormality

Prepubertal LH
response

Pubertal value of
testosterone

Slight to moderate
uniform enlargement of
testes

Irregular, asymmetric
enlargement of a testis
Testes symmetric
and length >2.5 cm
but smaller than
expected for pubertal
development;
spermatogenesis occurs
Testes prepubertal

Hepatomegaly suggests
hepatoblastoma; MRI
of brain if chorionic
gonadotropin-­
secreting CNS tumor
suspected
Testicular US

Leydig cell tumor in
males
Familial, male-­
limited precocious
puberty (FMPP,
testotoxicosis)

Suppressed

No LH response

High testosterone

Suppressed

No LH response

Pubertal values of
testosterone

Virilizing congenital
adrenal
hyperplasia

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

Elevated 17-­OHP in
CYP21 deficiency
or elevated
11-­deoxycortisol in
CYP11B1 deficiency

Activating pathogenic
variant of the LHCG
receptor; autosomal
dominant transmission
Autosomal recessive,
variable severity/
age of onset; may
have salt loss in
CYP21 deficiency
or hypertension in
CYP11B1 deficiency
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

3389

Table 600.2  Differential Diagnosis of Sexual Precocity—cont’d
DISORDER
Virilizing adrenal
tumor

Females
Granulosa cell tumor
(follicular cysts may
present similarly)
Follicular cyst

Feminizing adrenal
tumor
Nonclassical
congenital adrenal
hyperplasia
In Both Sexes
McCune-­Albright
syndrome

Primary
hypothyroidism

PLASMA
GONADOTROPINS

LH RESPONSE
TO GNRH

SERUM SEX STEROID
CONCENTRATION

GONADAL SIZE

MISCELLANEOUS

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

High DHEAS,
DHEA, and/or
androstenedione
values

Testes prepubertal

CT or MRI of abdomen

Suppressed

Prepubertal LH
response

Very high estradiol

Tumor often palpable on
physical examination

Suppressed

Prepubertal LH
response

Prepubertal to very
high estradiol

Ovarian enlargement on
physical examination,
CT, MRI, or US
Ovarian enlargement on
physical examination,
CT, MRI, or US

Suppressed

Prepubertal LH
response
Prepubertal LH
response

High estradiol, variable
DHEAS increase
Elevated 17-­OHP
in basal or in
corticotropin-­
stimulated state

Ovaries prepubertal
Ovaries prepubertal

Single or recurrent
episodes of menses
and/or breast
development; exclude
McCune-­Albright
syndrome
Unilateral adrenal mass
on CT or MRI
Autosomal recessive

Suppressed

Suppressed

Sex steroid pubertal;
estradiol may be
quite high in girls

LH prepubertal; FSH
may be slightly
elevated

Prepubertal;
flat FSH, LH
response

Estradiol often pubertal

Ovarian enlargement
(asymmetrical) on
US; slight (usually
symmetrical) testicular
enlargement
Testicular enlargement;
ovaries macrocystic

Skeletal survey/bone
scan for polyostotic
fibrous dysplasia and
skin examination for
café-­au-­lait macules
TSH very high, prolactin
mildly elevated; T4 low

Ovaries prepubertal

Onset usually before 3 yr
of age

Testes prepubertal

Onset usually after 6 yr of
age; more frequent in
CNS-­injured children

Ovaries prepubertal

Onset usually after 6 yr of
age; more frequent in
brain-­injured children

Prepubertal

INCOMPLETE PRECOCITY/VARIATIONS OF PUBERTY
Premature thelarche Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH
Premature
adrenarche (males)

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

Premature
adrenarche
(females)

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

Prepubertal or early
pubertal estradiol
response
Prepubertal
testosterone; DHEAS
value appropriate for
pubic hair stage
Prepubertal estradiol;
DHEAS value
appropriate for pubic
hair stage

CNS, Central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; CYP, P450 cytochrome isoenzyme; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH,
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; 17-­OHP, 17-­hydroxyprogesterone; T4,
thyroxine; TSH, thyrotropin; US, ultrasonography.
Modified from Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology,
13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.41, pp. 1196–1197.

tumors, McCune-­Albright syndrome, and exogenous sources of
estrogens. In males, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal tumors,
Leydig cell tumors, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)–producing tumors, exposure to exogenous androgens, and familial male
precocious puberty should be considered.

TREATMENT

Virtually all males and the large subgroup of females with rapidly
progressive precocious puberty, including CPP beginning before age 6
years, are candidates for treatment. Females with slowly progressive
idiopathic CPP do not seem to benefit in terms of height prognosis
from GnRH agonist therapy. Former small-­for-­gestational-­age infants
may be at greater risk of short stature as adults and may require more
aggressive treatment of precocious puberty, possibly in conjunction
with human growth hormone (hGH) therapy. Certain patients require
treatment predominantly for psychologic or social reasons, including
children with special needs.

The observation that the pituitary gonadotropic cells require pulsatile, rather than continuous, stimulation by GnRH to maintain the
ongoing release of gonadotropins provides the rationale for using
GnRH agonists for treatment of CPP. By virtue of being more potent
and having a longer duration of action than native GnRH, these GnRH
agonists (after a brief period of stimulation) desensitize the gonadotropic cells of the pituitary to the stimulatory effect of endogenous
GnRH and effectively halt the progression of central sexual precocity.
Long-­acting formulations of GnRH agonists, which maintain fairly
constant serum concentration of the drug for weeks or months, constitute the preparations of choice for treatment of CPP. In the United States,
the available preparations include (1) leuprolide acetate (Lupron Depot
Ped), in a dose of 0.2-­0.3 mg/kg (7.5-­15 mg) intramuscularly (IM) every
28 days; (2) longer-­acting preparations of depot-­leuprolide, including
Lupron-­Depot Ped 90-­day, 11.25 or 30 mg IM every 3 months, or Fensolvi
45 mg subcutaneously every 24 weeks; (3) histrelin (Supprelin LA), a subcutaneous 50-­mg implant with effects lasting at least 12 months; and (4)
triptorelin (Triptodur), 22.5 mg IM every 24 weeks. Other preparations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3390 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
are approved for treatment of precocious puberty in other countries.
Recurrent sterile fluid collections at the sites of injections are an uncommon local side effect and occur in less than 1–3% of patients treated with
IM depot-­leuprolide. Breakage or malfunction of the histrelin implant is
rare. Other available treatment options for children who cannot tolerate
the products listed previously include subcutaneous injections of aqueous
leuprolide, given once or twice daily (total dose 60 mcg/kg/24 hr), or intranasal administration of the GnRH agonist nafarelin (Synarel), 800 mcg
bid. The potential for irregular compliance with daily administration, as
well as the variable absorption of the intranasal route for nafarelin, may
limit the efficacy and long-­term benefit of the latter preparations. GnRH
antagonists, including novel oral compounds, have not been investigated
sufficiently in children and are not FDA approved.
Treatment results in decrease of the growth rate, generally to age-­
appropriate values, and an even greater decrease of the rate of osseous maturation. Some children, particularly those with greatly advanced (pubertal)
bone age, may show marked deceleration of their growth rate and an arrest
in the rate of osseous maturation. Treatment results in enhancement of the
predicted height, more so in younger patients at diagnosis, male patients,
and those children with more rapidly progressive CPP. In females, breast
size may regress in those with Tanner stage II-­III development but tends
to remain unchanged in females with late stage III-­V development or may
even increase slightly because of progressive adipose tissue deposition. The
amount of glandular tissue decreases. Pubic hair usually remains stable in
females or may progress slowly during treatment, reflecting the gradual
increase in adrenal androgens. Menses, if present, cease. Pelvic sonography
demonstrates a decrease of the ovarian and uterine size. In males, there is
a decrease of testicular size, variable regression of pubic hair, and decrease
in the frequency of erections. Except for a reversible decrease in bone density (of uncertain clinical significance) and a reversible increase in body
mass index (BMI) percentiles in some females, no serious adverse effects
of GnRH analogs have been reported in children during or after treatment
for sexual precocity. If treatment is effective, the serum sex hormone concentrations decrease to prepubertal levels (testosterone <10-­20 ng/dL in
males; estradiol <5-­10 pg/mL in females). The serum LH and FSH concentrations, as measured by sensitive immunometric assays, decrease to less
than 1 IU/L in most patients, although rarely does the LH return to truly
prepubertal levels (<0.1 IU/L). Moreover, the incremental FSH and LH
responses to GnRH stimulation decrease to less than 2-­3 IU/L. Serum LH,
FSH, and sex hormone levels are suppressed more completely and evenly
by the histrelin implant than by GnRH agonist injections. Therapy is typically discontinued at a pubertal chronological age, after which puberty
resumes promptly. In females, menarche generally appears at an average of
18 months (range 6-­24 months) after cessation of IM therapy and somewhat earlier after removal of the histrelin implant. The addition of hGH to
GnRH agonists has been used on an investigational basis in children with
precocious puberty, markedly advanced bone age, and prediction of short
stature. The available, albeit limited, data indicate that combined therapy
may increase the adult height.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.2 Precocious Puberty Resulting from
Organic Brain Lesions
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
Hypothalamic hamartoma is the most common brain lesion causing
CPP (Fig. 600.2). This congenital malformation consists of ectopically
located neural tissue, within which glial cells can produce transforming growth factor-­α (TGF-­α), which has the potential to activate the
GnRH pulse generator. On MRI, it appears as a small pedunculated mass
attached to the tuber cinereum or the floor of the third ventricle or, less
often, as a sessile mass (Fig. 600.3) that remains static in size over years.
A wide variety of other CNS lesions or insults, usually involving the hypothalamus by scarring, invasion, or pressure, have been associated with CPP
(see Table 600.1). These include postencephalitic scars, tuberculous meningitis, tuberous sclerosis, severe head trauma, and hydrocephalus, either

A

B

Fig. 600.2 Natural course of untreated precocious puberty with cen-

tral nervous system lesion. Photographs at 11⁄2 (A) and 21⁄2 (B) yr of age.
Accelerated growth, muscular development, osseous maturation, and
testicular development were consistent with the degree of secondary
sexual maturation. In early infancy, the patient began having frequent
spells of rapid, purposeless motion; later in life, he had episodes of uncontrollable laughing with ocular movements. At 7 yr, he exhibited emotional lability, aggressive behavior, and destructive tendencies. Although
a hypothalamic hamartoma had been suspected, it was not established
until CT scanning became available when the patient was 23 yr of age.
Epiphyses fused at 9 yr of age; final height was 142 cm (56 in). At 24 yr of
age, he developed an embryonal cell carcinoma of the retroperitoneum.

isolated or associated with myelomeningocele. Gonadotropin-­dependent
precocious puberty occurs in 26–29% of children with tumors developing
within or near the hypothalamus or optic pathways. Low-­grade gliomas,
the most common types of such neoplasms, are highly prevalent (15–20%)
in children with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-­1) and constitute the main
etiologic factor for the central sexual precocity encountered in a small subset (approximately 3%) of children with NF-­1.
About 50% of the tumors in the pineal region are germ cell tumors or
astrocytomas; the remainder consists of a wide variety of histologically
distinct tumor types. Pineal or hypothalamic germ cell tumors can cause
CPP in males by secreting hCG, which stimulates the luteinizing hormone (LH) receptors in the Leydig cells of the testes (see Chapter 600.5).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Hypothalamic hamartomas remain static in size or grow slowly and can be
associated with gelastic or psychomotor seizures, but most often produce
no signs other than precocious puberty. This is often rapidly progressive
sexual precocity in very young children. For other lesions causing neurologic symptoms, the neuroendocrine manifestations may be present for 1-­2
years before the tumor can be detected radiologically. Hypothalamic signs
or symptoms such as diabetes insipidus, adipsia, hyperthermia, unnatural crying or laughing, obesity, and cachexia should suggest the possibility
of an intracranial lesion. Visual signs (proptosis, decreased visual acuity,
visual field defects) may be the first manifestation of an optic glioma.
The sexual precocity is always isosexual, and the endocrine patterns
are generally those found in children without demonstrable organic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

3391

puberty. The prevalence of this condition in children treated with
radiotherapy for tumors located outside of the hypothalamic pituitary or optic pathways region has been reported at 6.6%. Hydrocephalus, young age at exposure to radiation (<5 years), being female,
and increased BMI are additional risk factors. This condition is often
associated with GH deficiency and at times with other conditions (spinal irradiation, hypothyroidism) adversely affecting the adult height
prognosis. Unless careful attention is paid to early signs of pubertal
development in these children, the combination of GH deficiency
and the growth-­promoting effect of sex steroids often results in a normal growth rate at the expense of a rapidly advancing bone age and
impaired adult height potential. The pubertal staging of males treated
with gonadotoxic modalities such as high-­dose alkylating agents or
testicular radiotherapy should not rely on testicular volume measurements (see Chapter 600.2).

TREATMENT

GnRH analogs are effective in arresting pubertal progression, but
concomitant GH (and/or thyroid hormone) deficiency should be diagnosed and treated promptly to improve the adult height prognosis.
Paradoxically, hypopituitarism with gonadotropin deficiency may
subsequently develop as a late effect of high-­dose CNS irradiation in
patients with or without a history of precocious puberty, and it may
require substitution therapy with sex steroids.
Fig. 600.3 MRI of a central nervous system lesion in a child with

central precocious puberty. A 6-­yr-­old female was referred for stage IV
breast development and growth acceleration. Serum luteinizing hormone and estradiol concentrations were in the adult range. The midsagittal T1-­weighted image shows an isointense hypothalamic mass
(arrowheads), typical of a hamartoma. (From Sharafuddin M, Luisiri A,
Garibaldi LR, et al. MR imaging diagnosis of central precocious puberty:
importance of changes in the shape and size of the pituitary gland. Am
J Roentgenol. 1994;162:1167–1173.)

lesions. In conditions other than hypothalamic hamartoma, growth
hormone (GH) deficiency can occur and may be masked by the growth-­
promoting effect of the increased sex hormone levels. The pubertal
staging of males treated with gonadotoxic modalities such as high-­dose
alkylating agents or testicular radiotherapy should not rely on testicular
volume measurements because these are affected by treatment-­induced
germ cell and Sertoli depletion. Pubic hair development, scrotal thinning, and penile size may be better indicators, and providers should not
hesitate to measure serum LH and testosterone levels when in doubt.

TREATMENT

GnRH agonists (depot forms or implant) are the treatment of choice of
tumor-­induced CPP. Neurosurgical treatment has been shown to have
limited efficacy and to be associated with high complication rates in a subset of patients with hypothalamic hamartoma and associated intractable
gelastic or psychomotor seizures. Stereotactic radiation therapy (gamma
knife surgery) and, more recently, MRI-­guided laser therapy, have been
proposed as possible alternatives in these instances. For other neurologic
lesions, therapy depends on the nature and location of the pathologic process. Combined GH therapy should be considered for patients with associated GH deficiency. The final height outcome will also depend on other
factors such as the burden of disease from the primary tumor, side effects
of cancer treatments, and associated chronic health conditions
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.3 Precocious Puberty After Irradiation
of the Brain
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
Children treated with cranial radiotherapy at a wide range of doses (18-­
50 Gy) are at an increased risk for gonadotropin-­dependent precocious

600.4 Syndrome of Precocious Puberty and
Hypothyroidism
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
The onset of puberty is usually delayed in children with mild forms
of hypothyroidism. However, up to 50% of children with profound,
untreated hypothyroidism of long duration may paradoxically develop
precocious puberty (a condition known as VanWyk-­Grumbach syndrome). Hashimoto thyroiditis is frequently the cause of such forms
of hypothyroidism. Patients have the usual manifestations of hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603); the symptoms may be difficult to recognize in children with special needs. Children with precocious puberty
caused by hypothyroidism have, contrary to other children with sexual
precocity, decreased growth velocity and delayed bone age. Females
may present with breast development and menstrual bleeding; the latter may occur even in females with minimal breast enlargement. Pelvic
sonography may reveal large, multicystic ovaries. Males have testicular enlargement associated with modest or no penile enlargement. No
pubic hair development occurs in either females or males. Enlargement
of the sella, which is typical of long-­standing primary hypothyroidism,
may be demonstrated by skull film or MRI. Plasma levels of thyroid-­
stimulating hormone (TSH) are markedly elevated, often greater than
500 μU/mL, and those of prolactin and estradiol are mildly elevated.
Although serum FSH is low and LH is undetectable, when measured
by specific assays, the massively elevated concentrations of TSH appear
to interact with the FSH receptor (specificity spillover), thus inducing
FSH-­like effects in the absence of LH effects on the gonads. The FSH-­
like effect suffices to induce estradiol secretion by the ovaries, whereas
in males, testicular enlargement occurs without substantial testosterone secretion. Treatment of the hypothyroidism results in rapid return
to normal of the biochemical and clinical manifestations. Possible
progression to central puberty with rapid bone age advancement may
occur in the months after the initiation of thyroid hormone replacement, a complication that would justify delaying puberty with GnRH
analogs. Macroorchidism (testicular volume >30 mL) may persist in
adult males despite adequate levothyroxine therapy. Children with
a high risk of primary hypothyroidism, especially those with special
needs such as patients with trisomy 21, should be screened at least
annually via measurement of serum free T4 and TSH levels.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3392 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

600.5 Chorionic Gonadotropin-­Secreting
Tumors: Paraneoplastic Precocious
Puberty
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
hCG-­secreting tumors are a rare cause of precocious puberty in males.
Secretion of hCG activates luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin
(LHCG) receptors in the Leydig cells causing testosterone production and virilization with minimal testicular enlargement. Testicular
histology reveals interstitial cell hyperplasia with no spermatogenesis. Plasma levels of testosterone are elevated, whereas those of FSH
and LH, as measured by specific assays, are low. Females with hCG-­
secreting tumors do not present with precocious puberty because the
ovarian production of estradiol cannot occur in the absence of FSH
stimulation.

HEPATIC TUMORS

All reported cases of hepatoblastoma causing isosexual precocious puberty
have been in males, with the average age of onset of 2 years (range 4 months
to 8 years). An enlarged liver or mass in the right upper quadrant should
suggest the diagnosis. Plasma levels of hCG and α-­fetoprotein (AFP) are
usually markedly elevated and serve as useful markers for following the
effects of therapy. As with other carcinomas of the liver, the prognosis for
survival beyond 1-­2 years from the time of diagnosis is poor.

INTRACRANIAL TUMORS

Nongerminomatous or mixed germ cell tumors, choriocarcinomas,
teratomas, teratocarcinomas, and others account for <5% of intracranial tumors; are usually located in the neurohypophyseal area or the
pineal area; and may cause precocious puberty in males if they secrete
hCG—the mass effect can infrequently cause precocious puberty in
females. Marked elevations of hCG and AFP often occur in the cerebrospinal fluid, although elevations in the blood may be modest. Treatment includes radiation, chemotherapy, and debulking surgery.

TUMORS IN OTHER LOCATIONS

Very rare locations include mediastinum, gonads, or even adrenal
glands. Mediastinal germ cell tumors have been reported to cause precocious puberty in males with Klinefelter syndrome.

testing from leukocyte DNA or unaffected tissues. The diagnostic
sensitivity may improve with new techniques, however. Precocious
puberty has been described predominantly in females (Fig. 600.4) and
is characterized by recurrent ovarian cysts, bouts of estrogen secretion,
and vaginal bleeding in the context of modest breast development.
The age at onset in females is usually 3-­6 years but has been reported
as early as 4-­6 months of age. Serum levels of LH and FSH are suppressed, with no response to GnRH stimulation. Estradiol levels fluctuate from low to markedly elevated (>300 pg/mL), are often cyclic, and
may correlate with the size of the cysts. Precocious puberty is less commonly reported in males with McCune-­Albright syndrome. Testicular
enlargement is often symmetric and is followed by the appearance of
phallic enlargement and pubic hair development, as in normal puberty.
Testicular histology has shown foci or nodules (often sonographically
detectable) of Leydig cell hyperplasia. In females and males, when the
bone age reaches the usual pubertal age range, gonadotropin secretion
begins and CPP ensues and overrides the antecedent (gonadotropin-­
independent) puberty. In females, menses become more regular, but
often not completely so, and fertility has been documented.
Pubertal progression is variable in these patients. Functioning ovarian cysts often disappear spontaneously; aspiration or surgical excision of cysts is rarely indicated. For those females with persistent or
recurrent estradiol secretion, aromatase inhibitors (which inhibit the
final step of estrogen biosynthesis) such as letrozole (1.25-­2.5 mg/day
PO) have proven safe and effective in limiting the estrogen effects on
pubertal and osseous maturation. The same compounds have also been
used in males in combination with antiandrogens. These medications
are not approved by the FDA for this indication. Associated therapy
with long-­acting analogs of GnRH is indicated only for young children whose puberty has shifted from a gonadotropin-­independent to a
predominantly gonadotropin-­dependent mechanism. Ovarian torsion
is a severe complication of large ovarian cysts.

EXTRAGONADAL MANIFESTATIONS

The hyperthyroidism that occurs in this condition is usually clinically
mild or subclinical, unlike that observed in Graves disease. Mildly
elevated triiodothyronine levels, suppressed TSH levels, and nodular
abnormalities on ultrasound have been reported. Thyroidectomy is
rarely necessary.

PERIPHERAL PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY

The adrenal causes of peripheral precocious puberty are discussed in
Chapter 616, and the gonadal causes are discussed in Chapters 624
and 627.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.6 McCune-­Albright Syndrome
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
McCune-­Albright syndrome, or precocious puberty with polyostotic
fibrous dysplasia and abnormal pigmentation, is a syndrome of endocrine dysfunction associated with patchy cutaneous pigmentation and
fibrous dysplasia of the skeletal system. It is a rare condition with a
prevalence between 1/100,000 and 1/1,000,000, characterized by
autonomous hyperfunction of one or more glands (which may include
pituitary, thyroid, and adrenal glands). An activating missense pathogenic variant in the GNAS1 gene encoding the α-­subunit of GS, the
G protein that stimulates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
formation, results in activation of receptors (adrenocorticotropic
hormone [ACTH], TSH, FSH, and LH receptors) that operate via a
cAMP-­dependent mechanism, as well as cell proliferation. Because
the pathogenic variant is postzygotic rather than genomic, it is present
variably in different tissues (somatic mosaicism) and hence results in
variable clinical expression and limited diagnostic sensitivity of genetic

A

B

Fig. 600.4 Precocious puberty with McCune-­
Albright syndrome
(MAS). A, A girl presented at 5 yr of age with early stage III breast development and vaginal bleeding. Note the extensive café-­au-­lait skin
patches, some of which did not cross the midline. B, A girl presented
with recurring episodes of mild breast enlargement and vaginal bleeding associated with ovarian cysts, starting at age 7 mo. She had no skin
lesions and a negative skeletal survey and bone scan at age 4 yr. The
diagnosis of MAS was established at 5 yr of age, when prominence of
her left forehead and supraorbital ridge prompted a CT scan, which revealed unilateral thickening of the skull bones (B). Skull lesions are often
hyperostotic, whereas long bone lesions usually have a lytic, “ground-­
glass” appearance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

A

B

Fig. 600.5 Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia in a 22-­yr-­old female. A, The

femur is expanded and bowed with a “shepherd’s crook” deformity.
The femoral trabeculae are replaced by a “ground-­glass” matrix. B, Diffuse sclerosis is seen in the hand and wrist with mild expansion and
indistinct transition from the cortex to medullary space. (From Thapa
MM, Kaste SC, Meyer JS. Soft tissue bone tumors. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 138.31.)

Cushing syndrome caused by bilateral nodular adrenocortical
hyperplasia has occurred only in neonates or young infants. ACTH
levels are low, and cortisol is elevated and not suppressible by dexamethasone. The condition may resolve spontaneously; if not, treatment
is bilateral adrenalectomy.
Increased secretion of GH occurs uncommonly and is manifested
clinically by gigantism or acromegaly. The growth rate is increased
(even in the absence of precocious puberty); serum levels of GH are
elevated, increase during sleep, and are poorly suppressed by oral glucose. Serum levels of prolactin are increased in most patients. Less than
50% of the patients have a demonstrable pituitary tumor. Treatment
includes octreotide or lanreotide—long-­acting somatostatin analogs—
to lower the elevated GH levels or pegvisomant to antagonize the effect
of GH at the receptor level.
Fibrous dysplasia of (usually) multiple bones (polyostotic) represents a major cause of morbidity in this syndrome (Fig. 600.5). The base
of the skull and the proximal femurs are most commonly involved, but
any bone can be affected. Even in the absence of deformities, a CT scan
of the cranium is recommended by several investigators. The prognosis is favorable for longevity, but deformities, repeated fractures, pain,
and occasional cranial nerve compression may result from the bony
lesions. Bone pain often responds to IV pamidronate or other bisphosphonates. Extensive bony lesions may be associated with phosphaturia
because of oversecretion of FGF23, leading to rickets or osteomalacia.
Extraglandular manifestations of this syndrome are rare, but cardiovascular and hepatic involvement (severe neonatal cholestasis) may be
life threatening.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.7 Familial Male-­Limited Gonadotropin-­
Independent Precocious Puberty
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
This rare, autosomal dominant form of peripheral precocious puberty
is transmitted from affected males and unaffected female carriers of the
pathogenic variant to their male offspring. Signs of puberty appear by

3393

2-­3 years of age. The testes are only slightly enlarged. Testicular biopsies
show Leydig cell maturation and, sometimes, marked hyperplasia. Maturation of seminiferous tubules may be present. Testosterone levels are
variably elevated, often markedly so, even above the adult male range;
however, baseline levels of LH are prepubertal, pulsatile secretion of
LH is absent, and LH does not respond to stimulation with GnRH or a
GnRH agonist. The cause for activation of Leydig cells independently of
gonadotropin stimulation is a missense pathogenic variant of LHCGR,
which encodes the LHCG receptor leading to constitutive activation
of cAMP production. Osseous maturation may be markedly advanced;
when it reaches the pubertal age range, hypothalamic maturation shifts
the mechanism of pubertal development to a gonadotropin-­dependent
one. This sequence of events is similar to that occurring in children
with McCune-­Albright syndrome (see Chapter 600.6) or in those with
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616).
Gonadotropin-­independent precocious puberty has been diagnosed
in a few unrelated males with type IA pseudohypoparathyroidism
with a specific pathogenic variant of GNAS that encodes the Gsα protein. This pathogenic variant is inactivating at normal body temperature
and causes pseudohypoparathyroidism, but in the cooler temperature
of the testes, it is constitutionally activating, resulting in adenyl cyclase
stimulation and production of testosterone. Although this pathogenic
variant differs from the constitutive LH receptor pathogenic variant,
which usually causes familial male gonadotropin-­independent precocious puberty, the end result is the same.

TREATMENT

Young males have been treated with ketoconazole (10-­15 mg/kg/day in
8-­hour divided doses), an antifungal drug that inhibits C-­17,20-­lyase
and testosterone synthesis. Complications of ketoconazole include
liver toxicity and tachyphylaxis. A combination of antiandrogens (such
as spironolactone 50-­100 mg bid, flutamide 125-­250 mg daily or bid,
or bicalutamide 25-­50 mg daily) and aromatase inhibitors (letrozole
2.5 mg/day or anastrozole 1 mg/day) has been used—the latter compounds to suppress estrogens derived from androgens, which potently
stimulate bone maturation. These medications are unable to revert the
serum testosterone to normal (prepubertal) concentrations or completely offset the unfavorable effects of the elevated sex hormones. They
slow down, but do not halt, the progression of puberty and may not
improve the height prognosis. Males whose GnRH pulse generator has
matured require combined therapy with GnRH agonists.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.8 Incomplete (Partial) Precocious
Development
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
Isolated development of the breasts in females and growth of sexual
hair in both sexes without other signs of puberty are the two most common forms of incomplete precocity and are not unusual in a pediatric
practice.

PREMATURE THELARCHE

This term applies to a sporadic, transient condition of isolated breast
development that most often appears in the first 2 years of life. In some
females, breast development is present at birth and persists. It may be
unilateral or asymmetric and often fluctuates in degree. Growth and
osseous maturation are normal or slightly advanced. The genitalia
show no evidence of estrogenic stimulation. Breast development may
regress after 2 years, often persists for 3-­5 years, and is rarely progressive. Menarche generally occurs at a normal age, and reproduction is
also normal. Basal serum levels of FSH and the FSH response to GnRH
stimulation may be greater than that seen in normal controls. Plasma
levels of LH and estradiol are typically undetectable. Pelvic ultrasound
reveals normal-­sized ovaries, but a few small (<9 mm) cysts are not
uncommon.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3394 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
In some females, breast development may be associated with definite
evidence of systemic estrogen effects, such as growth acceleration or bone
age advancement. Pelvic sonography may reveal enlarged ovaries and/
or uterus. This condition, referred to as exaggerated or atypical thelarche, differs from CPP because it spontaneously regresses. Leuprolide or
GnRH stimulation elicits a robust FSH response, a low LH response, and
(after leuprolide only) a moderate estradiol increment at 24 hours (average 60-­90 pg/mL). The pathogenesis of typical and exaggerated forms of
thelarche is unclear. Delayed inactivation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
ovarian axis, which is active during the prenatal and early postnatal period,
increased peripheral sensitivity to estrogens, and other possibilities are
unproven hypotheses. In addition to a detailed history, a bone age should
be obtained if there are any unusual features. Random serum concentrations of FSH, LH, and estradiol are generally low and not diagnostic. Pelvic
ultrasound examination or leuprolide stimulation testing is occasionally
indicated. Continued observation is important because the condition cannot be readily distinguished from true precocious puberty. Regression and
recurrence suggest functioning follicular cysts. Occurrence of thelarche in
children older than 3 years of age most often is caused by a condition other
than benign premature thelarche.

PREMATURE MENARCHE

PREMATURE PUBARCHE (ADRENARCHE)

Various medicaments can induce the appearance of secondary sexual
characteristics (i.e., peripheral precocious puberty). Examples include
the accidental ingestion of estrogens (including contraceptive pills) and
the administration of anabolic steroids. Exogenous estrogens may produce a darkening of the areola that is not usually seen in central sexual
precocity. The most common cause of medicational precocity is currently
related to the widespread use of testosterone gels or creams, which
are applied to the skin for treatment of male hypogonadism. Systemic
absorption from the skin area of a male relative where the gel/cream was
applied may result in elevated serum testosterone levels (50-­100 mg/dL
or higher), with ensuing virilization of exposed children and women.
Intense application of diaper rash creams or ointments has recently been
reported to cause mild pubarche, with an unclear mechanism.
Less commonly, estrogens in cosmetics, hair creams, and breast augmentation creams cause breast development in females and gynecomastia
in males via percutaneous absorption. Lavender and tea tree oils have been
associated with prepubertal gynecomastia in several reports. Genistein, a
compound from soy, has estrogenic activity in mice, but data in humans
are conflicting. The physical changes disappear after cessation of exposure
to the hormones. A careful history focused on exploring the possibility of
accidental exposure to, or ingestion of, sex hormones is important.

This term has traditionally applied to the appearance of sexual hair
before the age of 8 years in females or 9 years in males without other evidence of maturation. It is much more frequent in females than in males.
The higher prevalence of this condition in African American and, to a
smaller extent, Latino females in comparison to White females may suggest that the cutoff age for the definition of premature should be adjusted
for different ethnic groups on epidemiologic data. Hair appears on the
mons and labia majora in females and perineal and scrotal area in males;
axillary hair generally appears later. Adult-­type axillary odor is common. Affected children are often slightly advanced in height and osseous maturation. Premature adrenarche is an early maturational event
of adrenal androgen production. It coincides with precocious maturation of the zona reticularis, traditionally believed to be associated with
a decrease in 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity and an increase
in C-­17,20-­lyase activity. These enzymatic changes result in increased
basal and ACTH-­stimulated serum concentrations of the Δ5-­steroids
(17-­hydroxypregnenolone and dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA]) and,
to a lesser extent, of the Δ4-­steroids (particularly androstenedione) compared with age-­matched control subjects. One class of androgens, the
11-­oxygenated steroids, have been reported to play an important role
in adrenal physiology and pathology, including adrenarche. Idiopathic
premature adrenarche is a slowly progressive condition that requires no
therapy. However, a subset of patients presents with atypical premature
adrenarche characterized by one or more features of systemic androgen
effects, such as marked growth acceleration, clitoral (females) or phallic
(males) enlargement, cystic acne, and advanced bone age (2 SD greater
than the mean for age). In this subgroup, an ACTH stimulation test with
measurement of serum 17-­hydroxyprogesterone concentration is indicated to rule out nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to
21-­hydroxylase deficiency. The prevalence of nonclassical 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency is approximately 3–6% of unselected children with precocious
pubarche; other enzyme defects (i.e., 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
or 11β-­hydroxylase deficiencies) are extremely rare. Although idiopathic
premature adrenarche has been considered a benign condition, longitudinal observations suggest that approximately 50% of females with
premature adrenarche are at high risk for hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovary syndrome, alone or more often in combination with other
components of so-­called metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance possibly progressing to type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension,
increased visceral fat) as adults. Whether the unfavorable progression
to pubertal hyperandrogenism can be prevented by insulin-­sensitizing
agents (metformin 850-­2000 mg/day) or lifestyle interventions (diet,
exercise) remains to be proven in large studies. An increased risk of premature adrenarche and metabolic syndrome has been documented in
children born small for their gestational age. This appears to be associated with insulin resistance and decreased β-­cell reserve, perhaps as a
consequence of fetal undernutrition.

This is a rare entity, much less frequent than premature thelarche or
premature adrenarche, and is a diagnosis of exclusion. In females with
isolated vaginal bleeding in the absence of other secondary sexual characteristics, more common causes, such as vulvovaginitis, a foreign body
(typically associated with malodorous discharge), or sexual abuse, and
uncommon causes, such as urethral prolapse and sarcoma botryoides,
must be carefully excluded. Most females with idiopathic premature
menarche have only one to three episodes of bleeding; puberty occurs
at the usual time, and menstrual cycles are normal. Plasma levels of
gonadotropins are low, but estradiol levels may be occasionally elevated,
probably owing to episodic ovarian estrogen secretion associated with
ovarian follicular cysts that can be sometimes detected on ultrasound.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.9 Medicational Precocity
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.10 Delayed or Absent Puberty
Peter M. Wolfgram
For hypofunction of testis, see Chapter 623. For hypofunction of ovaries, see Chapter 626.
Delayed puberty is the failure of development of any pubertal feature
by 13 years of age in females or by 14 years of age in males. A lower
cutoff may be appropriate in a child with a strong familial pattern of
early puberty.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Delay or absence of puberty is caused by:
• Constitutional delay: A variant of normal.
• Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: Low gonadotropin levels as a result of a defect of the hypothalamus and/or pituitary gland (Tables
600.3, 600.4, and 600.5).
• Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism: High gonadotropin levels as a
result of a lack of negative feedback because of a gonadal problem
(see Tables 600.3, 600.4, and 600.5). Females may have evidence of
adrenarche with absence of normal breast development.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development
Table 600.3  Classification of Delayed Puberty and Sexual Infantilism
IDIOPATHIC (CONSTITUTIONAL) DELAY IN GROWTH AND
PUBERTY (DELAYED ACTIVATION OF HYPOTHALAMIC GNRH
PULSE GENERATOR)
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM: SEXUAL INFANTILISM
RELATED TO GONADOTROPIN DEFICIENCY
CNS Disorders
Tumors
Craniopharyngiomas
Germinomas
Other germ cell tumors
Hypothalamic and optic gliomas
Astrocytomas
Pituitary tumors (including MEN-­1, prolactinoma)
Other Causes
Langerhans histiocytosis
Postinfectious lesions of the CNS
Vascular abnormalities of the CNS
Radiation therapy
Congenital malformations especially associated with craniofacial
anomalies
Head trauma
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Isolated Gonadotropin Deficiency
Kallmann syndrome (with hyposmia or anosmia; without anosmia)
GnRH receptor pathogenic variant
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia (DAX1 pathogenic variant)
Isolated LH deficiency
Isolated FSH deficiency
Prohormone convertase 1 deficiency (PCI)
Idiopathic and Genetic Forms of Multiple Pituitary Hormone
Deficiencies Including PROP1 Pathogenic Variant
Miscellaneous Disorders
See Table 600.4 for syndromic etiologies
Functional gonadotropin deficiency
Chronic systemic disease and malnutrition
Sickle cell disease
Cystic fibrosis
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Chronic gastroenteric disease
Chronic renal disease
Malnutrition

3395

Miscellaneous Disorders (continued)
Anorexia nervosa
Bulimia
Psychogenic amenorrhea
Impaired puberty and delayed menarche in female athletes and
ballet dancers (exercise amenorrhea)
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
Cushing disease
Hyperprolactinemia
Marijuana use
Gaucher disease
HYPERGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Males
The syndrome of seminiferous tubular dysgenesis and its variants
(Klinefelter syndrome)
Other forms of primary testicular failure
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
Testicular steroid biosynthetic defects
Sertoli-­only syndrome
LH receptor mutation
Anorchia and cryptorchidism
Trauma/surgery
Females
The syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome) and its variants
XX and XY gonadal dysgenesis
Familial and sporadic XX gonadal dysgenesis and its variants
Familial and sporadic XY gonadal dysgenesis and its variants
Aromatase deficiency
Other forms of primary ovarian failure
Premature menopause
Radiation therapy
Chemotherapy
Autoimmune oophoritis
Galactosemia
Glycoprotein syndrome type 1
Resistant ovary
FSH receptor pathogenic variant
LH/hCG resistance
Polycystic ovarian disease
Trauma/surgery
Noonan or pseudo-­Turner syndrome
Ovarian steroid biosynthetic defects

CNS, Central nervous system; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin.
From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.15, p. 1129.

Table 600.4  Syndromes Associated with Pubertal Delay
PHENOTYPE

GENETIC DEFECT

Prader-­Willi syndrome

Cognitive impairment, morbid obesity, hypotonia

Deletions within paternally
imprinted 15q 11.2-­12 region

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

Cognitive impairment, obesity, retinitis pigmentosa, postaxial polydactyly

BBS 1-­11 (multiple loci) 20p12,
16q21, 15q22.3-­23, 14q32.1

Biemond syndrome

Iris coloboma, polydactyly, short stature

CHARGE anomaly

Coloboma, heart malformations, choanal atresia, growth retardation, genital
anomalies and ear anomalies, HH, olfactory bulb aplasia, hypoplasia

CHD7

Adrenohypoplasia congenita

Primary adrenal deficiency

NR0B1

Septo-­optic dysplasia

Small, dysplastic pale optic discs, pendular nystagmus, midline hypothalamic
defect with diabetes insipidus, GH, ACTH, TSH, and LH/FSH deficiency,
absent septum pellucidum

HESX1

Solitary median maxillary
incisor syndrome

Prominent midpalatal ridge

SHH 7q3

Börjeson-­Forssman-­Lehmann
syndrome

Cognitive impairment, gynecomastia, moderate short stature, truncal obesity

PHF6

Gordon Holmes syndrome

Cerebellar ataxia, dementia, chorioretinopathy, anterior hypopituitarism

RNF216/OTUD4
PNPLA6

Modified from Howard SR, Dunkel L. Delayed puberty – phenotype diversity, molecular genetic mechanisms, and recent discoveries. Endocrine Rev. 2019;40:1285–1317, Table 3, p. 1301.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3396 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 600.5  Molecular Basis for Developmental Disorders Associated with Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
GENE

PHENOTYPE

COMPLEX PHENOTYPE

ISOLATED HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Kallmann Syndrome or Normosmic IHH (With the Same Pathogenic Gene Variant)
KAL1 (Xp22.3)
X-­linked Kallmann syndrome
FGFR1 (KAL2) (8p11.2)
Autosomal dominant Kallmann syndrome (±
recessive)
FGF8 (ligand for FGFR1) (10q25)
NELF (9p34.3)
Autosomal dominant (?) Kallmann syndrome
PROK2 (3p21.1)
Autosomal recessive Kallmann syndrome
PROKR2* (20p12.3)
CHD7 (8p12.1)
Autosomal dominant (some)
Normosmic Isolated Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
GNRH1 (8p21-­11.2)
Autosomal recessive
GNRHR* (4q13.2-­3)
Autosomal recessive (± dominant)
GPR54* (19p13.3)
Autosomal recessive
SNRPN
Lack of function of paternal 15q11-­q13
region or maternal uniparental disomy
LEP (7q31.3)
Autosomal recessive
LEPR (1p31)
Autosomal recessive
NR0B1 (DAX1) (X21.3-­21.2)
X-­linked recessive
TAC3 (12q13-­12)
Autosomal recessive
TACR3 (4q25)
Autosomal recessive
Multiple Pituitary Hormone Deficiencies
PROP1 (POU1F1)
HESX1 (RPX)

LHX3
PHF6

Autosomal recessive GH, PRL, TSH, and LH/FSH
(less commonly, later-­onset ACTH deficiency)
Autosomal recessive; and heterozygous mutations
Multiple pituitary deficiencies including diabetes
insipidus, but LH/FSH uncommon
Autosomal recessive GH, PRL, TSH, FSH/LH
X-­linked; GH, TSH, ACTH, LH/FSH

Anosmia/hyposmia, renal agenesis, dyskinesia
Anosmia/hyposmia, cleft lip/palate

CHARGE syndrome includes hyposmia

Prader-­Willi syndrome
Obesity
Obesity
Obesity
Adrenal hypoplasia

Septo-­optic dysplasia

Rigid cervical spine
Börjeson-­Lehmann syndrome: mental
retardation; facies

*A G-­protein–coupled receptor.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; CHD7, chromatin-­remodeling factor; DAX1, dosage-­sensitive sex reversal-­adrenal hyperplasia congenita critical region on the X chromosome,
gene 1; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth hormone; GNRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; GPR54, kisspeptin G protein–coupled
receptor 54; HESX1, homeobox gene expressed in ES cells; IHH, idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; LEP, leptin; LH, luteinizing hormone; LHX3, lim homeobox gene 3;
NELF, nasal embryonic luteinizing hormone–releasing factor; NR0B1, nuclear receptor family 0, group B, member 1; PHF6, plant homeodomain–like finger gene; PRL, prolactin;
PROK2, prokineticin 2; PROP1, prophet of Pit-­1; R, receptor; SNRPN, small nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptide SmN; TAC3, neurokinin 3; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.19, p. 1138.

Constitutional Delay of Growth and Puberty

This is the most common cause of delayed puberty and a normal variant of pubertal timing. It is predominately diagnosed in males, likely
as a result of ascertainment bias from referral patterns. The cause is
unknown, but approximately 50% of affected patients have a first-­
degree relative with delayed puberty and/or late growth. This tendency
can occur in a child of the same gender as the affected parent or in
a child of the opposite gender. An affected child typically presents in
early adolescence, when peers are beginning to develop and having
growth spurts but the patient is not. The patient’s height is usually at
or below the third percentile. In a classic patient, the affected child had
a normal length at birth, followed by a slowdown in height velocity
between 6 months and 2 years of age that resulted in a decreased height
percentile, and then normal or near-­normal height velocity thereafter
along this decreased height percentile. The physical examination findings are unremarkable, except at the typical age of puberty the child
will have delayed pubertal development and growth. The cardinal
diagnostic finding is a bone age that is moderately delayed (or younger
appearing) than the typical bone age for the patient’s actual chronological age. There may also be a history of delayed dentition. Without intervention, final adult heights usually reach or approximate the genetic
target height range. However, rarely, children with constitutional delay

may have a blunted pubertal growth spurt in relation to their peers and
therefore may not reach their target height range.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism

A variety of CNS anomalies or injuries may disrupt production of
gonadotropins. The GnRH pulse generator may be disrupted by an
interfering substance, such as excess prolactin, chronic illness, malnutrition, or excessive physical activity. The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus
may be damaged by trauma, radiation, infection, infiltration, increased
intracranial pressure, or surgery. The most common mass lesions are
craniopharyngiomas, gliomas, and cysts. Of note, congenital conditions or malformations may have allowed enough GnRH, LH, and FSH
for infantile development but may not be enough later to begin and
sustain puberty.

Kallmann Syndrome

This is the combination of a deficiency of gonadotropins with an
impaired or absent sense of smell. Other features may include color
blindness, atrial septal defects, and renal structural anomalies (unilateral renal agenesis). The X-­linked form is caused by a pathogenic
variant of KAL; there are autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant
forms.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development
LH and FSH deficiencies may be isolated or accompanied by
multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies. The deficiency may be a
result of pituitary damage from trauma, radiation, infection, sickle
cell disease, compression by infiltrate or tumor, or autoimmune
processes. In differentiating primary pituitary deficiency from that
secondary to hypothalamic deficiency, the clinician should remember that all pituitary hormones, except prolactin, are stimulated by
hypothalamic-­releasing hormones; however, prolactin is inhibited
by hypothalamic prolactin inhibitory factor (dopamine). Therefore if all pituitary hormones, including prolactin, are deficient, the
problem is in the pituitary gland. If prolactin levels are present or
even elevated but the other pituitary hormones are deficient, the
problem is above the pituitary gland, in the stalk or hypothalamus.
In the case of isolated LH and FSH deficiencies, the primary abnormality may lie within the pituitary-­hypothalamic neurons producing GnRH or farther upstream of the GnRH-­secreting neurons. In
particular, defects in molecules required for proper migration of
GnRH neurons (including the KAL gene) or lack of necessary signaling to GnRH-­producing neurons (defects in kisspeptin or neurokinin B and their receptors) can result in LH and FSH deficiency
through inappropriate GnRH secretion.

Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism: Males

If the testes are small, they may have been damaged by torsion, sickle
cell disease, infection, autoimmune disease, chemotherapy, or radiation and may not be able to respond to LH and FSH stimulation. If the
male is of pubertal age (bone age is greater than 10 years) and the hypothalamus has matured, the serum LH and FSH will be high because of
lack of testicular response. Also, if there is a problem with testicular
LH receptors, the LH can be high but the testosterone will not appropriately increase.

Klinefelter Syndrome

This occurs in 1:500 males and is often associated with a 47,XXY
karyotype; common features include reduced intelligence, adolescent
gynecomastia (often severe), and small, firm testes. The testes rarely
exceed 5 mL in volume (approximately 25% of the average adult volume). Patients are often tall and thin with an eunuchoid habitus and
may have delayed puberty with high FSH and LH. Virilization may be
incomplete, the phallus is often smaller than average, and infertility
approaches 100%.

Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism: Females

In this condition, the ovary may be unable to synthesize estrogen
(an inherited metabolic defect), the ovary may not be formed normally (dysgenesis), or the ovary may have been damaged by any of
the factors listed for testicular damage and by galactosemia.
The ovary may be intact but may not be stimulated by gonadotropins—for example, FSH is present but there is an FSH receptor problem, so estradiol is not made appropriately.

Turner Syndrome

The two most common features of Turner syndrome are short stature (involving the limbs to a greater degree than the trunk) and
ovarian insufficiency with high FSH. Lymphedema and a webbed
neck are diagnostic features present in a neonate. Additional features include shield chest, increased carrying angle (cubitus valgus), short fourth metacarpal, hypoplastic nails, renal anomalies,
and left-­sided heart defects (coarctation of the aorta, bicuspid aortic valve). Approximately 50% of affected females have no stigmata
except short stature and thus are typically identified later. About
20% may have spontaneous puberty with functioning ovaries for at
least a short period, which is in large part dependent on the child’s
karyotype; the infertility rate is greater than 99%.

3397

Females with Delayed or Absent Adrenarche

If a female has advanced breast development but no androgen signs,
she may have a disorder of androgen activity as occurs in androgen insensitivity syndrome (testicular feminization). In females,
the androgens come predominantly from the adrenal glands (adrenarche). If the bone age is less than 8 years, adrenarche may simply
be delayed (delayed adrenarche). However, if the bone age is older,
there may be an inherited problem in androgen synthesis from an
enzyme deficiency, or the adrenal may be damaged secondary to
autoimmune, infectious, or hypoxic injury. In these latter conditions of adrenal damage, other signs of adrenal insufficiency would
be evident.

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO DELAYED PUBERTY

A normal growth rate with delayed, but not absent, puberty and a family history of late puberty suggest the diagnosis of constitutional delay
of growth and puberty, which is the most commonly encountered
cause. A bone age that correlates with the patient’s current pubertal
status but is delayed for their chronological age confirms the clinical
impression; no other testing is necessary.
Initial evaluation should include:
• Medical history: trauma, illness, medications (e.g., stimulants,
chemotherapy), radiation, infection, malnutrition, autoimmune
problems, sickle cell disease status, stresses, growth records, galactosemia
• Review of symptoms: vision problems, headache, vomiting, inability to detect odors (hyposmia or anosmia), age at onset of androgen
signs, age at onset of estrogen signs, small genitalia at birth, signs of
primary adrenal insufficiency such as hyperpigmentation, need for
deodorant, need to wash hair more frequently
• Family history: timing of maternal and paternal growth and pubertal development; siblings and cousins with delayed development
• Physical examination: signs of chronic disease, temperature,
blood pressure, height, weight, head circumference, dental age,
hyperpigmentation, pubic and axillary hair, adult body odor,
evidence of skin and hair oils, visual fields, optic discs, ability
to detect odors, breast development, vaginal cornification/discharge, penis size, scrotal development, testicular volume, pubic
hair stages, neurologic status, affect or mood, intellectual ability,
dysmorphic features
Initial laboratory evaluation screens for chronic disease (complete blood cell count, chemistry profile, sedimentation rate),
hypothyroidism (free thyroxine and TSH), and hyperprolactinemia
(prolactin level) should be obtained. If growth is slow, the clinician should measure insulin-­like growth factor-­1 level (marker of
basal GH activity) and consider GH testing. The clinician should
measure testosterone levels in males and estradiol levels in females.
Measurements of random FSH and LH and results of a GnRH
stimulation test may differentiate between hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and primary gonadal failure (Figs. 600.6 and 600.7). Elevated gonadotropin levels support a diagnosis of primary gonadal
failure. A random LH or an LH after GnRH is not typically helpful
in distinguishing between constitutional delay and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism because with both diagnoses the LH will be
low. However, the child with constitutional delay eventually develops an appropriate pubertal development and LH values. If there
are elevated gonadotropins, chromosomal karyotyping can be performed (Klinefelter syndrome in males and Turner syndrome in
females).
If Kallmann syndrome is being considered, an MRI scan may show
abnormalities in the olfactory region. If a 46,XX female has unexplained
ovarian failure, antiovarian antibodies and müllerian-­inhibiting substance can assess ovarian follicle reserve and potential fertility. In
males, an hCG stimulation test to evaluate ability to produce testosterone and a serum level of müllerian-­inhibiting substance (secreted by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3398 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Delay in onset of secondary sexual
development after 13.5 years in males

Serum gonadotropins

Elevated

Low

Growth pattern

Karyotype

47,XXY

Normal
46,XY

Consistently short
for chronological
age but appropriate
for bone age

Late-onset growth
failure especially
with concurrent
diabetes insipidus

Normal without
growth spurt

Sense of smell

Bone age delayed

Anosmia or
hyposmia

MRI

Klinefelter
syndrome
(onset of puberty
often normal but
poor progression
follows)

Primary
testicular
failure

Constitutional delay
in growth and
puberty

Normal

Mass

Absence of
olfactory bulb
and/or sulcus

CNS
tumor

Kallmann
syndrome
(cryptorchidism
and/or
microphallus
make this
more likely)

Normal

Isolated
gonadotropin
deficiency
(cryptorchidism
and/or
microphallus
make this
more likely)

Fig. 600.6 Diagnostic algorithm for the evaluation of delayed puberty in males. CNS, Central nervous system; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

(From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 25.48.)

Sertoli cells) are useful for determining whether functional testicular
tissue is present.

TREATMENT OF DELAYED PUBERTY

If delayed puberty is a normal physiologic variant (constitutional
delay of growth and puberty), sex steroid replacement is not medically necessary. Watchful waiting is usually the appropriate course
of action. However, adolescent males with constitutional delay of
growth and puberty who are short, underdeveloped, and psychologically compromised may benefit from a short course of testosterone therapy. This is usually given as long-­acting intramuscular
testosterone, at a dosage of 50-­100 mg every 4 weeks for a course
ranging between 6 and 12 months. Treatment is generally begun at
about 14 years of age and, if possible, when the testes have enlarged
to about 6-­8 mL in volume. These doses stimulate height and weight
gain, allow adequate virilization (increased pubic and axillary hair
growth and penile enlargement), and do not typically suppress pituitary FSH and LH secretion, thereby allowing simultaneous endogenous pubertal progression (testicular enlargement). This narrows

the physical gap between the patient and peers without causing
undue advancement of bone age. Acne is the principal side effect,
and the adult height is not altered. It is the hope that at the conclusion of treatment, the male will continue to grow and develop
rapidly, with the testosterone treatment perceived as a jump starter
of endogenous puberty. Additionally, a short course of a low-­dose
anabolic steroid, such as oxandrolone, can also be used in prepubertal and pubertal males, and low-­dose estradiol has been used in
prepubertal and pubertal females with constitutional delay.
Treatment of hypogonadism aims to mimic normal physiology
with stepwise replacement of testosterone in males and estrogen
and progesterone in females. For males with hypogonadism, low-­
dose parenteral testosterone is initiated at 50 mg every 4 weeks,
with increases in 50-­mg increments made over a 2-­to 3-­year period.
Most adult males receive 200 mg every 2-­4 weeks, which is based
on the daily adult male testosterone production rate of 6 mg. Adult
men can receive testosterone by patch, which is often associated
with local irritation, or by gel, but, typically in growing adolescents,
intramuscular testosterone is prescribed to allow more reliable control of testosterone activity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development
Delay in onset of secondary sexual
development after 13 years in females

3399

Normal secondary sexual
development with primary amenorrhea

Serum gonadotropins

Elevated

Low

Karyotype

Normal
46,XX

Absence or abnormality
of one X chromosome or
mosaicism with 45,X
cell line

Karyotype

Growth pattern

Consistently short
for chronologic
age but appropriate
for bone age

Late-onset growth
failure especially
with concurrent
diabetes insipidus

Bone age delayed

Signs of increased
intracranial
pressure or visual
abnormalities

Normal without
growth spurt

Normal

46,XY

Sense of smell

Anosmia or
hyposmia

MRI

Primary ovarian
failure–autoimmune
or other etiology
Turner syndrome (may
or may not have somatic
stigmata of Turner
syndrome but short stature
is extremely common)

Constitutional
delay in growth
and puberty

Normal

Mass

Absence of
olfactory bulb
and/or sulcus

CNS
tumor

Kallmann
syndrome

Normal

Isolated
gonadotropin
deficiency
Anatomic
defect or
abnormality
in LH
pulsatility

Syndrome
of
androgen
resistance

Fig. 600.7 Diagnostic algorithm for the evaluation of delayed puberty in females. CNS, Central nervous system; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. (From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams
Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 25.49, p. 1157.)

For females with hypogonadism, daily estrogen therapy typically is provided through a transdermal 17β-­estradiol patch 25
mcg/24 hr patch, which is more physiologic than oral preparations
of the estrogens (conjugated estrogens [Premarin] or ethinyl estradiol) because transdermal therapy avoids initial first-­pass hepatic
metabolism. The transdermal or oral dose of estrogen (Premarin
starts at 0.3 mg daily) is increased over the course of about 2 years.
Two years of estrogen therapy without progesterone does not place
the uterus at undue risk for hyperplasia and malignancy, but after
2 years (or sooner if spotting occurs prior), progesterone should
be added. Options to consider when adding progesterone include
continuing the 17β-­estradiol patches or estrogen-­only–containing
pills (conjugated estrogens or ethinyl estradiol) in conjunction with
oral medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera), a progesterone eluting
intrauterine device (IUD), or switching the patient to conventional
oral contraceptives. If the patient is not put on a conventional oral
contraceptive or a progesterone-­eluting IUD, the estrogen (pill or
patch) is prescribed on days 1-­23 of the calendar month with the
addition of medroxyprogesterone acetate on days 10-­23. With this

approach, withdrawal bleeding generally occurs between day 23
and the end of the month, although there can be some variability in
the timing between patients.
Patients of either sex with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are
potentially fertile, but sex-­steroid therapy alone is ordinarily not
sufficient to initiate gametogenesis, although there are rare cases in
males in which testosterone replacement alone has stimulated spermatogenesis. The general approach to fertility induction in either
sex involves the addition of either cyclical gonadotropin therapy
or pump-­driven GnRH therapy at the age of desired conception.
When hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is present as one component
of hypopituitarism, it is critical to adequately replace all deficient
hormones (see Chapter 595). In contrast, patients with primary
hypogonadism have intrinsic gonadal damage and are normally
infertile.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3400 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Section 2

Disorders of the
Thyroid Gland
Chapter 601

Thyroid Development and
Physiology
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith

FETAL DEVELOPMENT

The fetal thyroid arises from an outpouching of the foregut at the
base of the tongue (foramen cecum) and migrates to its normal
location below the cricoid cartilage by 8-­10 weeks of gestation. The
thyroid’s bilobed shape is apparent by 7 weeks of gestation, and
thyroid follicular cells capable of forming colloid are present by 10
weeks. Thyroglobulin synthesis begins at 4 weeks, iodine trapping
occurs by 8-­10 weeks, and synthesis and secretion of thyroxine (T4)
and, to a lesser extent, triiodothyronine (T3) occur from 12 weeks of
gestation. Several transcription factors, including NKX2.1, FOXE1,
and PAX8, are important in thyroid gland morphogenesis and differentiation and possibly also in its caudal migration. Thyrotropin
(TSH) secretion is evident by 10-­12 weeks of gestation. Maturation
of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid axis occurs during the second half of gestation, but normal hormonal feedback relationships
are not mature until 1-­3 months of postnatal life. Other transcription factors, including PROP1 and POU1F1, are important for the
differentiation and growth of pituitary thyrotrophs, along with
somatotrophs and lactotrophs.

THYROID PHYSIOLOGY

The primary function of the thyroid gland is to synthesize T4 and
T3, of which iodine is a critical component. The only known physiologic role of iodine is in the synthesis of these hormones, and iodine
deficiency results in hypothyroidism. The daily recommended
dietary allowance of iodine is 110-­130 μg for infants, 90-­120 μg for
children, and 150 μg for adolescents and adults (see Chapter 605.3).
Ingested iodine reaches the thyroid gland as its ionized form,
iodide [I−]. Thyroid tissue has a unique avidity for iodide and can
take up and concentrate it in the follicular lumen to synthesize thyroid hormone. Transport of iodide from the circulation into the
thyroid follicular cell is facilitated by the transmembrane sodium–
iodide symporter (NIS). Once taken up, iodide diffuses across the
cell and is transported across the apical membrane into the colloid
by pendrin (and likely another unidentified transporter).
To form thyroid hormone, trapped inorganic iodide is organified
onto tyrosine residues of thyroglobulin in the follicular lumen, a
reaction catalyzed by thyroperoxidase (TPO). This reaction requires
the H2O2 produced by the enzyme DUOX2, which is expressed in
conjunction with dual oxidase maturation factor 2 (DUOXA2).
Thyroglobulin is a large homodimeric glycoprotein that contains
138 tyrosine residues. Iodination of specific tyrosine residues forms
monoiodotyrosines (MITs) and diiodotyrosines (DITs), which are

further coupled by TPO to produce T4 or T3. Once formed, T4 and
T3 remain stored as part of thyroglobulin in the thyroid colloid until
they are secreted through a process of follicular cell endocytosis of
colloid followed by endolysosomal degradation of thyroglobulin to
release T4 and T3.
The thyroid secretes T4 and T3 in a ratio of about 12 to 1. Although T3
circulates at about one-­fiftieth the concentration of T4, T3 is the physiologically active thyroid hormone because it binds the thyroid hormone receptor with 10-­to 15-­fold greater affinity than T4. Only 20% of
circulating T3 is secreted directly by the thyroid, and the remainder is
produced by conversion from T4 in extrathyroidal tissues by iodotyrosine deiodinases (types 1 and 2).
Thyroid hormones increase oxygen consumption, stimulate
protein synthesis, influence growth and differentiation, and affect
carbohydrate, lipid, and vitamin metabolism. Entry of T4 and T3
into cells is facilitated by specific thyroid hormone transporters,
of which the most important is monocarboxylate transporter 8
(MCT8). Once inside the cell, T4 is converted to T3 by type 1 or 2
deiodinase. Intracellular T3 enters the nucleus and binds to thyroid
hormone receptors. Thyroid hormone receptors are members of the
steroid hormone receptor superfamily, and three thyroid hormone
receptor isoforms (α1, β1, and β2) are expressed in different tissues.
Binding of T3 to a thyroid hormone receptor causes recruitment
of co-­activator molecules, transcription of messenger RNA, and
protein synthesis. Deiodination, transmembrane transport, and
thyroid hormone receptor expression provide multiple levels of
tissue-­specific modulation of thyroid hormone action in the face of
a given level of circulating T4.
Approximately 70% of circulating T4 and 50% of T3 are bound to
thyroxine-­
binding globulin (TBG), and most of the remainder is
bound to albumin and prealbumin (also called transthyretin). Only
0.03% of serum T4 and 0.3% of T3 are unbound (free T4 and free T3,
respectively). Because the concentration or binding of TBG is altered
in many clinical circumstances, its status must be considered when
interpreting total T4 or T3 levels.

THYROID REGULATION

The thyroid is regulated by TSH, a glycoprotein hormone secreted
by the anterior pituitary thyrotrophs. Binding of TSH to its receptor
in the thyroid gland activates adenylate cyclase and stimulates all
steps of thyroid hormone biosynthesis (see Fig. 594.1). TSH is a
heterodimer composed of α and β subunits. The α subunit is common to luteinizing hormone, follicle-­stimulating hormone, and
chorionic gonadotropin, and the specificity of each hormone is conferred by its unique β subunit. TSH synthesis and release are stimulated by TRH, a tripeptide synthesized in the hypothalamus and
secreted into the pituitary. In states of decreased thyroid hormone,
TSH and TRH are increased, and increased thyroid hormone
inhibits TSH and TRH production. TSH levels can be measured
in serum, whereas circulating levels of TRH are not clinically
measurable.
Further control of the level of circulating thyroid hormones
occurs in the periphery. In many nonthyroidal illnesses, circulating
T3 levels fall because of decreased extrathyroidal production of T3
by type 1 deiodinase and increased inactivation of T4 (to reverse T3)
and T3 (to T2) by type 3 deiodinase. These changes may be induced
by factors such as fasting, chronic malnutrition, acute illness, and
certain drugs. Although levels of T3 may be significantly decreased,
levels of free T4 and TSH may remain normal. The decreased levels
of T3 may be a physiologic adaptation, resulting in decreased rates of
oxygen consumption, substrate use, and other catabolic processes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 601 u Thyroid Development and Physiology 3401

601.1 Thyroid Hormone Studies
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith

SERUM THYROID HORMONES

Methods are available to measure many thyroid hormones in serum,
including T4, free T4, T3, and free T3. The metabolically inert reverse
T3 (rT3) is present in serum, but measuring rT3 is rarely useful clinically. Direct assays for free T4 are widely available and are reliable in
healthy patients, but these assays may be less reliable during acute
illness or with severe abnormalities of thyroid hormone binding.
Therefore in such situations it may be preferable to measure total T4
as an index of TBG binding or to measure free T4 by the gold standard technique of equilibrium dialysis. The clinical utility of many
free T3 assays is limited by their poor standardization. Because
normal thyroid function changes over time, age-­specific reference
ranges should be used when interpreting thyroid hormone testing
in children, particularly in neonates and infants.
Measuring serum levels of TSH and free T4 can diagnose most
clinical thyroid disorders. Serum TSH is the most sensitive test for
primary thyroid dysfunction, and it is elevated in primary hypothyroidism and suppressed in primary thyrotoxicosis. In central
(secondary) hypothyroidism, serum TSH is low or inappropriately
in the normal range despite low serum T4 and free T4 levels. Biotin
supplements may cause a false elevation of T4 and T3 and a false
decrease of TSH.
Thyroglobulin is a glycoprotein secreted through the apical surface
of the thyroid follicular cell into the colloid. Thyroglobulin is measurable in the serum, and levels of thyroglobulin increase with TSH stimulation and in proportion to functional thyroid mass. Athyreotic infants
have markedly reduced levels of thyroglobulin. In contrast, thyroglobulin levels may be increased in neonates and in patients with Graves
disease and other forms of autoimmune thyroid disease, differentiated
thyroid carcinoma, or endemic goiter.

FETAL AND NEWBORN THYROID

Fetal serum T4 and free T4 increase from midgestation to approximately 9.5 μg/dL and 1.4 ng/dL, respectively, at term. Fetal levels of
T3 are low before 20 weeks and then gradually increase to approximately 60 ng/dL at term. Reverse T3 levels, however, are high in
the fetus (300 ng/dL at 30 weeks) and decrease to 200 ng/dL at
term. Serum levels of TSH gradually increase to 6 mIU/L at term.
Approximately one third of fetal T4 at term is derived from the
transplacental passage of maternal T4. Maternal T4 plays a key role
in fetal development, especially that of the brain, beginning before
fetal synthesis of thyroid hormone begins. Therefore a fetus with
congenital hypothyroidism may be partially protected by maternal
T4 if the mother is euthyroid but may be at risk for neurodevelopmental injury if the mother is hypothyroid.
Immediately after birth there is an acute release of TSH, with
peak serum concentrations reaching 70-­100 mIU/L 30 minutes
after delivery in full-­term infants. TSH declines rapidly over the
ensuing 24 hours and more gradually over the next 5 days to <10
mIU/L. After the first 1-­3 months of life, normal levels of TSH are
<5 mIU/L. The postnatal surge in TSH stimulates an increase in
levels of T4 to approximately 16 μg/dL and of T3 to approximately
300 ng/dL in about 4 hours. T4 levels gradually decrease during the
first 2 weeks of life to 10-­12 μg/dL. T3 levels decline during the first
week of life to below 200 ng/dL. Reverse T3 levels remain high for 2
weeks (200 ng/dL) and decrease by 4 weeks to around 50 ng/dL. In
preterm infants, changes in thyroid function after birth are qualitatively similar to but quantitatively smaller than in full-­term infants.

Serum T4 and T3 levels are decreased in proportion to gestational
age and birthweight.

SERUM THYROXINE-­BINDING GLOBULIN

The thyroid hormones are transported in plasma bound primarily to TBG, a glycoprotein synthesized in the liver. TBG binds
approximately 70% of T4 and 50% of T3. Estimating TBG binding
is occasionally necessary because changes caused by various clinical conditions can affect measured levels of total (but not free) T4
and T3. TBG levels increase in pregnancy; in the newborn period;
with hepatitis; and with the administration of estrogens (oral contraceptives), selective estrogen receptor modulators, heroin or
methadone, mitotane, and 5-­f luorouracil. TBG levels decrease with
androgens, anabolic steroids, glucocorticoids, nicotinic acid, and l-­
asparaginase. These effects are the result of altered hepatic synthesis
of TBG. Severe TBG deficiency may be caused by genetic variants,
decreased production with hepatocellular disease, or massive protein loss in the gut (protein-­losing enteropathies) or the urine (congenital nephrotic syndrome) (see Chapter 602). Some medications,
including furosemide, salicylates, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs, heparin, and free fatty acids, can elevate levels of free T4 by
inhibiting binding to TBG.

THYROID ULTRASONOGRAPHY

The primary clinical uses of thyroid ultrasound are to assess thyroid
morphology and to evaluate the characteristics of thyroid nodules.
In infants with congenital hypothyroidism, evaluation of the size
and location of the thyroid may clarify the diagnosis of thyroid dysgenesis; however, the sensitivity of ultrasound is user-­dependent,
and it will not reliably detect ectopic thyroid glands. Ultrasound
is more accurate than physical examination for estimating thyroid
gland size and assessing thyroid nodules. Certain characteristics
of thyroid nodules, such as irregular margins, microcalcifications,
hypoechogenicity, and taller-­than-­wide shape, increase the likelihood that a thyroid nodule is malignant and guide decisions about
the need for fine-­needle aspiration. In children with autoimmune
thyroiditis or Graves disease, ultrasound may reveal heterogeneous
echotexture or changes in vascularity. However, ultrasound generally is not clinically useful in these conditions unless a thyroid
nodule is suspected. Ultrasound may also be useful to evaluate thyroglossal duct cysts.

RADIONUCLIDE STUDIES

The availability of highly sensitive tests of thyroid function has
decreased the necessity for radioiodine uptake studies except in
specific clinical situations. The ability of the thyroid to take up
and organify iodine can be evaluated by measuring the uptake of
radioactive isotope 123I (half-­life: 13 hours). Technetium (99mTc) is
also a useful radioisotope for children because it is trapped but not
organified by the thyroid and has a half-­life of only 6 hours. Thyroid
scintigraphy can demonstrate the anatomic distribution of tracer
uptake by thyroid tissue and may be indicated to assess for possible thyroid dysgenesis or ectopic thyroid tissue or to evaluate possible autonomous (hot) thyroid nodules. 131I may be used to treat
hyperthyroidism or thyroid cancer, but its use generally should be
avoided for thyroid uptake and scintigraphy because of its cytotoxic
effect.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3402 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 602

Chapter 603

Disorders of Thyroxine-­
Binding Globulin

Hypothyroidism

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Approximately 70% of circulating thyroxine (T4) and 50% of triiodothyronine (T3) are bound to thyroxine-­binding globulin (TBG), and most of the
remainder is bound to albumin and prealbumin (also called transthyretin).
Only the unbound (free) fractions of these hormones, comprising 0.03% of
serum T4 and 0.3% of T3, can exert biologic activity. Because regulation of
the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid axis is mediated by the concentrations
of free thyroid hormones, abnormalities of thyroid hormone binding tend
to alter concentrations of total, but not free, thyroid hormones. Therefore
abnormalities in levels of TBG are not associated with clinical disease and do
not require treatment. They are usually discovered as an incidental finding
of abnormally low or high levels of T4 and may be a source of confusion in
the diagnosis of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
Congenital TBG deficiency is an X-­linked recessive trait that occurs
in 1 in 1,700 male newborns. It is most often discovered through screening programs for neonatal hypothyroidism that measure levels of T4 as the
primary screening test. Affected males have low levels of total T4 (usually
<4 μg/dL) and elevated T3 resin uptake, but levels of free T4 and thyrotropin (TSH) are normal. The diagnosis is confirmed by the measurement
of absent or low serum levels of TBG, although rare cases may have normal concentrations of TBG with reduced affinity for T4. No treatment is
required, but testing may be indicated in potentially affected family members to avoid the incorrect diagnosis of hypothyroidism in the future. More
than 40 different pathogenic variants have been reported in the TBG gene.
Acquired causes of TBG deficiency are listed in Table 602.1.
TBG excess is a benign X-­linked dominant variant that occurs in
approximately 1 in 25,000 individuals. It has been recognized primarily in
adults, but newborn screening programs may uncover the condition in the
neonate. The level of T4 is elevated, T3 is variably elevated, TSH and free
T4 are normal, and T3 resin uptake is decreased. Elevated serum levels of
TBG confirm the diagnosis. Affected neonates have been found to have
levels of T4 as high as 95 μg/dL, which decrease to 20-­30 μg/dL after 2-­3
weeks. Affected patients are euthyroid, but family studies may be indicated
to alert other affected family members. Acquired causes of TBG excess are
listed in Table 602.1.
Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia is an autosomal dominant variant caused by an abnormal albumin with a markedly increased
affinity for T4. This leads to increased serum concentrations of T4 (and in
some cases T3) that can be mistaken for thyrotoxicosis. However, levels of
free T4, free T3, and TSH are normal, and affected patients are euthyroid.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 602.1  Causes of Acquired Thyroxine-­Binding
Globulin (TBG) Deficiency and Excess
DECREASED TBG

INCREASED TBG

Androgens
Anabolic steroids
Glucocorticoids
Hepatocellular disease
Severe illness
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-­losing enteropathy
Nicotinic acid
l-­Asparaginase

Estrogens
Selective estrogen receptor
modulators
Pregnancy
Hepatitis
Porphyria
Heroin, methadone
Mitotane
5-­Fluorouracil
Perphenazine

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Hypothyroidism is a state of insufficient thyroid hormone action at the
tissue level. Hypothyroidism most often results from deficient production of thyroid hormone caused either by a defect in the thyroid gland
itself (primary hypothyroidism) or by reduced thyrotropin (TSH)
stimulation (central or secondary hypothyroidism; Table 603.1). Hypothyroidism may be present from birth (congenital) or may be acquired,
although some acquired cases are due to congenital defects in which
the onset of hypothyroidism is delayed.

CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM

Most cases of congenital hypothyroidism are caused by abnormal formation of the thyroid gland (thyroid dysgenesis), and ∼30% of cases
are due to inborn errors of thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis) or other causes. Most infants with congenital hypothyroidism are detected by newborn screening programs in the first week after
birth, before significant clinical signs or symptoms develop. In regions
without newborn screening, severely affected infants usually manifest
features within the first week of life, but in infants with milder hypothyroidism, the clinical manifestations may not be evident for weeks
or months.

Epidemiology

The incidence of congenital hypothyroidism was initially reported to
be 1 in 4,000 infants based on the earliest established neonatal screening programs. The incidence of diagnosis has increased to about 1 in
2,000, primarily because more stringent screening algorithms have
resulted in the detection of milder cases of hypothyroidism, mostly in
patients with a eutopic thyroid gland.

Etiology

See Table 603.1.

Primary Hypothyroidism

Thyroid Dysgenesis. Thyroid dysgenesis is the most common cause

of permanent congenital hypothyroidism, accounting for 80–85% of
cases. In approximately one third of cases of dysgenesis, no thyroid tissue is present (agenesis). In the other two thirds of infants, rudiments
of thyroid tissue are present, either in the normal position (hypoplasia)
or in an ectopic location along the embryologic path of descent of the
thyroid from the base of the tongue (lingual thyroid) to the normal position. Thyroid dysgenesis occurs twice as common in females as in males.
The cause of thyroid dysgenesis is largely unknown. The condition is
usually sporadic, but familial cases have been reported rarely. Thyroid
developmental anomalies, such as thyroglossal duct cysts and thyroid
hemiagenesis, are present in 8–10% of first-­degree relatives of infants
with thyroid dysgenesis. However, most thyroid dysgenesis is unlikely
to be genetic given the high degree of discordance among monozygotic
twins.
A small minority (2–5%) of thyroid dysgenesis is caused by genetic
defects in one of several transcription factors essential for thyroid morphogenesis and differentiation, including NKX2.1 (formerly TTF1),
FOXE1 (formerly TTF2), and PAX8. NKX2.1 is expressed in the thyroid, lung, and central nervous system, and recessive pathogenic variants in NKX2-­1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, respiratory distress, and
neurologic problems (chorea and ataxia) (brain-­lung-­thyroid syndrome). Recessive pathogenic variants in FOXE1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, spiky or curly hair, cleft palate, and sometimes choanal atresia
and bifid epiglottis (Bamforth-­Lazarus syndrome). PAX8 is expressed
in the thyroid and kidney, and dominant PAX8 variants are associated
with thyroid dysgenesis and kidney and ureteral malformations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3402 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 602

Chapter 603

Disorders of Thyroxine-­
Binding Globulin

Hypothyroidism

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Approximately 70% of circulating thyroxine (T4) and 50% of triiodothyronine (T3) are bound to thyroxine-­binding globulin (TBG), and most of the
remainder is bound to albumin and prealbumin (also called transthyretin).
Only the unbound (free) fractions of these hormones, comprising 0.03% of
serum T4 and 0.3% of T3, can exert biologic activity. Because regulation of
the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid axis is mediated by the concentrations
of free thyroid hormones, abnormalities of thyroid hormone binding tend
to alter concentrations of total, but not free, thyroid hormones. Therefore
abnormalities in levels of TBG are not associated with clinical disease and do
not require treatment. They are usually discovered as an incidental finding
of abnormally low or high levels of T4 and may be a source of confusion in
the diagnosis of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
Congenital TBG deficiency is an X-­linked recessive trait that occurs
in 1 in 1,700 male newborns. It is most often discovered through screening programs for neonatal hypothyroidism that measure levels of T4 as the
primary screening test. Affected males have low levels of total T4 (usually
<4 μg/dL) and elevated T3 resin uptake, but levels of free T4 and thyrotropin (TSH) are normal. The diagnosis is confirmed by the measurement
of absent or low serum levels of TBG, although rare cases may have normal concentrations of TBG with reduced affinity for T4. No treatment is
required, but testing may be indicated in potentially affected family members to avoid the incorrect diagnosis of hypothyroidism in the future. More
than 40 different pathogenic variants have been reported in the TBG gene.
Acquired causes of TBG deficiency are listed in Table 602.1.
TBG excess is a benign X-­linked dominant variant that occurs in
approximately 1 in 25,000 individuals. It has been recognized primarily in
adults, but newborn screening programs may uncover the condition in the
neonate. The level of T4 is elevated, T3 is variably elevated, TSH and free
T4 are normal, and T3 resin uptake is decreased. Elevated serum levels of
TBG confirm the diagnosis. Affected neonates have been found to have
levels of T4 as high as 95 μg/dL, which decrease to 20-­30 μg/dL after 2-­3
weeks. Affected patients are euthyroid, but family studies may be indicated
to alert other affected family members. Acquired causes of TBG excess are
listed in Table 602.1.
Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia is an autosomal dominant variant caused by an abnormal albumin with a markedly increased
affinity for T4. This leads to increased serum concentrations of T4 (and in
some cases T3) that can be mistaken for thyrotoxicosis. However, levels of
free T4, free T3, and TSH are normal, and affected patients are euthyroid.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 602.1  Causes of Acquired Thyroxine-­Binding
Globulin (TBG) Deficiency and Excess
DECREASED TBG

INCREASED TBG

Androgens
Anabolic steroids
Glucocorticoids
Hepatocellular disease
Severe illness
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-­losing enteropathy
Nicotinic acid
l-­Asparaginase

Estrogens
Selective estrogen receptor
modulators
Pregnancy
Hepatitis
Porphyria
Heroin, methadone
Mitotane
5-­Fluorouracil
Perphenazine

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Hypothyroidism is a state of insufficient thyroid hormone action at the
tissue level. Hypothyroidism most often results from deficient production of thyroid hormone caused either by a defect in the thyroid gland
itself (primary hypothyroidism) or by reduced thyrotropin (TSH)
stimulation (central or secondary hypothyroidism; Table 603.1). Hypothyroidism may be present from birth (congenital) or may be acquired,
although some acquired cases are due to congenital defects in which
the onset of hypothyroidism is delayed.

CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM

Most cases of congenital hypothyroidism are caused by abnormal formation of the thyroid gland (thyroid dysgenesis), and ∼30% of cases
are due to inborn errors of thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis) or other causes. Most infants with congenital hypothyroidism are detected by newborn screening programs in the first week after
birth, before significant clinical signs or symptoms develop. In regions
without newborn screening, severely affected infants usually manifest
features within the first week of life, but in infants with milder hypothyroidism, the clinical manifestations may not be evident for weeks
or months.

Epidemiology

The incidence of congenital hypothyroidism was initially reported to
be 1 in 4,000 infants based on the earliest established neonatal screening programs. The incidence of diagnosis has increased to about 1 in
2,000, primarily because more stringent screening algorithms have
resulted in the detection of milder cases of hypothyroidism, mostly in
patients with a eutopic thyroid gland.

Etiology

See Table 603.1.

Primary Hypothyroidism

Thyroid Dysgenesis. Thyroid dysgenesis is the most common cause

of permanent congenital hypothyroidism, accounting for 80–85% of
cases. In approximately one third of cases of dysgenesis, no thyroid tissue is present (agenesis). In the other two thirds of infants, rudiments
of thyroid tissue are present, either in the normal position (hypoplasia)
or in an ectopic location along the embryologic path of descent of the
thyroid from the base of the tongue (lingual thyroid) to the normal position. Thyroid dysgenesis occurs twice as common in females as in males.
The cause of thyroid dysgenesis is largely unknown. The condition is
usually sporadic, but familial cases have been reported rarely. Thyroid
developmental anomalies, such as thyroglossal duct cysts and thyroid
hemiagenesis, are present in 8–10% of first-­degree relatives of infants
with thyroid dysgenesis. However, most thyroid dysgenesis is unlikely
to be genetic given the high degree of discordance among monozygotic
twins.
A small minority (2–5%) of thyroid dysgenesis is caused by genetic
defects in one of several transcription factors essential for thyroid morphogenesis and differentiation, including NKX2.1 (formerly TTF1),
FOXE1 (formerly TTF2), and PAX8. NKX2.1 is expressed in the thyroid, lung, and central nervous system, and recessive pathogenic variants in NKX2-­1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, respiratory distress, and
neurologic problems (chorea and ataxia) (brain-­lung-­thyroid syndrome). Recessive pathogenic variants in FOXE1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, spiky or curly hair, cleft palate, and sometimes choanal atresia
and bifid epiglottis (Bamforth-­Lazarus syndrome). PAX8 is expressed
in the thyroid and kidney, and dominant PAX8 variants are associated
with thyroid dysgenesis and kidney and ureteral malformations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3403
Table 603.1  Etiologic Classification of Congenital
Hypothyroidism
PRIMARY HYPOTHYROIDISM
Defect of thyroid development (dysgenesis)
• Agenesis
• Hypoplasia
• Ectopia
Defects in thyrotropin (TSH) responsiveness
• TSH receptor–blocking antibodies
• Pathogenic variants in TSH receptor (TSHR)
• Defects in Gsα (GNAS)—pseudohypoparathyroidism
Defect in thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis)
• Defective iodide uptake into follicular cell: sodium–iodide
symporter (NIS)
• Defective iodide transport from follicular cell into colloid:
Pendred syndrome (SLC26A4)
• Iodide organification defects: thyroperoxidase (TPO), dual
oxidase 2 (DUOX2), dual oxidase maturation factor 2 (DUOXA2)
• Thyroglobulin synthesis defect: thyroglobulin (TG)
• Deiodination defect: iodotyrosine deiodinase (IYD)
• Thyroid hormone transport defect: monocarboxylate
transporter 8 (SLC16A2)—X-­linked
Iodine deficiency (endemic goiter)
Iodine excess
Maternal medications
• Iodides, amiodarone
• Methimazole, propylthiouracil
• Radioactive iodine (131I)
CENTRAL (SECONDARY) HYPOTHYROIDISM
Isolated TSH deficiency
• Pathogenic variant in TSH β-­subunit (TSHβ)—depending on
variant measured TSH level may be low, normal, or elevated
• Pathogenic variant in TRH receptor (TRHR)
• Pathogenic variant in IGSF1—X-­linked central hypothyroidism
and macroorchidism (prolactin deficiency and variable GH
deficiency)
• Pathogenic variant in other genes: TBL1X, IRS4
Multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies
• Pathogenic variant in POU1F1—deficiency of TSH, GH, and
prolactin
• Pathogenic variant in PROP1—deficiency of TSH, GH, LH, FSH,
prolactin, and variably ACTH
• Pathogenic variant in HESX1—variable deficiencies of TSH, GH,
LH, FSH, prolactin, and ACTH
• Pathogenic variants in other genes: OTX2, LHX3, LHX4, SOX3,
FGF8, FGFR1, GLI2, LEPR
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; TRH, thyrotropin-­releasing hormone.

Inactivating variants in the TSH receptor (TSHR) have been
described in patients with congenital hypothyroidism, including thyroid dysgenesis or hypoplasia. TSHR variants may be homozygous or
heterozygous with or without a concurrent change in another congenital hypothyroidism gene (such as DUOX2 or TG). Infants with a severe
TSHR defect have elevated TSH levels and are detected by newborn
screening, whereas patients with a mild defect may remain euthyroid
without treatment.
Congenital hypothyroidism can occur in infants with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a. These patients have somatic inactivating variants of the G-­protein stimulatory α-­subunit Gsα (GNAS), leading to
impaired signaling of the TSH receptor (see Chapter 612).

Defects in Thyroid Hormone Synthesis (Dyshormonogenesis). A variety of defects in thyroid hormone biosynthesis account

for 15% of cases of permanent congenital hypothyroidism detected by
neonatal screening programs (1 in 30,000-­50,000 live births). Because
increased TSH stimulation has a trophic effect on thyroid follicular
cells, a goiter is often present. When the synthetic defect is incomplete,
the onset of hypothyroidism may be delayed for months or years.
Defective Iodide Transport. Rare defects in iodide uptake are
caused by pathogenic variants in the sodium-­iodide symporter (NIS)

responsible for concentrating iodide in the thyroid gland. In contrast
to other defects of thyroid hormone synthesis, uptake of radioiodine
and pertechnetate is low, as in cases of thyroid dysgenesis. However,
impaired iodide transport may be suggested by the absence of normal
salivary gland iodine uptake on scintigraphy. A reduced saliva:serum
ratio of 123I supports the diagnosis, which can be confirmed by genetic
testing of NIS. This condition may respond to large doses of potassium iodide, but treatment with levothyroxine is more reliable and
preferable.
Pendred syndrome is a clinical syndrome consisting of sensorineural deafness and goiter. This syndrome is caused by a pathogenic variant
in the chloride-­iodide transport protein pendrin (SLC26A4) expressed
in the thyroid gland and the cochlea. Pendrin allows the transport of
iodide across the apical membrane of the thyroid follicular cell into the
colloid, where it undergoes organification and incorporation into the
tyrosine residues on thyroglobulin. Patients with a variant in SLC26A4
have impaired iodide organification and a positive perchlorate discharge test. Pathogenic variants in pendrin are a relatively common
genetic cause of sensorineural deafness, but some patients diagnosed
based on their hearing disorder have no goiter or thyroid dysfunction.
This finding has fueled speculation that pendrin is not the sole apical
iodine transporter in the thyroid, but no other specific transporter has
been confirmed to date.
Defects of Iodine Organification. Defects of iodine organification are the most common type of thyroid hormone synthetic defect.
After the thyroid takes up iodide, it is rapidly oxidized and incorporated
into tyrosine residues on thyroglobulin. These reactions are catalyzed
by the key enzyme thyroperoxidase (TPO) and require H2O2 generated
locally by the dual oxidase 2 system (DUOX2 and DUOXA2). Defects
can occur in any of these components of organification, and there is
considerable clinical and biochemical heterogeneity. In the Dutch neonatal screening program, a complete organification defect was present
in 1 in 60,000 live births, but the prevalence in other areas is unknown.
A characteristic finding of organification defects is a marked discharge
of thyroid radioactivity when perchlorate or thiocyanate is administered 2 hours after a test dose of radioiodine (perchlorate discharge of
40–90% of radioiodine compared with <10% in normal individuals).
Numerous pathogenic variants in TPO have been reported in children
with congenital hypothyroidism.
Pathogenic variants in DUOX2 can cause permanent or transient
congenital hypothyroidism. Previously, it was thought that monoallelic
DUOX2 variants cause transient disease and biallelic variants cause
permanent disease, but the reverse has been observed in some cases,
and this relationship remains variable and unclear. DUOX2 variants
have been reported in 15–40% of patients with apparent dyshormonogenesis, with pathogenic variant rates as high as 50–60% in studies from
China and South Korea. Dual oxidase maturation factor 2 (DUOXA2)
is required to express DUOX2 enzymatic activity, and recessive variants in DUOXA2 are a rare cause of congenital hypothyroidism.
Defects of Thyroglobulin Synthesis. Defects of thyroglobulin
synthesis are characterized by congenital hypothyroidism with goiter
and absent or low levels of circulating thyroglobulin. More than 40 different pathogenic variants in the thyroglobulin gene (TG) have been
described.
Defects in Deiodination. Monoiodotyrosine and diiodotyrosine
normally are released from thyroglobulin along with thyroxine (T4)
and triiodothyronine (T3). The IYD gene (formerly DEHAL1) encodes
the thyroidal enzyme iodotyrosine deiodinase, which deiodinates these
intermediates so that the liberated iodide is recycled into thyroid hormone synthesis. In patients with rare variants in IYD, urinary excretion
of monoiodotyrosine and diiodotyrosine rapidly causes severe iodine
deficiency, leading to hypothyroidism and goiter that may present soon
after birth or may be delayed.
Defects in Thyroid Hormone Transport. Passage of thyroid
hormone into cells is facilitated by specific plasma membrane transporters. Pathogenic variants in the transporter MCT8 (SLC16A2),
located on the X chromosome, impair the movement of T4 and T3
into cells. This leads to severe neurologic manifestations, including
profound developmental delay, reduced muscle mass, dysarthria,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3404 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
athetoid movements, and hypotonia that evolves to spastic paraplegia
(Allan-­Herndon-­Dudley syndrome). This syndrome is also characterized by low serum T4 levels, normal or mildly elevated serum TSH
levels, and elevated serum T3 levels. Treatment with thyroid hormone
analogs that do not require MCT8 for transmembrane transport can
improve hypermetabolism in this disorder but has little effect on the
neurologic phenotype.
Thyrotropin Receptor–Blocking Antibodies. Maternal TSHR–
blocking antibodies (TRBAbs) cause about 2% of cases of congenital hypothyroidism detected by neonatal screening programs (1 in
50,000-­100,000 infants). Transplacentally acquired maternal TRBAbs
inhibit the binding of TSH to its receptor in the neonate. This condition should be suspected whenever there is a history of maternal
autoimmune thyroid disease, including autoimmune thyroiditis or
Graves disease, maternal hypothyroidism, or transient congenital
hypothyroidism in previous siblings. However, TRBAbs can occur in
the absence of any maternal history. When suspected, levels of TRBAb
(measured as thyrotropin-­binding inhibitory immunoglobulin [TBII])
should be measured in the mother during pregnancy or after birth in
the neonate. Affected infants and their mothers also can have TSHR-­
stimulating antibodies and TPO antibodies. Ultrasonography typically
demonstrates a normally positioned but small thyroid gland; however,
thyroid tissue often will not be detected by scintigraphy because the
blockade of TSHR function suppresses thyroidal iodine uptake. Serum
thyroglobulin levels are low for the same reason. Treatment with levothyroxine is required initially, but remission of hypothyroidism occurs
in approximately 3-­6 months once the TRBAbs are cleared from the
infant’s circulation. Correct diagnosis of this cause of congenital hypothyroidism prevents unnecessarily protracted treatment and alerts the
clinician to possible recurrences in future pregnancies. The prognosis
is generally favorable, but developmental delay may occur in patients
whose mothers had unsuspected (and untreated) hypothyroidism
caused by TRBAbs during pregnancy.
Radioiodine Administration. Neonatal hypothyroidism can
occur when radioiodine is administered to a mother during (a usually
unrecognized) pregnancy as treatment for Graves disease or thyroid
cancer. The fetal thyroid is capable of trapping iodide by 70-­75 days of
gestation. Therefore a pregnancy test must be performed in any individual capable of pregnancy before 131I is given, regardless of menstrual
history or reported history of contraception. Administration of radioactive iodine to lactating individuals is also contraindicated because it
is excreted in breast milk.
Iodine Exposure. Congenital hypothyroidism can result from
fetal exposure to excessive iodine. Perinatal exposure can occur from
iodine-­based antiseptic used to prepare the skin for cesarean section or
to paint the cervix before delivery. In the neonate, especially in those
of low birthweight (LBW), topical iodine-­containing antiseptics used
in nurseries or perioperatively can cause transient hypothyroidism,
which newborn screening tests may detect. In older children, excess
iodine may be present in proprietary preparations used to treat asthma
or in amiodarone, an antiarrhythmic drug with high iodine content.
In most of these instances, a goiter is present (see Chapter 605). Hypothyroidism has also been reported in breastfed infants born to mothers
who consume large amounts of iodine daily (up to 12 mg) in nutritional supplements or large quantities of iodine-­rich seaweed. Iodine-­
induced hypothyroidism is transient once the exposure is discontinued
and therefore is important to distinguish from other forms of congenital hypothyroidism.
Iodine Deficiency (Endemic Goiter). See Chapter 605.3.
Iodine deficiency or endemic goiter is the most common cause of
congenital hypothyroidism worldwide. The recommended iodine
intake in adults is 150 μg daily, increasing to 220 μg daily during pregnancy to allow for fetal iodine requirements. Despite efforts at universal salt iodization, in many countries economic, political, and practical
obstacles continue to prevent the realization of this goal. Although
the U.S. population is generally iodine sufficient, approximately 15%
of women of reproductive age are iodine deficient. Borderline iodine
deficiency is more likely to cause problems in preterm infants, who
depend on a maternal source of iodine for normal thyroid hormone

production and often receive insufficient dietary iodine from standard
preterm infant formulas or parenteral nutrition that is low in iodine.

Central (Secondary) Hypothyroidism

Thyrotropin (TSH) Deficiency. Central hypothyroidism caused by

TSH deficiency can occur in any condition associated with developmental defects of the pituitary or hypothalamus (see Chapter 595).
Central hypothyroidism occurs in 1 in 16,000-­30,000 infants. However,
neonatal screening does not detect many cases, mainly because many
screening programs are designed to detect only primary hypothyroidism by measuring neonatal TSH. The majority (75%) of infants with
central hypothyroidism have additional pituitary hormone deficiencies
and may present with hypoglycemia, persistent jaundice, micropenis
or cryptorchidism (in males), and midline defects such as midline cleft
lip or palate or midface hypoplasia.
Congenital TSH deficiency may be caused by pathogenic variants in
genes encoding transcription factors essential to pituitary development
or thyrotroph cell differentiation. POU1F1 variants cause deficiency of
TSH, growth hormone, and prolactin. Patients with PROP1 variants
also have deficiency of TSH, growth hormone, prolactin, luteinizing
hormone, follicle-­
stimulating hormone, and variable deficiency of
adrenocorticotropic hormone. HESX1 pathogenic variants are associated with TSH, growth hormone, prolactin, and adrenocorticotropic
hormone deficiencies and are found in some patients with optic nerve
hypoplasia (septo-­optic dysplasia syndrome; see Chapter 631). Variants in multiple other genes involved in pituitary development can
cause central hypothyroidism (Table 603.1).
Isolated congenital deficiency of TSH is rare. The most common
genetic cause is a pathogenic variant in IGSF1, which results in an
X-­linked syndrome of congenital central hypothyroidism and macroorchidism. The mechanism remains unclear, but IGSF1 deficiency
may impair TRH receptor signaling in pituitary thyrotrophs. Prolactin deficiency is usually present, and some patients also have growth
hormone deficiency. Central hypothyroidism occurs in about 10% of
female carriers of IGSF1 deficiency. Patients with pathogenic variants
in the gene encoding the TSH β-­subunit (TSHB) have central hypothyroidism with very low TSH levels, although in some cases, TSH levels
are normal or even elevated. In other cases, levels of the TSH α-­subunit
are elevated. Variants in TRHR, which encodes the TRH receptor, are
a rare cause of congenital central hypothyroidism. In this condition,
both TSH and prolactin fail to respond to TRH stimulation.

Thyroid Function in Preterm and Low Birthweight
Infants

Postnatal thyroid function in preterm and LBW infants is qualitatively
similar but quantitatively reduced compared with term infants. The
cord blood T4 concentration is decreased in proportion to gestational
age and birthweight. The postnatal TSH surge is reduced, and very premature or very LBW infants experience a decrease in serum T4 in the
first week of life, in contrast to term infants in whom T4 increases during this time. Serum T4 gradually increases to the range observed in
term infants by about 6 weeks of life. However, serum free T4 concentrations are less affected than total T4, and free T4 levels may be normal
when measured by the gold standard technique of equilibrium dialysis.
Preterm and LBW infants also have a higher incidence of delayed TSH
elevation and apparent transient primary hypothyroidism. Mechanisms underlying these changes in thyroid function in preterm and
LBW infants may include immaturity of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
thyroid axis, loss of the maternal contribution of thyroid hormone normally present in the third trimester, severe illness and complications of
prematurity, and exposure to medications that can affect thyroid function (e.g., dopamine and glucocorticoids).

Clinical Manifestations

Before neonatal screening programs, congenital hypothyroidism was
rarely recognized in the newborn because most affected infants are
asymptomatic at birth, even if there is complete agenesis of the thyroid gland. This is because of transplacental passage of maternal T4,
which provides fetal levels that are approximately one-­third normal at

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3405
birth. Because symptoms are usually not present at birth, the clinician
depends on neonatal screening tests to diagnose congenital hypothyroidism. However, some infants escape newborn screening, and laboratory errors occur, so pediatricians must be alert for symptoms and
signs of hypothyroidism if they develop. Birth weight and length are
normal, but head size may be slightly increased because of myxedema
of the brain. The anterior and posterior fontanels are open widely, and
the presence of this sign at birth may be a clue to early recognition
of congenital hypothyroidism (only 3% of normal newborns have a
posterior fontanel wider than 0.5 cm). Prolonged jaundice (indirect
hyperbilirubinemia) may be present because of delayed maturation
of hepatic glucuronide conjugation. Affected infants cry little, sleep
much, have poor appetites, and are generally sluggish. Feeding difficulties, especially sluggishness, lack of interest, somnolence, and choking spells during nursing, may be present during the first month of
life. Respiratory difficulties, partly caused by macroglossia, include
apneic episodes, noisy respirations, and nasal obstruction. There may
be constipation that does not respond to treatment. The abdomen is
large, and an umbilical hernia is often present. The temperature may be
subnormal (often <35°C/95°F), and the skin may be cold and mottled,
particularly on the extremities. Edema of the genitals and extremities
may be present. The pulse is slow, and heart murmurs, cardiomegaly,
and asymptomatic pericardial effusion are common. Macrocytic anemia is often present. Because symptoms appear gradually and may be
nonspecific, the clinical diagnosis of neonatal hypothyroidism is often
delayed.
Approximately 10% of infants with congenital hypothyroidism have
associated congenital anomalies. Cardiac anomalies are most common,
but anomalies of the nervous system and eye have also been reported.
Infants with congenital hypothyroidism may have associated hearing
loss. Pathogenic variants in specific genes involved in thyroid gland
development result in congenital hypothyroidism with other syndromic features (Table 603.2).
If congenital hypothyroidism goes undetected and untreated, the
clinical manifestations progress. Delay of physical and mental development becomes more severe over time, and by 3-­6 months of age,
the clinical picture is fully developed (Fig. 603.1). When deficiency
of thyroid hormone is only partial, the symptoms may be milder and
their onset delayed. Although breast milk contains significant amounts
of thyroid hormones, particularly T3, this is inadequate to protect the
breastfed infant from the effects of congenital hypothyroidism.
In the patient with untreated congenital hypothyroidism, growth is
stunted, extremities are short, and head size is normal or increased.
The anterior fontanel is large, and the posterior fontanel may remain

open. The eyes appear far apart, and the bridge of the broad nose is
depressed. The palpebral fissures are narrow, and the eyelids are swollen. The mouth is kept open, and the thick, broad tongue protrudes.
Dentition is delayed. The neck is short and thick, and there may be fat
deposits above the clavicles and between the neck and shoulders. The
hands are broad, and the fingers are short. The skin is dry and scaly,
and there is little perspiration. Myxedema occurs mainly in the skin of
the eyelids, the back of the hands, and the external genitalia. The skin
shows general pallor with a sallow complexion. Carotenemia can cause
a yellow discoloration of the skin, but the sclerae remain white. The
scalp is thickened, and the hair is coarse, brittle, and scanty. The hairline reaches far down on the forehead, which usually appears wrinkled,
especially when the infant cries.
Development is usually delayed. Hypothyroid infants appear lethargic and are late in acquiring gross and fine motor skills. The voice is
hoarse, and they do not learn to talk. The degree of physical and intellectual delay increases with age. Sexual maturation may be delayed or
even absent. The muscles are usually hypotonic, but in rare instances,
generalized muscular pseudohypertrophy occurs (Kocher-­Debré-­
Sémélaigne syndrome). Affected older children can have an athletic
appearance because of pseudohypertrophy, particularly in the calf
muscles. Its pathogenesis is unknown; nonspecific histochemical and
ultrastructural changes seen on muscle biopsy return to normal with
treatment.
Some infants with mild congenital hypothyroidism have normal
thyroid function at birth and are not identified by newborn screening programs. In particular, some children with ectopic thyroid tissue
produce adequate amounts of thyroid hormone for some time (even
years) until the abnormal thyroid tissue fails. Affected children come
to clinical attention because of a growing mass at the base of the tongue
or in the midline of the neck, often at the level of the hyoid. Occasionally, thyroid ectopy is associated with thyroglossal duct cysts. Surgical removal of ectopic thyroid tissue from a euthyroid patient usually
results in hypothyroidism because most such patients have no other
thyroid tissue.

Laboratory Findings

In countries where newborn screening is performed, this is the most
important method for identifying infants with congenital hypothyroidism. Blood obtained by heelprick between 1 and 5 days of life is placed
on a filter paper card and sent to a central screening laboratory. Most

Table 603.2  Genes and Thyroid Development
GENE

THYROID
PHENOTYPE

FOXE1

Athyreosis

Cleft palate, choanal atresia, kinky
hair, bifid epiglottis

NKX2-­1

Athyreosis to
normal gland

Respiratory distress syndrome,
developmental delays/hypotonia,
ataxia/choreoathetosis

PAX8

Athyreosis to
normal gland

Cysts within thyroid remnants, kidney
and urinary tract malformations

GLIS3

Athyreosis to
normal gland

Congenital glaucoma; deafness; liver/
kidney and pancreatic abnormalities

TSHR

Athyreosis to
normal gland

None

Athyreosis,
ectopy

Cardiac defects

NKX2-­5

OTHER FEATURES

From Kim G, Nandi-­Munshi D, Diblasi CC. Disorders of the thyroid gland. In: Gleason
CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2018, Table 98.3, p. 1396.

A

B

Fig. 603.1 Congenital hypothyroidism in an infant 6 mo of age. The

infant ate poorly in the neonatal period and was constipated. She had
persistent nasal discharge and a large tongue, was very lethargic, and
had no social smile and no head control. A, Notice the puffy face, dull
expression, and hirsute forehead. Tests revealed a negligible uptake
of radioiodine. Osseous development was that of a newborn. B, Four
months after treatment, note decreased face puffiness, decreased hirsutism of the forehead, and the alert appearance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3406 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
screening programs measure the level of TSH, which detects infants
with primary hypothyroidism, including some with milder disease in
whom TSH is elevated but T4 is normal. However, this approach may
not detect rarer disorders such as central hypothyroidism or primary
congenital hypothyroidism with delayed TSH elevation. Some screening programs begin by measuring levels of T4, followed by reflex measurement of TSH when the T4 is low. This approach identifies infants
with primary hypothyroidism, some with central hypothyroidism or
delayed TSH elevation, and infants with thyroxine-­binding globulin
deficiency (a benign variant). All newborn screening results should
be interpreted based on age-­specific reference ranges, particularly in
the first week of life (Table 603.3). Regardless of the approach used
for screening, some infants escape detection because of technical or
human errors, and clinicians must remain vigilant for clinical manifestations of hypothyroidism.
Several groups of patients deserve vigilance for congenital hypothyroidism. Infants with trisomy 21 or cardiac defects have an increased
risk of congenital hypothyroidism. Monozygotic twins are usually discordant for congenital hypothyroidism. However, if twins are
monochorionic, fetal hypothyroidism in the affected twin may be compensated by the normal twin through their shared fetal circulation. In
such cases, the affected twin may go undetected on newborn screening
in the first days of life and present later with untreated hypothyroidism.
Preterm and LBW neonates have an increased incidence of congenital
hypothyroidism and are more likely to have delayed TSH elevation that
may be missed on initial screening. Therefore in all of these groups of
infants, many newborn screening programs perform a routine second
test 2-­4 weeks after birth.
Patients with congenital hypothyroidism have low serum levels of
T4 and free T4. Serum levels of T3 are often normal and are not helpful
for diagnosis. If primary hypothyroidism is present, levels of TSH are
elevated, often to >100 mU/L in severe cases. Serum levels of thyroglobulin are usually low in infants with thyroid agenesis, defects of the
TSH receptor (including TSHR pathogenic variants and TRBAb), or
defects in the synthesis or secretion of thyroglobulin itself. In contrast,
thyroglobulin levels are usually elevated in patients with thyroid ectopy
and other defects of thyroid hormone synthesis, but there is a wide
overlap of ranges.
Delay of osseous development can be shown radiographically at
birth in approximately 60% of congenitally hypothyroid infants and
indicates some deficiency of thyroid hormone during intrauterine life.
The distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyses, normally present at
birth, are often absent (Fig. 603.2A). In untreated patients, the discrepancy between chronologic age and osseous development increases over
time. The epiphyses often have multiple foci of ossification (epiphyseal
dysgenesis; see Fig. 603.2B). Deformity (beaking) of the 12th thoracic
or 1st or 2nd lumbar vertebra is common. X-­rays of the skull show
large fontanels and wide sutures, and intersutural (wormian) bones
are common. The sella turcica may be enlarged and round, and in rare
instances, there may be bony erosion and thinning. Formation and
eruption of teeth can be delayed. Cardiac enlargement or pericardial
effusion may be present.
Scintigraphy can help define the underlying cause in infants with
congenital hypothyroidism, but treatment should not be delayed to
obtain such imaging. 123I–sodium iodide is superior to 99mTc–sodium
pertechnetate for this purpose. Scintigraphy will demonstrate an ectopic thyroid gland, but the absence of uptake in disorders of the TSH
receptor (including TRBAb) or NIS may be mistaken for thyroid agenesis. Ultrasound of the thyroid can document the presence or absence
of an anatomically normal gland, but it can miss some ectopic glands
that are detectable by scintigraphy. Demonstration of ectopic thyroid
tissue or the absence of thyroid tissue in its normal location is diagnostic of thyroid dysgenesis and establishes the need for lifelong treatment.
A normally located thyroid gland with normal or increased uptake
indicates a defect in thyroid hormone synthesis. Although extensive
evaluation can be performed to elucidate the precise nature of the synthetic defect, this rarely affects clinical management and is unnecessary
in most cases. Similarly, genetic testing may reveal potentially relevant
variants in 60% or more of patients with defects of thyroid hormone

synthesis. However, such testing may be costly, is not always conclusive, and usually does not alter management.

Treatment

Levothyroxine (l-­T4) given orally is the treatment for congenital hypothyroidism. Although T3 is the biologically active form of thyroid hormone, 80% of circulating T3 is derived from deiodination of circulating
T4, and therefore treatment with l-­T4 alone restores normal serum levels of T4 and T3. The recommended initial dose of l-­T4 is 10-­15 μg/kg/
day (37.5-­50 μg/day for most term infants), and within this range the
starting dose can be adjusted based on the severity of hypothyroidism.
Newborns with more severe hypothyroidism, as judged by a serum T4
<5 μg/dL and/or imaging studies confirming aplasia, should be started
at the higher end of the dosage range. Rapid normalization of thyroid
function (ideally within 2 weeks) is essential in achieving optimal
neurodevelopmental outcomes. Lower doses of l-­T4 (8-­10 mcg/kg/
day) may be considered for infants with mild hypothyroidism (mildly
elevated TSH and normal free T4).
l-­T4 should be prescribed in tablet form. A liquid l-­T4 preparation
has been approved, but optimal dosing may differ slightly from the tablet form. Tablets should be crushed and mixed with a small volume
(1-­2 mL) of liquid. l-­T4 tablets should not be mixed with soy protein
formulas, concentrated iron, or calcium because these can inhibit l-­T4
absorption. Although it is often recommended to administer l-­T4 on
an empty stomach and avoid food for 30-­60 minutes, this is not practical in an infant. As long as the method of administration is consistent,
dosing can be adjusted based on serum thyroid test results to achieve
the desired treatment goals. One trial has suggested that brand-­name
l-­T4 may be superior to generic formulations in children with severe
congenital hypothyroidism.
The goals of treatment are to maintain serum TSH in the reference
range for age and the serum free T4 or total T4 in the upper half of the
reference range for age (see Table 603.3). Levels of serum T4 or free
T4 and TSH should be monitored at recommended intervals (every
1-­2 months in the first 6 months of life, and then every 2-­4 months
between 6 months and 3 years of age). Care should be taken to avoid
undertreatment, which has been related to adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes, including decreased intelligence quotient (IQ).
About 35% of infants with congenital hypothyroidism and a normally located thyroid gland have transient disease and do not require
lifelong therapy. In patients who might have transient disease, a trial
of l-­T4 may be undertaken after 3 years of age for 4 weeks to assess
whether the TSH rises significantly, indicating the presence of permanent hypothyroidism. Such a trial is unnecessary in infants with proven
thyroid dysgenesis or in those who have previously manifested elevated
levels of TSH after 6-­12 months of therapy because of poor medication
adherence or an inadequate dose of T4.

Prognosis

Thyroid hormone is critical for normal neurodevelopment, particularly in the early postnatal months. Prompt diagnosis and initiation of
adequate treatment of congenital hypothyroidism in the first 2 weeks of
life are essential to prevent irreversible brain damage and normal growth
and development. In most infants detected by newborn screening, verbal development, psychomotor development, and global IQ scores are
similar to unaffected siblings. However, the most severely affected newborns—those with the lowest T4 levels and most delayed skeletal maturation—may have reduced IQ and other neuropsychologic sequelae such
as incoordination, hypotonia or hypertonia, or problems with attention
or speech despite early diagnosis and adequate treatment. Psychometric
testing can show problems with vocabulary and reading comprehension,
arithmetic, and memory. Approximately 10% of children with congenital
hypothyroidism have a neurosensory hearing deficit. Outcome studies in
adults diagnosed and treated as neonates reveal delayed social development, lower self-­esteem, and a lower health-­related quality of life. The
latter appears to be related to those individuals with lower neurocognitive outcomes and associated congenital malformations.
Delay in diagnosis or treatment, failure to rapidly correct the initial
hypothyroidism, inadequate treatment, or poor adherence to treatment

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3407
Table 603.3  Thyroid Function Tests
AGE

U.S. REFERENCE VALUE

CONVERSION FACTOR

SI REFERENCE VALUE

THYROID THYROGLOBULIN, SERUM
Cord blood

14.7-­101.1 ng/mL

×1

14.7-­101.1 μg/L

Birth to 35 mo

10.6-­92.0 ng/mL

×1

10.6-­92.0 μg/L

3-­11 yr

5.6-­41.9 ng/mL

×1

5.6-­41.9 μg/L

12-­17 yr

2.7-­21.9 ng/mL

×1

2.7-­21.9 μg/L

THYROID-­STIMULATING HORMONE, SERUM
Premature Infants (28-­36 wk)
First wk of life
0.7-­27.0 mIU/L

×1

0.7-­27.0 mIU/L

Term Infant
Birth to 4 days

1.0-­17.6 mIU/L

×1

1.0-­17.6 mIU/L

2-­20 wk

0.6-­5.6 mIU/L

×1

0.6-­5.6 mIU/L

5 mo-­20 yr

0.5-­5.5 mIU/L

×1

0.5-­5.5 mIU/L

THYROXINE-­BINDING GLOBULIN, SERUM
Cord blood

1.4-­9.4 mg/dL

×10

14-­94 mg/L

1-­4 wk

1.0-­9.0 mg/dL

×10

10-­90 mg/L

1-­12 mo

2.0-­7.6 mg/dL

×10

20-­76 mg/L

1-­5 yr

2.9-­5.4 mg/dL

×10

29-­54 mg/L

5-­10 yr

2.5-­5.0 mg/dL

×10

25-­50 mg/L

10-­15 yr

2.1-­4.6 mg/dL

×10

21-­46 mg/L

Adult

1.5-­3.4 mg/dL

×10

15-­34 mg/L

THYROXINE, TOTAL, SERUM
Full-­Term Infants
1-­3 days

8.2-­19.9 μg/dL

×12.9

106-­256 nmol/L

1 wk

6.0-­15.9 μg/dL

×12.9

77-­205 nmol/L

1-­12 mo

6.1-­14.9 μg/dL

×12.9

79-­192 nmol/L

Prepubertal Children
1-­3 yr

6.8-­13.5 μg/dL

×12.9

88-­174 nmol/L

3-­10 yr

5.5-­12.8 μg/dL

×12.9

71-­165 nmol/L

Pubertal Children and Adults
>10 yr

4.2-­13.0 μg/dL

×12.9

54-­167 nmol/L

THYROXINE, FREE, SERUM
Full term (3 days)

2.0-­4.9 ng/dL

×12.9

26-­63.1 pmol/L

Infants

0.9-­2.6 ng/dL

×12.9

12-­33 pmol/L

Prepubertal children

0.8-­2.2 ng/dL

×12.9

10-­28 pmol/L

Pubertal children and adults

0.8-­2.3 ng/dL

×12.9

10-­30 pmol/L

THYROXINE, TOTAL, WHOLE BLOOD
Newborn screen (filter paper)

6.2-­22 μg/dL

×12.9

80-­283 nmol/L

TRIIODOTHYRONINE, FREE, SERUM
Cord blood

20-­240 pg/dL

×0.01536

0.3-­0.7 pmol/L

1-­3 days

180-­760 pg/dL

×0.01536

2.8-­11.7 pmol/L

1-­5 yr

185-­770 pg/dL

×0.01536

2.8-­11.8 pmol/L

5-­10 yr

215-­700 pg/dL

×0.01536

3.3-­10.7 pmol/L

10-­15 yr

230-­650 pg/dL

×0.01536

3.5-­10.0 pmol/L

>15 yr

210-­440 pg/dL

×0.01536

3.2-­6.8 pmol/L

TRIIODOTHYRONINE RESIN UPTAKE TEST (RT3U), SERUM
Newborn
26–36%

×0.01

0.26-­0.36 fractional uptake

Thereafter

×0.01

0.26-­0.35 fractional uptake

26–35%

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3408 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 603.3  Thyroid Function Tests—cont’d
AGE

U.S. REFERENCE VALUE

CONVERSION FACTOR

SI REFERENCE VALUE

TRIIODOTHYRONINE, TOTAL, SERUM
Cord blood

30-­70 ng/dL

×0.0154

0.46-­1.08 nmol/L

1-­3 days

75-­260 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.16-­4.00 nmol/L

1-­5 yr

100-­260 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.54-­4.00 nmol/L

5-­10 yr

90-­240 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.39-­3.70 nmol/L

10-­15 yr

80-­210 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.23-­3.23 nmol/L

>15 yr

115-­190 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.77-­2.93 nmol/L

Adapted from Nicholson JF, Pesce MA. Reference ranges for laboratory tests and procedures. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 17th ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:2412–2413; TSH from Lem AJ, de Rijke YB, van toor H, et al. Serum thyroid hormone levels in healthy children from birth to adulthood and in short
children born small for gestational age. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:3170–3178; Free T3 from Elmlinger MW, Kuhnel W, Lambrecht H-­G, et al. Reference intervals from birth to
adulthood for serum thyroxine (T4), triiodothyronine (T3), free T3, free T4, thyroxine binding globulin (TBG), and thyrotropin (TSH). Clin Chem Lab Med. 2001;39:973–979.

Table 603.4  Etiologic Classification of Acquired
Hypothyroidism

A

B

Fig. 603.2 Congenital hypothyroidism. A, Absence of distal femoral

epiphyses in a 3-­mo-­old infant who was born at term. This is evidence
for onset of the hypothyroid state during fetal life. B, Epiphyseal dysgenesis in the head of the humerus in a 9-­yr-­old girl who had been
inadequately treated with thyroid hormone.

in the first 2-­3 years of life may result in variable degrees of neurodevelopmental impairment. Without treatment, severely affected infants
have profound intellectual disability and growth stunting. When hypothyroidism develops after 2 years of age, the outlook for neurodevelopment is much better even if diagnosis and treatment are delayed, which
illustrates the critical dependence of brain development on thyroid
hormone in the first year of life.

ACQUIRED HYPOTHYROIDISM
Epidemiology

Hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 0.3% (1 in 333) of school-­age
children. Subclinical hypothyroidism (defined as an elevated TSH with
normal T4 or free T4) is more common, occurring in approximately
2% of adolescents. Autoimmune thyroiditis is the most common cause
of acquired hypothyroidism: 6% of children age 12-­19 years have evidence of autoimmune thyroiditis, and females are twice as likely to be
affected as males. Although this condition typically arises in adolescence, it may present as early as the first year of life.

Etiology

The most common cause of acquired hypothyroidism (Table 603.4) is
autoimmune thyroiditis (also called Hashimoto or chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis; see Chapter 604). Children with trisomy 21, Turner
syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, celiac disease, or type 1 diabetes
mellitus are at higher risk for associated autoimmune thyroid disease
(see Chapter 604), as are those with autoimmune polyglandular syndromes (APSs; see Chapter 608). APS type 1 (APS-­1) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in AIRE. It is
classically characterized by the triad of mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism, and primary adrenal insufficiency. Autoimmune

Autoimmune
• Autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis)
• Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes types 1 and 2 (APS-­1, APS-­2)
• IPEX
• Celiac disease
Drug-­induced
• Excess iodide: amiodarone, nutritional supplements,
expectorants
• Anticonvulsants: oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital,
valproate
• Antithyroid drugs: methimazole, propylthiouracil
• Miscellaneous: lithium, rifampin, tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
interferon-­α, stavudine, thalidomide, aminoglutethimide,
dopamine, amiodarone, tetracycline, ipilimumab, nivolumab
Iatrogenic
• Irradiation (e.g., cancer therapy, bone marrow transplant)
• Radioactive iodine (131I)
• Thyroidectomy
Systemic infiltrative disease
• Cystinosis
• Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Consumptive: inactivation of thyroid hormone by large liver
hemangiomas (type 3 deiodinase)
Decreased sensitivity to thyroid hormone (MCT8, SEC16A2, THRA,
THRB pathogenic variants)
Hypothalamic-­pituitary disease (often with multiple pituitary
hormone deficiencies)
• Central nervous system tumors (e.g., craniopharyngioma)
• Meningoencephalitis
• Cranial irradiation
• Head trauma
• Langerhans cell histiocytosis
IPEX, Immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy X-­linked.

thyroiditis is a less common feature (∼10%), as are type 1 diabetes mellitus, primary hypogonadism, pernicious anemia, vitiligo, alopecia,
nephritis, hepatitis, and gastrointestinal dysfunction. APS type 2 (APS-­
2) is far more common than APS-­1, and its pathogenesis remains an
obscure combination of genetic and environmental factors. APS-­2 may
consist of any combination of autoimmune thyroiditis (∼70%), type 1
diabetes mellitus, celiac disease, or less common manifestations such as
primary adrenal insufficiency, primary hypogonadism, pernicious anemia, and vitiligo. Patients with any of these other autoimmune conditions are at increased risk of developing hypothyroidism. For example,
about 20% of children with type 1 diabetes mellitus develop thyroid
autoantibodies and about 5% become hypothyroid.
In children with trisomy 21, thyroid autoantibodies develop in approximately 30%, and subclinical or overt hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 15–20%. In females with Turner syndrome, thyroid autoantibodies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3409
develop in approximately 40%, and subclinical or overt hypothyroidism
occurs in approximately 15–30%, rising with increasing age. Additional
autoimmune conditions with an increased risk of hypothyroidism include
immune dysregulation–polyendocrinopathy–enteropathy–X-­linked syndrome (IPEX) and IPEX-­like disorders, immunoglobulin G4–related diseases, Sjögren syndrome, and multiple sclerosis. Williams syndrome is
associated with subclinical hypothyroidism, but this does not appear to be
autoimmune, and thyroid autoantibodies are absent.
Medications can cause acquired hypothyroidism. Some medications
containing iodine (e.g., expectorants or nutritional supplements) may
cause hypothyroidism through the Wolff-­Chaikoff effect (see Chapter
605). Amiodarone, a drug used for cardiac arrhythmias and consisting of 37% iodine by weight, causes hypothyroidism in approximately
20–30% of treated children. Children treated with amiodarone should
have serial monitoring of thyroid function.
Anticonvulsants, including phenytoin, phenobarbital, and valproate, may cause thyroid dysfunction, usually in the form of subclinical
hypothyroidism. In some cases, this is because of their effect of stimulating hepatic cytochrome P450 metabolism and excretion of T4. The
anticonvulsant oxcarbazepine can cause central (secondary) hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism can be caused by overtreatment with antithyroid drugs (methimazole or propylthiouracil) for Graves disease.
Additional drugs that can produce hypothyroidism include lithium,
rifampin, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, interferon-­α, stavudine, thalidomide, and aminoglutethimide.
Children who receive therapeutic irradiation, such as for Hodgkin
disease or other head and neck malignancies or before bone marrow
transplantation, are at risk for thyroid damage and hypothyroidism.
Approximately 30% of such children acquire elevated TSH levels within
a year after therapy, and another 15–20% progress to hypothyroidism
within 5-­7 years. Radioactive iodine ablative treatment or thyroidectomy for Graves disease or thyroid cancer results in iatrogenic hypothyroidism. Thyroid tissue in a thyroglossal duct cyst may constitute
the only source of thyroid hormone, and in this case, excision of the
cyst results in hypothyroidism. Ultrasonographic examination or a
radionuclide scan before surgery is indicated in these patients.
Children with nephropathic cystinosis, a disorder characterized by
intralysosomal storage of cystine in body tissues, acquire impaired thyroid function. Hypothyroidism is usually subclinical but may be overt,
and periodic assessment of TSH levels is indicated. By 13 years of age,
two thirds of these patients require l-­T4 replacement.
Histiocytic infiltration of the thyroid in children with Langerhans
cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 556.1) can result in hypothyroidism.
Children with chronic hepatitis C infection are at risk for subclinical
hypothyroidism that does not appear to be autoimmune.
Consumptive hypothyroidism can occur in children with large
hemangiomas of the liver. These tumors may express massive amounts
of the enzyme type 3 deiodinase, which inactivates T4 and T3, respectively, to the inert metabolites reverse T3 and diiodothyronine (T2).
Hypothyroidism occurs when increased thyroidal secretion of thyroid
hormones is insufficient to compensate for their rapid inactivation.
Some patients with mild forms of congenital hypothyroidism (thyroid
dysgenesis or genetic defects in thyroid hormone synthesis) do not develop
clinical manifestations until childhood. Although these conditions are
often detected by newborn screening, very mild defects can escape detection and present later with apparently acquired hypothyroidism.
Any hypothalamic or pituitary disease can cause acquired central
hypothyroidism (see Chapter 595). TSH deficiency may result from a
hypothalamic-­pituitary tumor (craniopharyngioma is most common
in children) or from treatment for a tumor. Central hypothyroidism
may develop in up to 10% of children receiving craniospinal irradiation. Other causes include head trauma or infiltrative diseases affecting
the pituitary gland, such as Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

Clinical Manifestations

Slowing of growth is usually the first clinical manifestation of acquired
hypothyroidism, but this sign often goes unrecognized (Figs. 603.3 and
603.4). Goiter is a common presenting feature of primary hypothyroidism. In autoimmune thyroiditis, the thyroid is typically nontender

A

B

Fig. 603.3 A, Acquired hypothyroidism in a 6-­yr-­old female. She was

treated with a wide variety of hematinics for refractory anemia for 3
years. She had almost complete cessation of growth, constipation, and
sluggishness for 3 years. The height age was 3 years; the bone age was
4 years. She had a sallow complexion and immature facies with a poorly
developed nasal bridge. Serum cholesterol, 501 mg/dL; radioiodine
uptake, 7% at 24 hr; protein-­bound iodine (PBI), 2.8 mg/dL. B, After
therapy for 18 months, note the nasal development, increased luster
and decreased pigmentation of hair, and maturation of the face. The
height age was 5.5 years; the bone age was 7 years. There was a decided improvement in her general condition. Menarche occurred at 14
years. The ultimate height was 155 cm (61 in). She graduated from high
school. The disorder was well controlled with daily l-­thyroxine.

A

B

Fig. 603.4 A, This 12-­yr-­old male with hypothyroidism has short stat-

ure (108 cm, <3rd percentile), generalized myxedema, sleepy expression, protuberant abdomen, and coarse hair. Body proportions are immature for his age (1.25:1). B, Same boy 4 months after treatment. His
height increased by 4 cm, and there is a marked change in body habitus
owing to loss of myxedema, improved muscle tone, and bright facial
expression. (From LaFranchi SH. Hypothyroidism. Pediatr Clin North
Am. 1979;26:33–51.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3410 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and firm, with a rubbery consistency and pebbly (bosselated) surface. Weight gain is mainly caused by fluid retention (myxedema),
not true adiposity. Myxedematous changes of the skin, constipation,
cold intolerance, decreased energy, and an increased need for sleep
develop insidiously. School performance usually does not suffer, even
in severely hypothyroid children. Additional features may include bradycardia, muscle weakness or cramps, nerve entrapment, and ataxia.
Skeletal maturation is delayed, and the degree of delay reflects the
duration of the hypothyroidism. Adolescents typically have delayed
puberty. Older adolescent females may have menometrorrhagia, and
some may develop galactorrhea because of increased TRH, which
stimulates prolactin secretion. In fact, long-­standing primary hypothyroidism can result in enlargement of the pituitary gland, sometimes
leading to headaches and vision problems. This is believed to result
from thyrotroph hyperplasia but may be mistaken for a pituitary tumor,
particularly a prolactinoma if prolactin is elevated (see Chapter 595).
Rarely, young children with profound hypothyroidism may develop
secondary sex characteristics (pseudoprecocious puberty), including breast development or vaginal bleeding in females and testicular
enlargement in males. It is hypothesized that this phenomenon results
from abnormally high concentrations of TSH binding and stimulating
the follicle-­stimulating hormone receptor.
Laboratory abnormalities in hypothyroidism may include hyponatremia, macrocytic anemia, hypercholesterolemia, and elevated
creatine phosphokinase. Table 603.5 lists complications of severe hypothyroidism, all of which normalize with adequate replacement of T4.

Diagnostic Studies

Children with suspected hypothyroidism should undergo measurement of serum TSH and free T4. Because the normal range for thyroid tests varies by age and is different in children than in adults, it
is important to interpret results using age-­specific reference ranges
(see Table 603.3). Detection of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin or
TPO is diagnostic of autoimmune thyroiditis. Measurement of urine
iodine can confirm excess iodine exposure, if suspected. In cases of
goiter resulting from autoimmune thyroiditis, ultrasonography typically shows diffuse enlargement and heterogeneous echotexture, but

ultrasonography generally is not indicated unless the physical exam
raises suspicion for a thyroid nodule. A bone age x-­ray at diagnosis
may suggest the duration and severity of hypothyroidism based on the
degree of bone age delay.

Treatment and Prognosis

l-­T4 is the treatment for children with hypothyroidism. The dose on a
weight basis gradually decreases with age. For children ages 1-­3 years,
the average daily l-­T4 dose is 4-­6 μg/kg; for ages 3-­10 years, 3-­5 μg/kg;
and for ages 10-­16 years, 2-­4 μg/kg. Treatment should be monitored
by measuring serum TSH every 4-­6 months and 4-­6 weeks after any
change in dosage, and TSH should be maintained in the age-­specific
reference range. In young children (under age 3 years), serum free T4
should also be measured and ideally maintained in the upper half of
the age-­specific reference range. In older children with primary hypothyroidism, serum free T4 need not be measured routinely but may
be helpful in certain situations, such as to assess for poor medication
adherence. In children with central hypothyroidism, in which TSH
levels by definition do not reflect systemic thyroid status, serum free
T4 alone should be monitored and maintained in the upper half of the
age-­specific reference range.
During the first year of treatment, deterioration of schoolwork, poor
sleeping habits, restlessness, short attention span, and behavioral problems may develop. However, these issues are transient and more easily
managed if families are forewarned about them. Some practitioners
feel that these symptoms may be partially ameliorated by starting at
a lower dose of l-­T4 and advancing slowly. The development of persistent headaches or vision changes should prompt an evaluation for
pseudotumor cerebri, a rare complication after initiation of l-­T4 treatment in older children (age 8-­13 years).
In older children, after catch-­up growth is complete, the growth rate
provides a good index of the adequacy of therapy. In children with long-­
standing hypothyroidism, catch-­up growth may be incomplete, and final
adult height may be irremediably compromised (see Fig. 603.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 603.5  Clinical Presentation and Implications of Hypothyroidism
PRESENTATION

SIGNS AND IMPLICATIONS

General metabolism

Weight gain, cold intolerance,
fatigue

Increase in body mass index, low metabolic rate, myxedema,* hypothermia*

Cardiovascular

Fatigue on exertion, shortness of
breath

Dyslipidemia, bradycardia, hypertension, endothelial dysfunction or increased
intima–media thickness,* diastolic dysfunction,* pericardial effusion,*
hyperhomocysteinemia,* electrocardiogram changes*

Neurosensory

Hoarseness of voice, decreased
taste, vision, or hearing

Neuropathy, cochlear dysfunction, decreased olfactory and gustatory sensitivity

Neurologic and
psychiatric

Impaired memory, paresthesia,
mood impairment

Impaired cognitive function, delayed relaxation of tendon reflexes, depression,*
dementia,* ataxia,* carpal tunnel syndrome, and other nerve entrapment
syndromes,* myxedema coma*

Gastrointestinal

Constipation

Reduced esophageal motility, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease,* ascites (very rare)

Endocrinologic

Infertility and subfertility, menstrual
disturbance, galactorrhea

Goiter, glucose metabolism dysregulation, infertility, sexual dysfunction, increased
prolactin, pituitary hyperplasia*

Musculoskeletal

Muscle weakness, muscle cramps,
arthralgia

Creatine phosphokinase elevation, Hoffman syndrome,* osteoporotic fracture*
(most probably caused by overtreatment)

Hemostasis and
hematologic

Bleeding, fatigue

Mild anemia, acquired von Willebrand disease,* decreased protein C and S,*
increased red cell distribution width,* increased mean platelet volume*

Skin and hair

Dry skin, hair loss

Coarse skin, loss of lateral eyebrows,* yellow palms of the hand,* alopecia areata*

Electrolytes and
kidney function

Deterioration of kidney function

Decreased estimated glomerular filtration rate, hyponatremia*

*Uncommon presentation.
From Chaker L, Bianco AC, Jonklaas J, et al. Hypothyroidism. Lancet. 2017;390:1550–1560, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 604 u Thyroiditis 3411

Chapter 604

Thyroiditis
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Thyroiditis refers to inflammation of the thyroid gland. Thyroiditis can
be acute or chronic and can be categorized by etiology, pathology, and/or
clinical features. Painful thyroiditis is typically due to infection or trauma,
whereas painless thyroiditis is often autoimmune-­mediated or due to drug
exposure.
Depending on the etiology and phase of illness, patients with thyroiditis may be euthyroid, hypothyroid, or thyrotoxic. The classic pattern of
thyroid function changes in transient forms of thyroiditis is thyrotoxicosis followed by hypothyroidism and then restoration of euthyroidism. In
some cases, hypothyroidism can persist after transient thyroiditis. The thyrotoxicosis caused by thyroiditis is not due to increased thyroid hormone
synthesis (in contrast to Graves disease), but rather release of preformed
thyroid hormone from the damaged gland, which can last up to 60 days.
Treatment for patients with thyroiditis is directed at alleviating symptoms of pain and symptoms of thyrotoxicosis such as tachycardia, palpations, and tremors. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
usually alleviate thyroid pain effectively, but a short course of steroids
(prednisone) can be considered if pain is severe. Because the thyrotoxicosis is caused by the release of preformed thyroid hormone, antithyroid
drugs (which block thyroid hormone synthesis) are ineffective. Instead,
treatment with β blockers (atenolol or propranolol) may be used to control
cardiovascular symptoms until thyrotoxicosis resolves. Thyroid function
tests should be monitored every 6-­8 weeks until they normalize. If hypothyroidism is prolonged or symptomatic, replacement with levothyroxine
may be initiated.

THYROIDITIS WITH PAIN

Acute infectious (suppurative) thyroiditis is uncommon in children and
typically is preceded by a respiratory infection or pharyngitis. The most
common pathogenic organisms are α-­hemolytic streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus, followed by gram-­negative organisms and anaerobic
bacteria. Other pathogens, including mycobacteria, fungi, and pneumocystis, cause more indolent infection and occur in immunocompromised
patients. Abscess formation can occur, and the left thyroid lobe is more
commonly affected than the right. Recurrent episodes or detection of
mixed bacterial flora suggest that the infection arises from a piriform
sinus fistula or, less commonly, from a thyroglossal duct remnant. Acute
infectious thyroiditis is characterized by acute onset of neck pain, thyroid
tenderness, swelling, erythema, dysphagia, and decreased range of motion
of the neck. Fever, chills, sore throat, and leukocytosis are common. Thyroid function is usually normal, but thyrotoxicosis can occur. A suspected
abscess can be assessed by thyroid ultrasound, and fine needle aspiration
can help identify the responsible microorganism. Treatment of a thyroid
abscess includes incision and drainage and administration of parenteral
antibiotics. After the infection subsides, a CT scan with contrast may be
obtained to identify a fistulous tract that may require surgical resection.
Subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain disease, subacute granulomatous
thyroiditis) is believed to have a viral or postviral etiology and is usually transient. It typically presents with low-­grade fever, minimal thyroid tenderness, and laboratory evidence of thyrotoxicosis (suppressed
TSH and elevated T4 and T3). Mild symptoms of thyrotoxicosis may be
present, but radioiodine uptake is depressed in the thyrotoxic phase.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is increased. The course is
variable but usually follows the classic pattern of thyrotoxicosis, hypothyroidism, and finally resolution to euthyroidism, usually occurring
over several months. There is a strong association with HLA-­B35.
Radiation thyroiditis can occur after treatment with radioactive iodine or external beam radiation. Thyroid pain and tenderness
develop after 2-­5 days because of radiation-­induced destruction of the
thyroid follicular cells and subsequent release of preformed thyroid
hormone. The neck pain is responsive to antiinflammatory therapies.

Palpation-­or trauma-­induced thyroiditis can result from direct
trauma to the thyroid gland, typically from surgery, accidental trauma,
biopsy, or rarely, vigorous palpation.

THYROIDITIS WITHOUT PAIN
Autoimmune Thyroiditis (Hashimoto Thyroiditis,
Chronic Lymphocytic Thyroiditis)

Autoimmune thyroiditis is the most common cause of thyroid disease
in children and adolescents and accounts for many of the formerly designated adolescent or simple goiters. It is also the most common cause
of acquired hypothyroidism, with or without goiter. Between 1 and 2%
of school-­age children and 6–8% of adolescents have positive thyroid
autoantibodies as evidence of autoimmune thyroid disease.

Etiology

This typical organ-­specific autoimmune disease results from a combination of inherited susceptibility in genes involved in immunoregulation and from environmental triggers, both poorly characterized. Early
in the disease, there may be thyroid hyperplasia only. This is followed
by infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells into thyroid follicles
and formation of lymphoid follicles with germinal centers. Chronic
inflammation eventually leads to follicular fibrosis and atrophy. Certain
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes (HLA-­DR4, HLA-­DR5)
are associated with an increased risk of goiter and thyroiditis, and others (HLA-­DR3) are associated with the atrophic variant of thyroiditis.
A variety of different autoantibodies to thyroid antigens are also present.
Circulating antibodies to thyroperoxidase (TPO-­Abs) or thyroglobulin
(Tg-­Abs) are detectable in most children with autoimmune thyroiditis and
many patients with Graves disease. TPO-­Abs are involved in activation of
the complement cascade and antibody-­dependent, cell-­mediated cytotoxicity. Tg-­Abs do not appear to play a role in the autoimmune destruction of
the gland. TSH receptor-­blocking antibodies (TRBAbs) may cause thyroid
atrophy and have been demonstrated in 18% of patients with severe hypothyroidism (TSH >20 mU/L) caused by autoimmune thyroiditis.

Clinical Manifestations

Autoimmune thyroiditis is 4-­6 times more common in females than in
males. It can occur during the first 3 years of life but becomes more common after 6 years of age and reaches its peak incidence during adolescence.
The most common clinical manifestations are goiter and growth deceleration. Goiter is primarily caused by thyroid inflammation and fibrosis, and
it can appear insidiously and may be variable in size. In most patients,
the thyroid is diffusely enlarged, firm, and nontender. In some patients
the gland may be asymmetric. Most affected children are euthyroid and
asymptomatic. Children who develop hypothyroidism may be symptomatic, but others may have no symptoms despite laboratory evidence of
overt hypothyroidism. In some cases, autoimmune thyroiditis can cause
transient thyroiditis as a result of autoimmune thyroid destruction (so-­
called Hashitoxicosis). Such children may present with manifestations of
thyrotoxicosis, such as tremulousness, irritability, increased sweating, and
hyperactivity. Ophthalmopathy can occur in autoimmune thyroiditis even
in the absence of Graves disease, although this is rare in childhood.
The clinical course of autoimmune thyroiditis is variable. Goiter may
persist or regress spontaneously. Most children who are euthyroid at
presentation remain euthyroid, but a subset of patients develop hypothyroidism within months or years. In children who have subclinical
hypothyroidism at diagnosis (elevated TSH, normal free thyroxine [T4]),
approximately 35% revert to euthyroidism, 50% continue to have subclinical hypothyroidism, and approximately 15% develop overt hypothyroidism (elevated serum TSH, subnormal free T4) within 5 years. There are few
reliable predictors of progression to hypothyroidism, so periodic monitoring of TSH levels is indicated in children with autoimmune thyroiditis.
Familial clusters of autoimmune thyroiditis are common, and the
incidence in siblings or parents of affected children may be as high as
25%. The concurrence within families of patients with autoimmune
thyroiditis and Graves disease reflects a fundamental pathophysiologic
relationship among these autoimmune thyroid disorders.
Autoimmune thyroiditis is associated with other autoimmune disorders.
Autoimmune thyroiditis occurs in 10% of patients with type 1 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS-­1), characterized by autoimmune

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3412 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis, and ectodermal dysplasia (APECED),
a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene (see Chapter 608). Autoimmune thyroiditis occurs in 70% of patients with type 2 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS-­2), including type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune
primary adrenal insufficiency, pernicious anemia, vitiligo, and alopecia.
TPO-­Abs are found in approximately 20% of White and 4% of Black children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. The onset of APS-­2 typically occurs in
late childhood or early adulthood. Its cause is unknown but may be related
to predisposing genetic factors shared among these autoimmune conditions (see Chapter 608). Autoimmune thyroiditis has also been described
in children with immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked (IPEX) syndrome, including early-­onset diabetes and colitis
(see Chapter 608).
Autoimmune thyroiditis is common in patients with celiac disease
or certain chromosomal disorders, particularly Turner syndrome
(8–30%) and trisomy 21 (7–10%). Males with Klinefelter syndrome
also appear to be at increased risk for autoimmune thyroid disease.
Table 604.1 compares the characteristics of autoimmune thyroiditis
to other forms of thyroiditis.

Laboratory and Imaging Findings

Thyroid function tests are often normal. Elevation of serum TSH indicates
hypothyroidism, which may be subclinical (normal free T4) or overt (low
free T4). TPO-­Abs are present in most children with autoimmune thyroiditis. Tg-­Abs are present in many adolescents but are somewhat less
sensitive in young children. Testing for both antibodies will detect about
95% of children with autoimmune thyroiditis. Antibody levels are lower
in children than in adults, so repeated measurements of borderline levels
may be indicated. Measurement of thyroid autoantibody levels is useful
only for diagnosing autoimmune thyroiditis; antibody levels do not correlate with thyroid function and should not be monitored routinely after
the initial diagnosis. In adolescent females with overt hypothyroidism,
measurement of TSH receptor antibodies may identify patients at future
risk of having babies with transient congenital hypothyroidism caused by
transplacental passage of TRBAbs.
Thyroid scintigraphy and ultrasonography usually are not necessary for the diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis. If performed, thyroid scintigraphy reveals decreased radioisotope uptake that is patchy
and irregular. Thyroid ultrasonography shows diffusely heterogeneous
echogenicity and frequently an increased number of hyperplastic,
benign-­appearing cervical lymph nodes. Thyroid ultrasound is indicated for patients with a palpable thyroid nodule or significant thyroid
asymmetry.

Treatment

If hypothyroidism is overt (elevated TSH with low free T4) or symptomatic, treatment with levothyroxine is indicated at doses specific to
size and age. Goiter may decrease in size but can persist for years. In a
euthyroid patient, treatment with levothyroxine is unlikely to significantly decrease the goiter’s size, and doses of levothyroxine sufficient to
suppress TSH should be avoided because of potential adverse effects.
Because autoimmune thyroiditis is self-­limited in some instances, the
need for continued therapy may be reevaluated periodically, particularly after growth and pubertal development are complete. Untreated
euthyroid patients should have periodic monitoring for risk of progression to hypothyroidism. There is some controversy about the
management of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism. Subclinical
hypothyroidism has not been demonstrated to have clinically significant adverse effects, but studies are small and of limited quality. Therefore observation without treatment is acceptable, but some clinicians
prefer to treat until growth and puberty are complete and then reevaluate their thyroid function.

OTHER CAUSES OF THYROIDITIS

Painless thyroiditis (silent thyroiditis) is characterized by transient thyrotoxicosis, followed sometimes by hypothyroidism, and then recovery.
It accounts for 1–5% of cases of thyrotoxicosis. It can also occur in the
postpartum period and in response to certain types of drugs.
Drug-­induced thyroiditis can be caused by medications including
lithium, amiodarone, interferon-­α, interleukin-­2, and tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Patients taking lithium are susceptible to both lithium-­
induced hypothyroidism and painless thyroiditis. The antiarrhythmic
drug amiodarone contains a high concentration of iodine and can
cause two types of thyrotoxicosis. Type 1 is caused by increased synthesis of thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism), typically occurs in patients
with underlying thyroid autoimmunity, and is amenable to treatment
with antithyroid drugs (methimazole). Type 2 is a destructive thyroiditis causing excessive release of preformed thyroid hormone, which can
be treated with glucocorticoids (prednisone).
Fibrous thyroiditis (invasive or Riedel thyroiditis) is quite rare in
children and is characterized by extensive fibrosis and macrophage
and eosinophil infiltration of the thyroid gland. The thyroid becomes
enlarged, hard, and affixed to surrounding structures. Thyroid function tests are normal, and a biopsy is required to confirm the diagnosis.
Glucocorticoids may alleviate symptoms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 604.1  Characteristics of Thyroiditis Syndromes
CHARACTERISTIC

AUTOIMMUNE
THYROIDITIS

PAINLESS
THYROIDITIS

SUBACUTE
THYROIDITIS

ACUTE INFECTIOUS
THYROIDITIS

FIBROUS
THYROIDITIS

Sex ratio (F:M)

4-­6:1

2:1

5:1

1:1

3-­4:1

Cause

Autoimmune

Autoimmune

Unknown (probably
viral)

Infectious (bacterial)

Unknown

Pathologic findings

Lymphocytic
infiltration, germinal
centers, fibrosis

Lymphocytic
infiltration

Giant cells,
granulomas

Abscess formation

Dense fibrosis

Thyroid function

Usually euthyroidism;
some
hypothyroidism

Thyrotoxicosis,
hypothyroidism, or
both

Thyrotoxicosis,
hypothyroidism, or
both

Usually euthyroidism

Usually euthyroidism

TPO antibodies

Present, persistent

Present, persistent

Low titer, absent, or
transient

Absent

Usually present

ESR

Normal

Normal

High

High

Normal

123I uptake

Usually low

Low

Low

Normal

Low or normal

ESR, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; 123I, iodine 123; TPO, thyroid peroxidase.
Data from Farwell AP, Braverman LE. Inflammatory thyroid disorders. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 1996;4:541–556.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 605 u Goiter 3413

Chapter 605

Goiter
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
A goiter is an enlargement of the thyroid gland. Average thyroid volume
is approximately 1 mL at birth and increases with age and body mass
index. For clinical assessment of thyroid size, the “rule of thumb” states
that in older children (>5 years) each lobe of the thyroid gland is approximately the size of the distal phalanx of the child’s thumb. Children with
an enlarged thyroid can have normal thyroid function (euthyroidism),
underproduction of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism), or overproduction of thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism). Most goiters are discovered
by the patient or a caregiver or on physical examination. Detection of a
goiter should prompt an investigation of its cause and assessment of thyroid function.
Goiter may be congenital or acquired, endemic or sporadic. Goiter
often results from increased pituitary secretion of thyroid-­stimulating
hormone (TSH) in response to decreased circulating levels of thyroid
hormone. The most common causes of pediatric goiter are inflammation (autoimmune thyroiditis) and, in endemic areas, iodine deficiency
(endemic goiter). Other causes include inborn errors in thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis), maternal ingestion of antithyroid
drugs, goitrogens, abnormal activation of the TSH receptor by circulating antibodies (TRSAb) in Graves disease or by genetic gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants, or disorders of inappropriate TSH secretion. Thyroid
enlargement can also result from thyroid nodules or infiltrative processes.

605.1 Congenital Goiter
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Congenital goiter usually results from a defect in fetal thyroxine (T4)
synthesis that leads to neonatal hypothyroidism. This defect may be
intrinsic to the fetal thyroid or may be caused by transplacental transfer from the mother of substances that decrease fetal thyroid hormone synthesis. Antithyroid drugs (methimazole or propylthiouracil)
administered during pregnancy to treat maternal thyrotoxicosis cross
the placenta and can interfere with fetal synthesis of thyroid hormone.
The neonatal consequences are most severe when overtreatment with
antithyroid drugs causes concomitant hypothyroidism in the mother,
which reduces the supply of maternal thyroid hormone to the fetus.
Fetal effects can occur even with low doses of antithyroid drugs; therefore infants born to women treated with such drugs in the third trimester should undergo serum thyroid studies at birth, even if they appear
clinically euthyroid. Levothyroxine treatment may be indicated for
severe hypothyroidism or to reduce the size of goiter that causes airway
obstruction. Hypothyroidism caused by maternal antithyroid drugs
is transient and resolves once the antithyroid drug has been excreted
by the neonate, usually after 1-­2 weeks. Like antithyroid drugs, other
medications containing large amounts of iodine can cause congenital
goiter, including amiodarone and some cough preparations.
In cases of congenital goiter and hypothyroidism in which no cause is
identifiable from the maternal or medication history, an intrinsic defect in
synthesis of thyroid hormone (dyshormonogenesis) should be suspected.
Such disorders are caused by genetic defects in one of the proteins critical to thyroid hormone synthesis and are usually inherited in autosomal
recessive fashion. Neonatal screening programs detect congenital hypothyroidism caused by such a defect in about 1 in 25,000 infants. Treatment
with levothyroxine should be initiated immediately. If a specific defect is
suspected, genetic testing to identify a mutation may be considered (see
Chapter 603). Monitoring subsequent pregnancies with ultrasonography
can be useful to detect fetal goiter (see Chapter 117).
Iodine deficiency is an important cause of congenital goiter that is rare
in countries that have adopted universal salt iodization, but iodine deficiency persists in endemic areas (see Chapter 605.3). Severe maternal

iodine deficiency early in pregnancy can cause neurologic damage during
fetal development because maternal hypothyroidism reduces the transfer
of maternal thyroid hormones that typically protect neurodevelopment in
a fetus unable to synthesize its own thyroid hormone.
Goiter is almost always present in the infant with neonatal Graves disease. Thyroid enlargement results from transplacental passage of maternal
TSH receptor-­stimulating antibodies that promote thyroid hyperplasia
(see Chapter 606.2). These goiters usually are not large, and the infant
manifests clinical symptoms of hyperthyroidism. The diagnosis of maternal Graves disease is usually known but occasionally may be discovered by
evaluating unexpected neonatal hyperthyroidism. Activating pathogenic
variants of the TSH receptor are a rare cause of congenital goiter with
hyperthyroidism.
A very large congenital goiter of any cause can lead to tracheal compression and respiratory distress that interferes with feeding and can even be
fatal. Therefore intervening to reduce the size of a large fetal goiter may be
necessary before delivery. Treatment should be directed at the underlying
cause. Iodine deficiency should be treated if present. In pregnant women
treated with antithyroid drugs, reducing the dose of maternal medication
is appropriate. In severe cases, fetal goiter caused by fetal hypothyroidism
(including dyshormonogenesis) may be reduced by intraamniotic injections of levothyroxine. If the fetal goiter is caused by fetal hyperthyroidism
(e.g., fetal Graves disease), treatment with antithyroid drugs administered
to the mother is indicated. Large obstructing fetal goiters are often managed with the ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure during
elective delivery (see Chapter 117). When postnatal respiratory obstruction is severe, endotracheal intubation, hormone therapy, and occasionally
partial thyroidectomy is indicated (Fig. 605.1).
When a palpable congenital goiter is lobulated, asymmetric, firm, or
unusually large, a teratoma in or near the thyroid must be considered
(see Chapter 607).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

605.2 Intratracheal Goiter
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
One of the many potential ectopic locations of thyroid tissue is within the
trachea. When present, intraluminal thyroid tissue lies beneath the tracheal mucosa and is often continuous with the normally located extratracheal thyroid gland. Both eutopic and ectopic thyroid tissue are susceptible
to goitrous enlargement. Therefore when airway obstruction is associated
with a goiter, it must be ascertained whether the obstruction is extratracheal
or intratracheal. If obstructive manifestations are mild, administration of
levothyroxine usually decreases the size of the goiter. When symptoms are
severe, surgical removal of the intratracheal goiter is indicated.

A

B

Fig. 605.1 Congenital goiter in infancy. A, Large congenital goiter in

an infant born to a mother with thyrotoxicosis who had been treated
with iodides and methimazole during pregnancy. B, A different infant, 6
wk old, with increasing respiratory distress and cervical mass since birth.
Notice the anterior deviation and posterior compression of the trachea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3414 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

605.3 Endemic Goiter and Cretinism
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith

ETIOLOGY

Goiter caused by iodine deficiency is termed endemic goiter, whereas cretinism refers to the clinical manifestations of severe hypothyroidism in
early life. The association of dietary iodine deficiency with endemic goiter
and cretinism is well established. The thyroid gland can overcome a moderate deficiency of iodine by increasing the efficiency of thyroid hormone
synthesis. This increased activity is achieved by compensatory thyroid
hypertrophy and hyperplasia (goiter). In cases of severe iodine deficiency,
these compensatory mechanisms are insufficient, and hypothyroidism can
result. The World Health Organization estimates that nearly 2 billion individuals have insufficient iodine intake, including one third of the world’s
school-­age children. Thus despite significant progress in the global effort
to reduce iodine deficiency, it remains a leading cause of preventable intellectual disability worldwide.
Because seawater is rich in iodine, endemic goiter is rare in coastal
populations that consume much of their diet from the sea. In areas
of iodine deficiency, iodized salt provides excellent prophylaxis, and
endemic goiter has effectively disappeared in the United States and
other countries that have introduced salt iodization programs. The U.S.
recommended dietary allowance of iodine is:
• Infants under 6 months: 110 μg/day
• Infants 7-­12 months: 130 μg/day
• Children 1-­8 years: 90 μg/day
• Children 9-­13 years: 120 μg/day
• Children 14 years and older: 150 μg/day
• Pregnant women: 220 μg/day
• Lactating women: 290 μg/day
Although the overall dietary iodine intake in the United States is considered adequate, recent data indicate that the median urinary iodine
concentration among pregnant U.S. women has dropped to <150 μg/L
(mild iodine deficiency). This highlights the re-­emerging risk of iodine
deficiency even in industrialized countries. These risks can be mitigated by the continued monitoring of iodine status, the adjustment of
salt iodization levels, and the targeted supplementation of vulnerable
subpopulations (e.g., promoting iodine-­containing prenatal vitamins).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In mild iodine deficiency, thyroid enlargement generally is not noticeable except when demand for thyroid hormone synthesis is increased,
such as during rapid growth in adolescence and pregnancy. In regions
of moderate iodine deficiency, goiter in school children can disappear
with maturity and reappear during pregnancy or lactation. Iodine-­
deficient goiter is more common in girls than in boys. In areas of severe
iodine deficiency, nearly half the population may have large goiters,
and endemic cretinism is common (Fig. 605.2).
Serum T4 levels are often low in individuals with endemic goiter,
although clinical hypothyroidism is rare. Despite low serum T4 levels,
serum TSH concentrations are often normal or only mildly increased
because of the elevated circulating levels of T3 produced in response to
iodine deficiency.
Endemic cretinism is the most severe consequence of iodine deficiency
and occurs only in association with endemic goiter. The term endemic cretinism includes two distinct but overlapping syndromes (neurologic and
myxedematous). The incidence of the two syndromes varies among different populations, but both syndromes are found in all endemic areas,
and some individuals have intermediate or mixed features.
The neurologic syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability; deaf-­mutism; disturbances in standing and gait; and pyramidal signs such as clonus of the foot, Babinski sign, and patellar
hyperreflexia. Affected persons have a goiter but minimally impaired
thyroid function and have normal pubertal development and adult
stature. Persons with the myxedematous syndrome also have intellectual disability, deafness, and neurologic symptoms. In contrast
to the neurologic type, they also have delayed growth and pubertal
development and myxedema. Serum T4 levels are low, TSH levels are

Fig. 605.2 A 14-­yr-­old male with a large nodular goiter was seen in
2004, in an area of severe iodine-­deficiency disorders in northern Morocco. He had tracheal and esophageal compression and hoarseness,
probably as a result of damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerves. (From
Zimmermann MB, Jooste PL, Pandav CS. Iodine-­deficiency disorders.
Lancet. 2008;372:1251–1262, Fig. 2.)

markedly elevated, goiter is absent, and ultrasound demonstrates thyroid atrophy.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of the neurologic syndrome is attributed to maternal
iodine deficiency and hypothyroidism during pregnancy, leading to fetal
and postnatal hypothyroidism. Maternal thyroid hormone is critical for
early fetal neurodevelopment. Thyroid hormone receptors are expressed
in the fetal brain as early as 7 weeks of gestation. Although the fetal thyroid gland does not produce significant amounts of thyroid hormone until
midgestation, as early as 6 weeks there is measurable T4 in the coelomic
fluid that is of maternal origin. In addition, there is transplacental passage
of maternal thyroid hormone into the fetus throughout gestation, which
ameliorates the neurologic effects of fetal hypothyroidism in the second
half of pregnancy. Thus maternal iodine deficiency affects fetal neurodevelopment throughout pregnancy. However, iodine intake after birth is
often sufficient for the infant to maintain (near-­)normal thyroid function.
The pathogenesis of the myxedematous syndrome and its persistent postnatal hypothyroidism is not well understood. Multiple environmental factors have been implicated (Table 605.1), as have thyroid
autoimmunity and TSH receptor-­blocking antibodies, but studies are
conflicting, and the pathogenesis remains obscure.

TREATMENT

The optimal treatment of endemic goiter is prevention by ensuring iodine
sufficiency in women before pregnancy. A single intramuscular injection
of iodinated poppy seed oil administered to women prevents iodine deficiency during future pregnancies for approximately 5 years. This therapy
is also effective in children younger than 4 years with myxedematous cretinism. However, older children and adults respond poorly, indicating a
progressive inability of the thyroid gland to synthesize hormone, and
these patients require treatment with levothyroxine. Large-­scale prevention efforts include universal salt iodization in many countries, as well as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 605 u Goiter 3415
Table 605.1  Goitrogens and Their Mechanisms
GOITROGEN

MECHANISM

FOODS
Cassava, lima beans,
linseed, sorghum, sweet
potato

Contain cyanogenic glucosides that
are metabolized to thiocyanates that
compete with iodine for uptake by
the thyroid

Cruciferous vegetables
(cabbage, kale, cauliflower,
broccoli, turnips)

Contain glucosinolates; metabolites
compete with iodine for uptake by
the thyroid

Soy, millet

Flavonoids impair thyroid peroxidase
activity

INDUSTRIAL POLLUTANTS
Perchlorate
Competitive inhibitor of the sodium-­
iodide symporter, decreasing iodide
transport into the thyroid
Others (e.g., disulfides
from coal processes)

Reduce thyroidal iodine uptake

Smoking

Smoking during breastfeeding is
asso­ciated with reduced iodine
concentrations in breast milk; high
serum concentration of thiocyanate
from smoking might compete with
iodine for active transport into the
secretory epithelium of the lactating
breast

NUTRIENTS
Selenium deficiency

Accumulated peroxides can damage
the thyroid, and deiodinase deficiency
impairs thyroid hormone activation

Iron deficiency

Reduces heme-­dependent thyroperoxi­
dase activity in the thyroid and may
blunt the efficacy of iodine prophylaxis

Vitamin A deficiency

Increases TSH stimulation and
goiter through decreased vitamin
A–mediated suppression of the
pituitary TSH-­β gene

TSH, Thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
From Zimmermann MB, Jooste PL, Pandav CS. Iodine-­deficiency disorders. Lancet.
2008;372:1251–1262, Table 1.

iodination of irrigation water in some areas. Nevertheless, political, economic, and practical obstacles have limited iodization efforts in many
parts of the world.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

In a normal thyroid gland, the acute intake of large doses of iodine
inhibits thyroid hormone synthesis (Wolff-­Chaikoff effect). However,
this effect is short-­lived and normally does not lead to hypothyroidism.
If iodine administration continues, an autoregulatory mechanism limits iodide uptake by the thyroid, allowing thyroid hormone synthesis
to resume. This “escape” from the Wolff-­Chaikoff effect may not occur
in individuals with underlying thyroid abnormalities (such as autoimmune thyroid disease or thyroid irradiation) or in neonates, potentially
leading to hypothyroidism and iodine-­induced goiter.

Iodine-­Deficiency Goiter

Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of goiter worldwide, but salt
iodization has nearly eradicated this entity in the United States and many
other countries. A severely iodine-­restricted diet can result in a goiter and
hypothyroidism in children, adolescents, or neonates born to mothers with
severe iodine deficiency (urine iodine concentration <50 mcg/L). Children
with moderate or severe iodine deficiency and goiter have subclinical or
mild hypothyroidism, but their serum T3 concentrations may be normal or
high because of preferential thyroidal T3 secretion. Acquired iodine deficiency can be treated with either iodine or levothyroxine supplementation.

Goitrogens

Certain foods contain goitrogenic substances (see Table 605.1). When
consumed alone, these substances are unlikely to cause goiter but can
contribute to goiter formation when iodine intake is marginal.
Lithium carbonate can cause goiter and hypothyroidism in children.
Lithium decreases T4 and T3 synthesis and release; the mechanism producing the goiter or hypothyroidism is similar to that described for
iodide goiter. Lithium and iodide act synergistically to produce goiter,
so their combined use should be avoided.
Amiodarone, a drug used to treat cardiac arrhythmias, can cause
thyroid dysfunction with goiter because it is rich in iodine. Amiodarone
can often cause hypothyroidism, particularly in patients with underlying
autoimmune thyroid disease. In other patients, it can cause thyrotoxicosis through either transient thyroiditis or the Jod-­Basedow effect.

SIMPLE GOITER (COLLOID GOITER)

Some children with euthyroid goiters have a simple goiter, a condition of
unknown cause not associated with thyroid dysfunction and not caused
by inflammation or neoplasia. Simple goiter is more common in girls,
may be familial, and has its peak incidence during adolescence. Histologic
examination of the thyroid either is normal or reveals variable follicular
size, dense colloid, and flattened epithelium. The size of the goiter is variable. It can occasionally be firm, asymmetric, or nodular. Levels of TSH are
normal, thyroid scintigraphy is normal, and thyroid antibodies are absent.
Simple goiters usually decrease in size gradually over several years, without treatment. Patients should be reevaluated periodically because some
have antibody-­negative autoimmune thyroiditis and therefore are at risk
for changes in thyroid function (see Chapter 604).

MULTINODULAR GOITER

605.4 Acquired Goiter
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Acquired goiter is usually sporadic and may develop from a variety of
causes. The most common cause of acquired goiter is autoimmune thyroiditis (see Chapter 604). Other causes in children include painless sporadic thyroiditis and subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain disease; see Chapter
604). Ingestion of excess iodide or certain medications can cause goiter, as
can congenital defects in thyroid hormone synthesis. The occurrence of
goiter in siblings, onset in early life, and possible association with hypothyroidism are important clues to diagnosing congenital dyshormonogenesis.

IODIDE GOITER

Excessive iodine ingestion can result in a goiter. Large amounts of
iodine are found in certain foods (such as seaweed) and some expectorants for chronic reactive airway disease or cystic fibrosis. Some
children with iodine-­induced goiter have underlying autoimmune thyroiditis or a subclinical congenital defect in thyroid hormone synthesis.

Multinodular goiter is usually a firm goiter with a lobulated surface and
one or more palpable nodules. Areas of cystic change, hemorrhage, and
fibrosis may be present. The incidence of this condition has decreased
markedly with the use of iodine-­enriched salt. Ultrasonographic examination can reveal multiple nodules that are nonfunctioning on thyroid
scintigraphy. Thyroid function is usually normal. Some children with
autoimmune thyroiditis develop a multinodular goiter, and in such cases,
thyroid antibodies may be present, and TSH may be elevated. If hypofunctioning nodules within a multinodular goiter grow to a significant size (≥1
cm) or have suspicious sonographic features, fine needle aspiration should
be considered to rule out malignancy (see Chapter 607). Children with
McCune-­Albright syndrome or TSH receptor–activating mutations can
develop a toxic multinodular goiter, characterized by suppressed TSH,
hyperthyroidism, and multiple hyperfunctioning nodules.

TOXIC GOITER (HYPERTHYROIDISM)
See Chapter 606.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3416 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 606

Thyrotoxicosis
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Although the terms hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxicosis are often
interchanged in the literature, they are not synonymous. Hyperthyroidism specifically refers to the synthesis and secretion of excess
thyroid hormone from the thyroid gland; in contrast, thyrotoxicosis refers to any state of excess circulating thyroid hormone (and
its clinical manifestations) regardless of its source. This distinction
is physiologically and clinically relevant because different therapies
may be indicated depending on the mechanism of thyroid hormone
excess.
Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism
in children (Table 606.1). It is an autoimmune disorder that results
in the production of thyrotropin (TSH) receptor–stimulating antibodies (TRSAbs) that bind and activate the G protein–coupled TSH
receptor (TSHR) to cause increased thyroid hormonogenesis and
diffuse glandular growth. In infants born to mothers with Graves
disease, hyperthyroidism can be caused by transplacental passage
of TRSAbs, but this is transitory and resolves when TRSBAbs are
cleared from the neonate’s circulation. Etiologies of nonautoimmune
hyperthyroidism include hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules and
germline gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the TSHR (either
autosomal dominant or sporadic). Hyperthyroidism can also occur
in patients with McCune-­Albright syndrome because of an activating pathogenic variant of the stimulatory α-­subunit of the G protein. These patients can also develop a multinodular goiter. Other
rare causes of hyperthyroidism include iodine-­induced hyperthyroidism, TSH-­secreting adenomas, toxic multinodular goiters, and
hyperfunctioning thyroid carcinoma. Thyrotoxicosis not caused by
hyperthyroidism (i.e., not the result of overproduction of thyroid
hormone by the gland) can be caused by thyroiditis (see Chapter 604)
or ingestion of exogenous thyroid hormone. Choriocarcinoma,
hydatidiform mole, and struma ovarii can cause hyperthyroidism
but are rarely diagnosed in children.
Laboratory evaluation of primary thyrotoxicosis reveals suppression of serum TSH and elevation of serum total thyroxine
(T4) and/or total triiodothyronine (T3) levels. Elevated T4 and T3
with normal or elevated TSH suggests hyperthyroidism caused by
inappropriate TSH secretion, which may be caused by a dominant-­
negative pathogenic variant in thyroid hormone receptor-­β (THRB)
resulting in resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH). TSH-­secreting
pituitary tumors are extremely rare in the pediatric population.
Elevated T4 and/or T3 levels with normal TSH may also be caused
by abnormalities of thyroid hormone–binding proteins such as
thyroxine-­binding globulin excess or familial dysalbuminemic
hyperthyroxinemia. In such cases, free T4 levels are normal, and
patients are euthyroid.

606.1 Graves Disease
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Graves disease occurs in approximately 0.02% of children (1:5,000)
and is the most common cause of pediatric hyperthyroidism. It has
a peak incidence in the 11-­to 15-­year-­old age-­group, and there is

a 5:1 female:male ratio. Many children with Graves disease have a
family history of autoimmune thyroid disease. Although rare in very
young children, Graves disease has been reported between 6 weeks
and 2 years of age in children born to mothers without a history of
hyperthyroidism.

ETIOLOGY

Graves disease is a form of autoimmune thyroid disease characterized by infiltration of the thyroid gland by T-­helper cells (CD4+),
cytotoxic T cells (CD8+), and activated B lymphocytes. A postulated failure of T suppressor cells allows the expression of T helper
cells sensitized to the TSH antigen to interact with B cells, which

Table 606.1  Pathogenic Mechanisms and Causes and
Effects of Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis with hyperthyroidism (normal or high radioactive
iodine uptake)
EFFECT OF INCREASED THYROID STIMULATORS
TSH-­receptor antibody

Graves disease

Inappropriate TSH secretion

TSH-­secreting pituitary adenoma;
resistance to thyroid hormone β

Excess hCG secretion

Trophoblastic tumors
(choriocarcinoma or hydatidiform
mole); hyperemesis gravidarum

AUTONOMOUS THYROID FUNCTION
Activating pathogenic variant
in TSH receptor or Gsα
protein

Solitary hyperfunctioning adenoma;
multinodular goiter; familial
nonautoimmune hyperthyroidism

Thyrotoxicosis without hyperthyroidism (low radioactive iodine
uptake)
INFLAMMATION AND RELEASE OF STORED HORMONE
Autoimmune destruction of
thyroid gland

Autoimmune thyroiditis;
postpartum thyroiditis

Viral infection*

Subacute (painful) thyroiditis (de
Quervain thyroiditis)

Toxic drug effects

Drug-­induced thyroiditis
(amiodarone, lithium, interferon-­α)

Bacterial or fungal infection

Acute suppurative thyroiditis

Radiation

Radiation thyroiditis

EXTRATHYROIDAL SOURCE OF HORMONE
Excess intake of thyroid
hormone

Excess exogenous thyroid hormone
(iatrogenic or factitious)

Ectopic hyperthyroidism
(thyroid hormone produced
outside the thyroid gland)

Struma ovarii; functional thyroid
cancer

Ingestion of contaminated food

Hamburger thyrotoxicosis

EXPOSURE TO EXCESSIVE IODINE
Jod-­Basedow effect

Iodine-induced hyperthyroidism
(radiocontrast agents or iodine in
medications)

*Etiology is not definitive.
Gsα, G protein alpha subunit; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; TSH, thyroid-­
stimulating hormone.
Modified from De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2016;388:906–
916, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 606 u Thyrotoxicosis

3417

Table 606.2  Conditions Associated with Graves Disease
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
Celiac disease
Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency
Vitiligo
Psoriasis
Pernicious anemia
Alopecia areata
Myasthenia gravis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Trisomy 21
Turner syndrome

differentiate into plasma cells that produce TRSAbs. TRSAbs bind
to and activate the TSHR, resulting in thyroid hyperplasia and
unregulated thyroid hormone synthesis. Some patients with Graves
disease also produce TSH receptor–blocking antibodies (TRBAbs)
that bind to and block activation of the TSHR. In these cases, the
clinical course of the disease correlates to the ratio between stimulating and blocking antibodies.
Ophthalmopathy may occur in Graves disease and appears to
be caused primarily by autoimmunity to the TSHR, which is also
expressed in orbital adipocytes and fibroblasts. TRSAb-­mediated
activation of these cells stimulates the synthesis of glycosaminoglycans and cytokines, resulting in retro-­orbital inflammation and
edema. Although 50–75% of children with Graves disease have
some eye findings, the symptoms are much milder than in adults;
significant ophthalmopathy is rare.
Graves disease is associated with specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes. It is also associated with other HLA-­related
disorders, such as autoimmune adrenal insufficiency, type 1 diabetes mellitus, myasthenia gravis, and celiac disease (Table 606.2).
Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, vitiligo, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, and pernicious anemia have
also been described in children with Graves disease. In family clusters, the condition associated most commonly with Graves disease
is autoimmune thyroiditis. Polymorphisms in the TSHR gene and
numerous immunomodulatory genes—including FOXP3, IL2RA,
CD40, CTLA4, PTPN22, and FCRL3—have also been associated
with increased susceptibility to Graves disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical course of Graves disease is variable, and children typically take longer to remit than adults. Because symptoms develop
gradually, the interval between onset and diagnosis is typically
6-­12 months and may be longer in prepubertal children than in
adolescents.
Signs and symptoms of Graves disease in children are shown in
Figure 606.1 and Table 606.3. Tremulousness, headaches, mood
disturbances, behavioral swings, difficulties with sleep, decreased
attention span, hyperactivity, and a decline in school performance
are all common findings in childhood. Many hyperthyroid children are referred for evaluation of attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Children with hyperthyroidism may show
acceleration in growth velocity and advanced skeletal maturation.
The effect on growth may be more pronounced if hyperthyroidism
presents earlier in childhood. The onset of puberty does not appear
to be altered by hyperthyroidism, but postmenarchal females can
develop secondary amenorrhea. There may also be an increase in
appetite with either failure to gain weight or overt weight loss. Polyuria and more frequent defecation (although not usually frank diarrhea) contribute to changes in weight. Because of the increased risk

Fig. 606.1 A 15-­yr-­old female with classic Graves disease. Clinical

features include a goiter and exophthalmos. She was treated with antithyroid drugs, to which she had a good response.

of comorbid autoimmune disorders, screening for type 1 diabetes,
celiac disease, and inflammatory bowel disease should be considered in patients who present with these symptoms.
Most children with Graves disease have a diffuse goiter. The size
of the thyroid is variable, but it is typically smooth and without
nodules. A bruit can occasionally be auscultated over a markedly
enlarged gland. Ocular manifestations can produce proptosis, pain,
eyelid erythema, chemosis, decreased extraocular muscle function
and decreased visual acuity (corneal or optic nerve involvement)
(Table 606.4). In children with thyrotoxicosis and diffuse goiter,
identifying these signs of ophthalmopathy on physical examination
strongly suggests the diagnosis of Graves disease. However, stare
and lid lag are eye findings caused by increased sympathetic activity and can be seen in thyrotoxicosis of any cause, not only Graves
disease (Fig. 606.2). In general, ocular symptoms in children with
Graves disease tend to be mild and improve with the restoration of
euthyroidism.
Children with hyperthyroidism have an increase in cardiac output.
Tachycardia, palpitations, increased systolic blood pressure, and a
widened pulse pressure are common cardiac manifestations, whereas
cardiac enlargement and insufficiency and atrial fibrillation are rare
complications.
The skin is smooth and flushed, with excessive sweating. Occasionally, associated vitiligo or psoriasis can be present. Graves dermopathy, characterized by indurated, nonpitting edema often on the
anterior shins (pretibial myxedema), is rare in children. Proximal
muscular weakness may be present. Thyroid hormone stimulates
bone resorption, leading to low bone density and increased fracture
risk in patients with chronic hyperthyroidism. Bone density returns
to normal with treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3418 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 606.3  Clinical Manifestation of Thyrotoxicosis
SYMPTOMS

SIGNS

Constitutional

Weight loss despite increased appetite; heat-­related
symptoms (heat intolerance, sweating, and polydipsia)

Weight loss

Neuromuscular

Tremor; nervousness; anxiety; fatigue; weakness; disturbed
sleep; poor concentration

Tremor of the extremities; hyperactivity; hyperreflexia;
pelvic and girdle muscle weakness

Cardiovascular

Palpitations

Tachycardia; systolic hypertension

Pulmonary

Dyspnea, shortness of breath

Tachypnea

Gastrointestinal

Hyperdefecation; nausea, vomiting

Abdominal tenderness

Skin

Increased perspiration

Warm and moist skin

Reproductive
Ocular (Graves
disease)

Menstrual disturbances
Diplopia; sense of irritation in the eyes; eyelid swelling; retro-­ Proptosis; eyelid retraction and lag; periorbital edema;
orbital pain or discomfort
conjunctival injection and chemosis; ophthalmoplegia

From De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2016;388:906–916, Table 2.

Table 606.4  Clinical Assessment of the Patient with
Graves Ophthalmopathy
ACTIVITY MEASURES*
• Spontaneous retrobulbar pain
• Pain on attempted up or down gaze
• Redness of the eyelids
• Redness of the conjunctivae
• Swelling of the eyelids
• Inflammation of the caruncle and/or plica
• Conjunctival edema
SEVERITY MEASURES
• Lid aperture (distance between the lid margins in millimeters with
the patient looking in the primary position, sitting relaxed, and
with distant fixation)
• Swelling of the eyelids (absent/equivocal, moderate, severe)
• Redness of the eyelids (absent/present)
• Redness of the conjunctivae (absent/present)
• Conjunctival edema (absent, present)
• Inflammation of the caruncle or plica (absent, present)
• Exophthalmos (measured in millimeters using the same Hertel
exophthalmometer and the same intercanthal distance for an
individual patient)
• Subjective diplopia score†
• Eye muscle involvement (ductions in degrees)
• Corneal involvement (absent/punctate keratopathy/ulcer)
• Optic nerve involvement (best corrected visual acuity, color vision,
optic disc, relative afferent pupillary defect (absent/present), plus
visual fields if optic nerve compression is suspected
*Based on the classic features of inflammation in Graves ophthalmopathy.
†Subjective diplopia score: 0, no diplopia; 1, intermittent (i.e., diplopia in primary
position of gaze, when tired or when first awakening); 2, inconstant (i.e., diplopia at
extremes of gaze); 3, constant (i.e., continuous diplopia in primary or reading position).
The clinical activity score (CAS) is the sum (1 point each) of all items present; a CAS ≥3/7
indicates active ophthalmopathy.
From Davies TF, Laurberg P, Bahn RS. Hyperthyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky
KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 12.4.

Thyroid storm is an extreme form of hyperthyroidism characterized by severely elevated thyroid hormone levels, hyperthermia, tachycardia, heart failure, altered mental status, and GI symptoms (Table
606.5). If untreated, there may be rapid progression to delirium, coma,
and death. Precipitating events include trauma, infection, radioactive
iodine (RAI) treatment, or surgery.

Fig. 606.2 Retraction of upper eyelids in the primary gaze (Dalrymple
sign). (From Kanski JJ. Systemic Diseases and the Eye: Signs and Differential Diagnosis. London: Mosby; 2001.)

LABORATORY FINDINGS

In Graves disease, serum TSH is suppressed and free T4 and T3 are
elevated. Most patients with Graves disease have measurable TRSAbs
at diagnosis. TRSAbs can be measured either by a functional assay
(thyroid-­stimulating immunoglobulin [TSI]) that assesses the presence
of antibodies capable of stimulating TSHR-­mediated cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) generation, or by a competitive binding assay
(thyrotropin-­binding inhibitory immunoglobulin [TBII]) that assesses
the presence of antibodies that bind to the TSHR, regardless of their
effect on receptor activity. In a patient with thyrotoxicosis, both assays
are highly sensitive and specific for Graves disease.
When the diagnosis cannot be established by history, physical examination, and laboratory evaluation, RAI uptake can be
measured, preferably using 123I. RAI uptake is elevated in Graves
disease, whereas it is low in other causes of thyrotoxicosis like thyroiditis or exogenous thyroid hormone ingestion. If scintigraphy
is also performed, the increased RAI uptake in Graves disease is
present diffusely throughout the gland, whereas focally increased
uptake is observed in hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Elevated serum levels of T4 or free T4 and T3 in association with suppressed levels of TSH are diagnostic of thyrotoxicosis (see Table 606.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 606 u Thyrotoxicosis
Table 606.5  Diagnostic Criteria for Thyroid Storm
POINTS
TEMPERATURE °F (°C)
99-­99.9 (37.2-­37.7)

5

100-­100.9 (37.8-­38.2)

10

101-­101.9 (38.3-­38.8)

15

102-­102.9 (38.9-­39.4)

20

103-­103.9 (39.4-­39.9)

25

≥104.0 (>40.0)

30

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM EFFECTS
Absent

0

Mild (agitation)

10

Moderate (delirium, psychosis, extreme lethargy)

20

Severe (seizure, coma)

30

GASTROINTESTINAL-­HEPATIC DYSFUNCTION
Absent

0

Moderate (diarrhea, nausea/vomiting, abdominal pain)

10

Severe (unexplained jaundice)

20

CARDIOVASCULAR DYSFUNCTION
Tachycardia
90-­109

5

110-­119

10

120-­129

15

130-­139

20

≥140

25

Congestive Heart Failure
Absent

0

Mild (pedal edema)

5

Moderate (bibasilar rales)

10

Severe (pulmonary edema)

15

Atrial Fibrillation
Absent

0

Present

10

Precipitating History
Absent

0

Present

10

In adults, a score ≥45 is highly suggestive of thyroid storm; a score of 25-­44 is suggestive
of impending thyroid storm; a score of <25 is unlikely to represent thyroid storm.
Data are from HB Burch, L Wartofsky. Life-­threatening thyrotoxicosis. Thyroid storm.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 1993;22:263–277. From De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman
LE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2016;388:906–916, Table 3.

The combination of diffuse goiter and prolonged thyrotoxicosis (>8
weeks) is most often caused by Graves disease; the presence of circulating TSHR antibodies or characteristic eye or skin changes is
diagnostic.
If the etiology of thyrotoxicosis is unclear, 123I radioiodine
uptake can distinguish hyperthyroidism (increased uptake) from
other causes of thyrotoxicosis, which will determine the appropriateness of antithyroid medication. If a discrete thyroid nodule
is palpated, 123I scintigraphy should be performed to assess for a

3419

hyperfunctioning nodule. Some children with toxic multinodular
goiter may have a TSHR-­activating pathogenic variant or McCune-­
Albright syndrome. If precocious puberty, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, or café-­au-­lait macules are present, then McCune-­Albright
syndrome is likely.
Patients with thyroid hormone resistance have elevated levels
of free T4 and T3, but levels of TSH are inappropriately elevated
or normal. They must be differentiated from patients with TSH-­
secreting pituitary tumors who have elevated serum levels of the
common α-­subunit shared by TSH, luteinizing hormone (LH),
follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH), and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Most other causes of elevated serum T4 are uncommon but can result in an erroneous diagnosis. Patients with elevated
thyroxine-­
binding globulin levels or familial dysalbuminemic
hyperthyroxinemia have high serum T4 but normal levels of free
T4 and TSH and are clinically euthyroid. Rare patients with pathogenic variants in SLC16A2 (encoding the MCT8 thyroid hormone
transporter) or THRA (encoding thyroid hormone receptor α) can
present with high serum T3, inappropriately normal or high TSH,
and low or low-­normal serum T4 concentrations.
When thyrotoxicosis is caused by exogenous thyroid hormone,
free T4 and TSH levels are the same as those seen in Graves disease, but in contrast to Graves disease, thyroid size is small, serum
thyroglobulin is very low, and 123I radioiodine uptake is suppressed.

TREATMENT
Antithyroid Drugs

In most cases, antithyroid drugs (ATDs) are the preferred initial
therapy for Graves disease in children. Alternative treatments
include radioiodine ablation (in children older than 10 years of
age) and thyroidectomy. Each therapeutic option has advantages
and disadvantages (Table 606.6). Methimazole is the first-­
line
ATD for children with Graves disease and functions by blocking
the organification of iodide necessary to synthesize thyroid hormone. Methimazole has a long serum half-­life (6-­8 hours) that
allows once-­or twice-­daily dosing. Propylthiouracil is similar to
methimazole, but its use is not recommended in children because
of its potential to cause liver failure. However, in rare instances of
severe hyperthyroidism in which methimazole cannot be used, a
short course of propylthiouracil may be offered to restore euthyroidism before definitive therapy.
Adverse reactions can occur with ATDs and range from mild
to life-­threatening. Minor adverse effects occur in approximately
10–20% of patients, and severe adverse effects occur in 2–5%. Reactions most commonly occur during the first 3 months of therapy
but can occur at any time. Transient urticaria is common and may
be managed with antihistamines or by a short period off therapy
followed by restarting ATD. Agranulocytosis is a severe adverse
reaction that occurs in 0.1–0.5% of patients and can lead to a fatal
infection. Therefore during any episode of significant fever, pharyngitis, or oral ulcers, patients should stop taking methimazole and
have an absolute neutrophil count checked. On the other hand,
transient, asymptomatic granulocytopenia (<2,000/mm3) is common in Graves disease; it is not a harbinger of agranulocytosis and
is not a reason to discontinue treatment. Other severe reactions
include hepatitis (0.2–1.0%), a lupus-­like polyarthritis syndrome,
glomerulonephritis, and antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody–
positive vasculitis. Severe liver disease, including liver failure
requiring transplantation, has been reported with propylthiouracil. The most common liver disease associated with methimazole
is cholestatic jaundice, which is reversible when the drug is discontinued. Patients with severe adverse effects should be treated with
radioiodine or thyroidectomy. Importantly, methimazole and propylthiouracil have been associated with congenital malformations
in infants exposed to these drugs in utero. Methimazole exposure
may be associated with aplasia cutis, omphalocele, choanal atresia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3420 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 606.6  Treatments for Graves Disease
TREATMENT

ADVANTAGE

DISADVANTAGE

COMMENT

Antithyroid
drugs

Noninvasive
Less initial cost
No risk of permanent hypothyroidism
Possible remission

Remission rate 30–50% (with long-­term
treatment)
Adverse drug reactions
Drug compliance required

First-­line treatment in children and
adolescents

Radioactive
iodine (131I)

Cure of hyperthyroidism

Permanent hypothyroidism
Might worsen ophthalmopathy
Pregnancy must be deferred for 6-­12 mo,
mother cannot breastfeed; small potential
risk of exacerbation of hyperthyroidism

No evidence for infertility or
birth defects with currently
recommended doses

Surgery

Rapid, effective (especially in patients
with large goiter)

Most invasive therapy
Potential complications (recurrent laryngeal
nerve damage, hypoparathyroidism)
Permanent hypothyroidism
Pain, surgical scar

Useful when coexisting suspicious
nodule is present or thyromegaly
is massive
Option for patients who do not
desire radioiodine

Modified from Cooper DS. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2003;362:459–468.

Table 606.7  Management of Thyroid Storm in
Adolescents
GOAL

TREATMENT

Inhibition of thyroid
hormone formation
and secretion

Propylthiouracil 400 mg q8h PO/IV/NGT
Saturated solution of potassium iodide, 3
drops every 8 hr

Sympathetic
blockade

Propranolol 20-­40 mg q4-­6h or 1 mg IV slowly
(repeat doses until heart rate slows); not
indicated in patients with asthma or heart
failure that is not rate related

Glucocorticoid
therapy

Prednisone 20 mg bid

Supportive therapy

Intravenous fluids (depending on indication:
glucose, electrolytes, multivitamins)
Temperature control (cooling blankets,
acetaminophen; avoid salicylates)
O2 if required
Digitalis for heart failure and to slow ventricular
response; pentobarbital for sedation
Treatment of precipitating event (e.g., infection)

From Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 22nd ed. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders; 2004:1401.

and urinary system malformations, whereas propylthiouracil may
be associated with malformations of the head, neck, and urinary
system.
The initial dosage of methimazole is 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/24 hr (max 40
mg/day) administered once or twice daily. Smaller initial dosages
should be used in early childhood or for mild disease. Careful surveillance is required after treatment is initiated. Low serum free T4
or elevated serum TSH indicates overtreatment and warrants a dose
reduction. The clinical response becomes apparent in 3-­4 weeks, and
adequate control is typically evident within 2-­4 months. The dose is
slowly decreased to the minimal level required to maintain a euthyroid state.
Most studies report a remission rate of approximately 25% after
2 years of ATD treatment in children. However, extended treatment
appears to be associated with higher remission rates of 30–50% after

4-­10 years of drug treatment. Among patients who remit, relapse
may occur, often within 6-­12 months after therapy has been discontinued. In cases of relapse, ATD therapy may be resumed, or
definitive therapy with radioiodine or thyroidectomy can be pursued. Rituximab has been used as an adjuvant therapy for difficult-­
to-­treat Graves disease.
Thyroid hormones potentiate the actions of catecholamines, leading to symptoms of tachycardia, tremor, excessive sweating, lid lag,
and stare. To ameliorate cardiovascular symptoms, a β-­adrenergic
blocking agent such as propranolol or atenolol is a useful initial supplement to ATDs. However, these agents do not alter thyroid function or treat Graves ophthalmopathy. Table 606.7 lists additional
therapies for thyroid storm.

Definitive Therapy

Radioiodine ablation or thyroidectomy is indicated when medical
management is not possible because of patient nonadherence or
severe side effects of ATDs, when an adequate trial of medical management has failed to result in remission, or if the patient prefers
definitive therapy.
Radioiodine ablation with 131I is an effective therapy for Graves
disease in children. In patients with severe hyperthyroidism, euthyroidism should be restored with methimazole before radioiodine
ablation to deplete the gland of preformed hormone and reduce the
risk of a thyrotoxic flare from radiation thyroiditis. If a patient is taking methimazole, it should be stopped 3-­5 days before radioiodine
administration. The goal of radioiodine ablation is to administer a
sufficient dose of radioiodine to ensure complete ablation of thyroid
tissue. Some centers measure radioiodine uptake before treatment
and use this to calculate an 131I dose that delivers an absorbed thyroid dose of >150 μCi/g thyroid tissue (based on thyroid gland mass
estimated by clinical examination or ultrasound). Alternatively, an
empiric fixed dose of 131I (usually 10-­15 mCi) can be offered. The
theoretical advantage of calculated doses is that they define the lowest administered dose for each patient who achieves the therapeutic
target. This benefit is most important in small children because the
absorbed radiation dose to the bone marrow and other normal tissues is inversely proportional to body size. Based on this concept
and theoretical modeling of radiation exposure, 131I therapy should
be avoided in children younger than 5 years of age. It should be used
in children between 5 and 10 years of age if the administered dose is
<10 mCi. Radioiodine ablation has a low failure rate (5–20%), and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 606 u Thyrotoxicosis
patients with persistent hyperthyroidism more than 6 months after
their first 131I therapy can be offered retreatment.
Thyroidectomy is a safe procedure when performed by an experienced surgeon. Thyroid surgery should be performed only after
the patient has been rendered euthyroid with methimazole. A saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI; 1-­3 drops, 2-­3 times per
day) may be added for 7-­14 days before surgery to decrease the vascularity of the gland. Complications of surgical treatment include
hypoparathyroidism (transient or permanent) and paralysis of the
vocal cords. Total or near-­total thyroidectomy should be performed
rather than a less extensive subtotal resection. Patients become
hypothyroid postoperatively, and recurrence of hyperthyroidism is
rare. Referral to a surgeon with extensive experience in thyroidectomy and a low personal complication rate is paramount.
Graves ophthalmopathy usually remits gradually and independently of hyperthyroidism, but control of ophthalmopathy is
facilitated by maintaining consistent euthyroidism. Severe ophthalmopathy can require treatment with high-­dose glucocorticoids,
orbital radiotherapy, or orbital decompression surgery. Teprotumumab, a human monoclonal antibody against the insulin-­like
growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-­1R) is effective in adults with ophthalmopathy. Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for thyroid eye disease and should be avoided or discontinued to avoid progression of
eye involvement.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

606.2 Congenital Hyperthyroidism
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Neonatal Graves disease is caused by transplacental passage of TRSAbs from mothers with a history of Graves disease. These mothers
can have active Graves disease, Graves disease in remission, or a
prior history of Graves disease treated with radioiodine ablation or
thyroidectomy. Occasionally, there is a maternal history of autoimmune thyroiditis. High levels of TRSAb typically result in fetal and
neonatal hyperthyroidism. However, if the mother has been treated
with ATDs, the onset of hyperthyroidism may be delayed by 3-­7
days postnatally until the ATD is metabolized by the neonate. If
TRBAbs are also present, they may delay the onset of hyperthyroidism for several weeks or even cause neonatal hypothyroidism.
Neonatal Graves disease typically remits spontaneously within 6-­12
weeks but can persist longer, depending on the titer and rate of
clearance of the TRSAbs (and TRBAbs, if present).
Neonatal hyperthyroidism occurs in approximately 2% of infants
born to mothers with a history of Graves disease. Fetal tachycardia
and goiter may suggest the diagnosis prenatally, and close ultrasound surveillance is recommended in mothers with uncontrolled
hyperthyroidism, particularly in the third trimester. Elevated serum
titers of TRSAb (more than 3 times the upper limit of normal) or a
history of a prior child with neonatal thyroid dysfunction increases
the likelihood of neonatal Graves disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Many infants born with neonatal Graves disease are premature and
have intrauterine growth restriction. Many infants also have a goiter, and tracheal compression can occur if the goiter is very large.
Other signs and symptoms of neonatal Graves disease include stare,
periorbital edema, retraction of the eyelids, hyperthermia, irritability, diarrhea, feeding difficulties, poor weight gain, tachycardia, heart

3421

Fig. 606.3 Twins with neonatal hyperthyroidism confirmed by abnor-

mal thyroid function tests. Clinical features include lack of subcutaneous tissue owing to a hypermetabolic state and a wide-­eyed, anxious
stare. They were given the diagnosis of neonatal Graves disease, but,
in fact, their mother did not have Graves disease; they had persistent,
not transient, hyperthyroidism. At age 8 years, they were treated with
radioiodine. They are now believed to have had some other form of neonatal hyperthyroidism, such as a constitutive activation of the thyroid-­
stimulating hormone receptor.

failure, hypertension, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, cholestasis, jaundice, thrombocytopenia, and hyperviscosity (Fig. 606.3). Laboratory
evaluation shows suppressed serum TSH and elevated serum levels of
T4, free T4, and T3. TRSAbs are elevated at birth and typically resolve
within 3 months of life. If symptoms and signs are not recognized
and treated promptly, cardiac failure and death can occur. Permanent
sequelae of neonatal hyperthyroidism can include craniosynostosis
and developmental delay.

TREATMENT

Treatment should be initiated at the onset of symptoms to avoid
short-­
term and long-­
term complications. Therapy consists of
methimazole (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/24 hr given every 12 hr) and oral or
intravenous administration of a nonselective β-­adrenergic blocker
such as propranolol to decrease sympathetic hyperactivity. In
refractory cases, Lugol solution or potassium iodide (1-­2 drops per
day) can be added. The first dose of iodide should be given at least
1 hour after the first dose of ATD to prevent the iodide from being
used for further thyroid hormone synthesis. If severe hyperthyroidism induces heart failure, parenteral fluid therapy, corticosteroids,
and digitalization may be indicated. Once serum thyroid hormone
levels begin to decrease, ATDs should be gradually tapered to keep
the infant euthyroid. Occasionally, a block-­and-­replace method
with concurrent ATD and thyroid hormone replacement therapy
may be required to ensure euthyroidism.
Most cases of neonatal Graves disease remit by 3 months of age, but
occasionally neonatal hyperthyroidism persists into childhood. Typically, there is a family history of hyperthyroidism. Neonatal hyperthyroidism without evidence for autoimmune disease in mother or
infant may be caused by a gain-­of-­function pathogenic variant in the
TSHR gene that results in constitutive activation of the receptor. This
can be transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner or can occur
sporadically. Neonatal hyperthyroidism has also been reported in
patients with McCune-­Albright syndrome because of an activating
pathogenic variant of the G protein stimulatory α-­subunit. Under
these circumstances, hyperthyroidism recurs when ATDs are discontinued, and these children eventually must be treated with radioiodine or surgery.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3422 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
PROGNOSIS

Advanced osseous maturation, microcephaly, and cognitive impairment occur when treatment of neonatal hyperthyroidism is delayed.
Intellectual development is normal in most treated infants with neonatal Graves disease, although some have neurocognitive problems
likely caused by in utero hyperthyroidism. Therefore neurocognitive development should be monitored throughout childhood. After
the resolution of neonatal hyperthyroidism, some infants develop
transient or permanent central hypothyroidism that requires thyroid hormone replacement, likely resulting from poorly understood
changes in hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid feedback caused by in
utero hyperthyroidism.

Resistance to Thyroid Hormone

The actions of thyroid hormones are mediated by two thyroid
hormone receptors (α and β), each with a unique tissue distribution. Inactivating pathogenic variants in each of these receptors
gives rise to a distinct syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone.
Resistance to thyroid hormone β (RTHβ) is an autosomal dominant
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the THRB gene. Because
this receptor mediates the normal feedback of thyroid hormone
on the hypothalamus and pituitary, patients have elevated serum
levels of T4 and T3, but serum TSH levels are inappropriately normal or elevated. Goiter is almost always present, but symptoms of
thyroid dysfunction are variable among individuals. There may be
clinical features of hypothyroidism such as developmental delay,
growth retardation, delayed skeletal maturation, and some features
of hyperthyroidism like tachycardia and hyperreflexia. Affected
children have an increased prevalence of learning disabilities and
ADHD. The clinical symptoms, goiter, and elevated thyroid hormone levels may be mistaken for Graves disease, but RTHβ is confirmed by the presence of normal or elevated (not suppressed) TSH
levels. This condition must also be differentiated from a pituitary
TSH-­secreting tumor, which is not familial and in which serum levels of the common α-­subunit are elevated.
More than 100 distinct variants in THRB have been identified in
patients with RTHβ, and genotype-­phenotype correlation is poor
even among affected members of the same family. Nearly all mutations have a dominant-­negative effect in which the variant receptor
interferes with normal receptor action, leading to disease even in
heterozygotes. Individuals carrying two mutant alleles are severely
affected. A very rare autosomal recessive form of this disorder has
been reported in individuals homozygous for a deletion of the
THRB gene.
Treatment usually is not required unless growth and skeletal
stunting are present. Different therapies, including levothyroxine
and triiodothyroacetic acid, have been successful in some patients.
Intermittent administration of T3 may be useful for reducing goiter
size. Symptoms of hyperthyroidism can be treated with β blockers,
but ATDs or radioiodine ablation are generally not used because
they increase TSH levels and goiter size.
Pathogenic variants in the THRA gene, which encodes thyroid
hormone receptor α, have also been reported. THRA variants are
dominant negative and cause RTHα in heterozygous individuals.
Clinical symptoms are those of untreated primary hypothyroidism,
including skeletal dysplasia with short stature and macrocephaly,
developmental delay, constipation, bradycardia, and macrocytic
anemia. Serum thyroid function tests show subtle abnormalities of
low or low-­normal T4, high or high-­normal T3 (with elevated T3/
T4 ratio), and normal TSH, as well as the unique finding of markedly low reverse T3. Treatment has not been clearly established for
RTHα.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 607

Carcinoma of the Thyroid
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Carcinoma of the thyroid is rare in childhood, with an annual incidence in children younger than 15 years of approximately 4-­5 in
100,000 cases. The incidence of childhood thyroid cancer increases
with age and peaks in adolescence. Females are more commonly
affected than males. Compared to adults, childhood thyroid cancers are characterized by significantly higher rates of metastasis
and recurrence. Despite often being metastatic at discovery, most
pediatric thyroid cancers with adequate treatment have a favorable
outcome.

PATHOGENESIS

The majority of differentiated thyroid cancers are of follicular cell
origin; papillary carcinoma (85–90%) is the most common subtype. Although their histologic features are similar, papillary thyroid cancers of childhood are genetically distinct from their adult
counterparts. About 70% of adults with papillary thyroid cancer
exhibit pathogenic somatic variants in BRAF or RAS; pediatric
papillary thyroid cancers are more commonly caused by somatic
gene fusion events involving the oncogenic tyrosine kinases RET
or NTRK1/3. Follicular carcinoma (8%) is the next most common
type of childhood thyroid cancer and is also derived from thyroid
follicular cells. Medullary carcinoma (4%), derived from thyroid C
cells, and anaplastic thyroid cancers are relatively rare.
Up to 10% of cases of follicular cell–derived thyroid cancers may
be familial. Genetic syndromes associated with an increased risk
of thyroid neoplasia include PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes
(Cowden, Bannayan-­
Riley-­
Ruvalcaba, and Proteus syndromes)
characterized by macrocephaly, mucocutaneous lesions (fibromas),
and breast cancer and endometrial tumors; familial adenomatous
polyposis (pathogenic variant in APC); and DICER1 syndrome,
which includes tumors of the lung, kidney, female reproductive
tract, and other organs. The evaluation of a child with a thyroid
nodule should include a medical and family history to assess for features of these syndromes. In addition, some families have a strong
history of nonsyndromic nonmedullary thyroid cancer, but no specific genetic causes have been confirmed.
The thyroid gland of children is susceptible to radiation exposure, particularly in very young patients. Even a low dose (1 Gy)
of radiation exposure results in a 7.7-­fold increased relative risk of
thyroid cancer. In past decades, irradiation of the cervical region for
benign conditions (e.g., enlarged thymus or tonsils, adenitis) was a
predominant cause of thyroid cancer in children. Currently, therapeutic irradiation for other regional neoplasms or bone marrow
transplantation and the increased survival of these children have
made this cause of thyroid cancer increasingly prevalent. Higher
radiation dose, younger age at the time of treatment, and female sex
are additional risk factors for the development of thyroid cancer.
The relative risk of thyroid cancer is highest after radiation doses of
5-­30 Gy, above which the excess risk declines but does not disappear. In studies of cancer survivors treated with radiation, ∼10–30%
develop benign thyroid nodules. There is an increased incidence of
thyroid cancer beginning within 3-­5 years after radiation treatment
and peaking after 15-­25 years.
Autoimmune thyroiditis and Graves disease may be associated
with an increased risk of thyroid cancer, but data remain conflicting.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 607 u Carcinoma of the Thyroid
Therefore thyroid nodules detected in patients with these disorders
should be evaluated for possible thyroid cancer. Thyroid cancer has
been reported rarely in children with congenital goiter or ectopic thyroid tissue.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Thyroid cancer usually presents as a painless nodule in the anterior
neck. Rapid growth and large size, firmness, fixation to adjacent tissues,
hoarseness, dysphagia, or neck lymphadenopathy should heighten the
concern for thyroid cancer. Cervical lymph node metastasis is common, so any unexplained cervical lymphadenopathy warrants examination of the thyroid.
The lungs are the most common site of distant metastasis. Pulmonary metastases are usually asymptomatic, and pulmonary function
testing may be normal even with widespread metastases. Radiologically, metastases may appear as diffuse miliary or nodular infiltrations, typically greatest in the posterior basal lung fields. Other sites
of metastasis, including bones and brain, are rare in children. Almost
all children with thyroid cancer are euthyroid, but rarely is the carcinoma functional and produces clinical and laboratory evidence of
hyperthyroidism.

DIAGNOSIS

Patients usually present with a neck mass, and thyroid ultrasound
demonstrates a thyroid nodule and/or diffuse infiltration of the thyroid. Although several imaging features (including calcifications,
irregular margins, and the presence of abnormal lymph nodes)
are significantly associated with thyroid cancer risk, the absence
of these features does not exclude the possibility of thyroid cancer.
The appropriate technique for evaluating sonographically suspicious nodules is fine needle aspiration (FNA), which can detect the
characteristic nuclear abnormalities of papillary thyroid carcinoma,
which is the most common form. In most cases, operative pathology is required to confirm the diagnosis of thyroid cancer and to
determine the extent of disease.

TREATMENT

The primary therapy for thyroid cancer is surgical resection.
Because intrathyroidal spread is common in papillary thyroid cancer, near-­total thyroidectomy is recommended. Before surgery, neck
ultrasonography should be performed to assess for abnormal lymph
nodes, and suspicious lymph nodes may be biopsied preoperatively
to determine the need for lymph node dissection. In patients with
metastatic thyroid cancer, adjunctive therapy may be required with
radioactive iodine (131I) to ablate unresectable thyroid cancer and
thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH) suppression with supraphysiologic levothyroxine to reduce TSH-­stimulated growth of residual
cancer cells.

PROGNOSIS

Although regional and distant metastases are more common in the
pediatric population than in adults, most children with thyroid cancer have an excellent prognosis. Long-­term survival from pediatric
thyroid cancer is >97%, although the disease may recur in up to
15–20%. Even in children with pulmonary metastasis at diagnosis,
30-­year survival is 90%, and many patients who cannot achieve
complete cure remain asymptomatic with stable or slowly progressive cancer burden over many years. For rare children with aggressive cancers that progress despite conventional therapy, targeted
molecular therapies directed at the underlying genetic pathogenic
variants are available and effective in many cases. Psychosocial supports, including access to social work and mental health professionals, are essential in caring for children with thyroid cancer.
Children with thyroid cancer require lifelong monitoring because
of the risk of disease recurrence years or decades after initial treatment. For most patients, serum thyroglobulin is a sensitive and
specific cancer marker. Circulating autoantibodies to thyroglobulin
can confound the measurement of thyroglobulin levels and should
be measured whenever serum thyroglobulin is assayed. Because

3423

most thyroid cancer recurrences occur in the thyroid bed or cervical lymph nodes, surveillance should include serial neck ultrasounds. Patients with a higher risk of recurrence or with distant
metastases may require additional anatomic imaging (such as chest
CT), whole-­body radioactive iodine scanning (123I), or combined
anatomic and functional imaging (SPECT/CT).

MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) arises from the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid and accounts for approximately
4% of thyroid malignancies in children. In children, the majority
of MTC cases are hereditary, as part of the syndrome of multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2; see Chapter 609). Activating
pathogenic variants in the RET proto-­oncogene are responsible for
most cases of MTC. These variants occur in the germline in patients
with MEN2, but somatic RET changes are present in many sporadic
cases of MTC.
The most common presentation of sporadic MTC is an asymptomatic thyroid nodule. When MTC occurs sporadically, it is usually unicentric, but in the familial form it may be multicentric. MTC
begins as hyperplasia of the parafollicular cells (C ­cell hyperplasia),
which is often present histologically in thyroid glands removed prophylactically from patients with MEN2. The diagnosis of MTC can
also be made by cytology after FNA of a thyroid nodule. Because C
cells produce calcitonin, a high calcitonin concentration in an FNA
specimen or in a patient’s serum can help confirm the diagnosis of
MTC. The diagnosis warrants genetic testing for a germline RET
variant, and in variant-­positive patients, screening for pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism should be obtained before
anesthesia for thyroidectomy.
The most important treatment for MTC is surgical resection.
Preoperative evaluation should include neck ultrasound to identify
potential lymph node metastases. Baseline serum levels of calcitonin
and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) should be measured preoperatively, and higher levels are correlated with a greater likelihood of
metastatic disease. Surgical treatment includes total thyroidectomy
and lymph node dissection of any involved lymph node compartments. Complete resection is often curative, but this can be difficult to achieve in patients with metastatic disease. Surveillance with
neck ultrasound and serum levels of calcitonin and CEA can assess
for the presence or progression of residual disease. Other treatment
modalities for advanced or metastatic disease include specific RET
inhibitors, external beam radiation, and radiofrequency ablation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

607.1 Thyroid Nodules
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
The frequency of thyroid nodules increases with age. Sonographically
detectable thyroid nodules are present in 19–67% of adults but in only
1–2% of children. Although the risk of malignancy in a thyroid nodule
is higher in children (20–25%) than in adults (5–15%), the majority of
thyroid nodules in children are benign.
Benign disorders that can present as a thyroid mass include benign
adenomatous or colloid nodules and various congenital cysts (Table
607.1). A thyroid mass that appears suddenly or enlarges rapidly can
indicate hemorrhage into a cyst, a benign adenoma, or an infectious
process.
Evaluation of a child with a thyroid nodule should begin by
measuring serum TSH. A low serum TSH suggests a possible
hyperfunctioning (autonomous) thyroid nodule, which should be
evaluated by scintigraphy (123I or 99mTc-­pertechnetate). Autonomous nodules generally are not malignant and do not require
biopsy. Patients with a normal or elevated TSH should undergo
neck ultrasound, and any sonographically suspicious nodule(s)
of significant size should be evaluated by ultrasound-­guided FNA

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3424 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
(Fig. 607.1). Thyroid cytology is evaluated using a standardized system, most commonly the Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid
Cytopathology. Cytology may be interpreted as benign, positive for
papillary thyroid cancer, indeterminate, or nondiagnostic. The predictive value of cytology for thyroid cancer varies by category and
to some degree among institutions. In general, cytology positive for
papillary thyroid cancer confers a >98% likelihood of cancer, and
near-­total thyroidectomy is appropriate. For a nodule of indeterminate cytology, lobectomy is commonly performed for definitive
diagnosis; this may be followed by completion thyroidectomy if
pathology shows a significant thyroid cancer. Molecular testing for
oncogenic mutations may inform the management of certain indeterminate cytology. Patients with cytologically benign nodules have
a low likelihood of malignancy and should be monitored with serial
neck ultrasound. Surgical resection may be offered for benign nodules that cause symptoms, including dysphagia, globus sensation, or
undesired appearance.

Table 607.1  Etiologic Classification of Solitary Thyroid
Nodules
Lymphoid follicle, as part of autoimmune thyroiditis
Thyroid developmental anomalies
Intrathyroidal thyroglossal duct cyst
Intrathyroidal ectopic thymus
Thyroid abscess (acute infectious thyroiditis)
Simple cyst
Neoplasms
Benign
Colloid (adenomatous) nodule
Follicular adenoma
Hyperfunctioning (toxic) adenoma
Lymphohemangioma
Malignant
Papillary carcinoma
Follicular carcinoma
Anaplastic carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
Nonthyroidal
Lymphoma
Teratoma

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Neck ultrasonography sonographic pattern

Benign or very low suspicion
<3% risk of malignancy

Low suspicion
5–10% risk of malignancy

Intermediate suspicion
15–30% risk of malignancy

High suspicion
>70–90% risk of malignancy

• Purely cystic nodules

• Partially cystic nodules
• Solid isoechoic or hyperechoic
nodules

• Solid hypoechoic nodules with
smooth margins

• Solid hypoechoic nodules or solid
hypoechoic component of a
partially cystic nodule with one
or more of the following: irregular
margins, microcalcifications,
taller-than-wide shape, rim
calciﬁcations with small extrusive
soft-tissue component,
extrathyroid extension, and
suspicious lymph nodes

>1·5 cm

>1 cm

>1 cm

FNAC DCs in order of increasing risk of malignancy

Benign (DC 2)
<3% risk of
malignancy

Surveillance*

Nondiagnostic
(DC 1)
5–10% risk of
malignancy

Repeat FNAC

AUS or FLUS
(DC 3)
30–45% risk of
malignancy

FN or SFN
(DC 4)
30–70% risk
of malignancy

Surgery
(consider molecular testing)

Suspicious
(DC 5)
70–85% risk
of malignancy

Malignant
(DC 6)
97–99% risk
of malignancy

Surgery

Fig. 607.1 Management algorithm for thyroid nodules based on sonographic patterns and cytology diagnostic categories of the Bethesda System.
*Fine-­needle aspiration can be considered (1) for nodules with a low-­suspicion sonographic pattern and the largest diameter greater than 2 cm and
(2) if there are suspicious clinical findings (e.g., firm mass, neck pain, cough, voice change, and a history of childhood neck irradiation or familial
thyroid cancer), regardless of the sonographic appearances. AUS, Atypia of undetermined significance; DC, diagnostic category; FLUS, follicular
lesion of undetermined significance; FN, follicular neoplasm; FNAC, fine needle aspiration cytology; SFN, suspicious for follicular neoplasm. (From
Cabanillas ME, McFadden DG, Durante C. Thyroid cancer. Lancet. 2016;388:2783–2794, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 608 u Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes

Chapter 608

Autoimmune
Polyglandular Syndromes
Christina M. Astley, Jessica R. Smith, and
Ari J. Wassner
An autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS) occurs when autoimmunity is directed at multiple glands and/or nonendocrine organs,
sometimes associated with immune dysregulation. Endocrine glands
and other organs commonly affected by APS have unique autoantigens
that increase these tissues’ susceptibility to damage by an untamed
immune response. Most autoimmune endocrinopathies are caused by
cell-­mediated immunity from autoreactive T cells. Antibodies to one
or more autoantigens are commonly associated with specific autoimmune manifestations and are markers of immune dysregulation. These
autoantibodies are directly pathogenic in some nonendocrine tissues,
but this is rarely the case in autoimmune endocrine disease. A notable
exception is the autoantibodies in Graves disease that cause primary
hyperthyroidism by activating the thyroid-­stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR).
APS caused by monogenic disorders of immune dysregulation
(including APS type 1 [APS-­1]) have heritable lesions in key aspects
of immune tolerance (Table 608.1). Polygenic disorders associated
with APS (APS type 2 [APS-­2]) and some chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., trisomy 21) also result in an aberrant immune response that
causes multiorgan autoimmunity. Nongenetic factors (e.g., immune
checkpoint inhibitors for cancer therapy) may lead to autoimmune
polyglandular disease. Although APS is uncommon, patients can
experience significant morbidity, particularly if the syndrome is not
identified early and managed appropriately. There may be 1-­2 decades
between the presentations of the first and subsequent endocrinopathy. The presence of hypoparathyroidism, primary adrenal insufficiency,
neonatal type 1 diabetes mellitus, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
immune dysregulation, or a family history should raise particular suspicion for APS.

MONOGENIC AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR
SYNDROMES

The number of recognized monogenic defects of immune regulation leading to APS continues to grow (see Table 608.1). The best-­
characterized monogenic APSs are caused by pathogenic genetic
variants that primarily affect central immune tolerance (APS-­1) or the
development of regulatory T cells (immune dysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked, or IPEX). Other monogenic APSs
(the so-­called IPEX-­like disorders) are caused by defects in regulatory
T-­cell suppression or signaling.

AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR SYNDROME
TYPE 1

APS-­1 is an archetypal monogenic polyendocrinopathy syndrome. It is
a rare, autosomal recessive disorder caused by loss-­of-­function variants
in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) on chromosome 21q22.3.
AIRE plays a critical role in the presentation of self-­antigens to developing T cells in the thymus, which normally leads to central immune
tolerance by inducing apoptosis of T cells specific for these autoantigens (negative selection). AIRE also plays a role in the development
of regulatory T cells (see Chapter 174). Therefore patients with APS-­1
develop autoreactive T cells and autoantibodies directed at multiple
tissues.
APS-­1 is defined by the presence of at least two of three classic clinical features (Whitaker triad) of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism, and primary adrenal insufficiency. These three

3425

manifestations tend to emerge over time—candidiasis before around 5
years of age, hypoparathyroidism around 10 years, and adrenal insufficiency around 15 years—but the precise order and age of onset of each
component are variable. Most patients develop additional autoimmune
manifestations over time, with skin and gastrointestinal disorders typically emerging before age 20 and other endocrine disorders after the
second decade (see Table 608.1).
Nearly every endocrine gland may be affected by APS-­1. The commonly affected glands include parathyroids and adrenals. Other glands
affected, in decreasing order of frequency, are the ovaries, testes, thyroid, pancreatic β cells, and pituitary. A wide range of nonendocrine
tissues can be affected, sometimes before the first endocrinopathy is
detected. The commonly affected nonendocrine tissues are teeth and
nails, and ectodermal dystrophy is present in most patients. For this
reason, APS-­1 has also been called autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-­
candidiasis-­ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). Other manifestations
include gastrointestinal malabsorption, autoimmune hepatitis, pernicious anemia, vitiligo, and alopecia. APS-­1 patients are at increased risk
of infection, possibly related to a combination of cytokine autoantibodies, splenic dysfunction, and compromised gastrointestinal mucosal
integrity. Mucocutaneous candidiasis is quite common and can lead
to oral or esophageal cancer if not diagnosed and treated. Esophageal
cancer, autoimmune hepatitis, adrenal crisis, and severe hypocalcemia
are important causes of mortality in APS-­1 patients. Therefore APS-­1
patients require close clinical follow-­up with a multidisciplinary team
to manage disease manifestations. (Treatment of individual endocrinopathies and other manifestations are reviewed separately in the relevant chapters, including Chapters 280, 611, and 615).
The initial diagnosis of APS-­1 generally is made clinically. Pathogenic AIRE variants can be detected in the majority of patients with
clinical APS-­1, and confirmation of the diagnosis by AIRE sequencing
is indicated for any patient with known or suspected APS-­1. APS-­1
caused by pathogenic AIRE variants is more common in certain
founder populations (e.g., Iranian Jews, Sardinians, Finns, and Norwegians reported a prevalence ranging from 1 in 9,000 to 1 in 90,000).
Knowledge of the specific pathogenic variant facilitates clinical and
genetic counseling, including testing of family members. AIRE variants with autosomal dominant inheritance and an atypical APS-­2–like
clinical presentation (especially with pernicious anemia or vitiligo)
have been reported. APS-­1 patients without identifiable AIRE variants
may benefit from further evaluation (e.g., immune dysregulation gene
panel, whole exome sequencing, imaging for thymoma).
The clinical presentation of APS-­1 is variable, even within families
with the same AIRE variant, making it difficult to predict the disease
course for affected individuals. Therefore patients with APS-­1 should
have regular screening for the development of new clinical manifestations. The importance of screening is illustrated by unexplained deaths
in APS-­1 patients or their siblings, presumably the result of undiagnosed manifestations such as adrenal insufficiency.
Multiple autoantibodies may be detectable in patients with APS-­1
(Table 608.2). Many of these autoantibodies are also present in the corresponding single-­organ autoimmune disease, but autoantibodies to
some antigens (e.g., NALP5, interleukin-­17 family cytokine, and type
1 interferons) are unique to APS-­1. Measuring organ-­specific autoantibodies has variable utility for predicting the onset of endocrine
gland failure or other APS-­1 manifestations. Therefore clinical suspicion, laboratory screening, and education about symptoms of evolving
endocrinopathies and/or other APS-­1 manifestations are paramount
regardless of autoantibody status.

IMMUNE DYSREGULATION-­
POLYENDOCRINOPATHY-­ENTEROPATHY X-­LINKED

IPEX is caused by loss-­of-­function variants in FOXP3, which is
located on the X chromosome (Xp11.23) (see Chapter 174). The
inactivation of FOXP3 results in impaired peripheral immune tolerance caused by impaired development of regulatory T cells, leading to
the emergence of autoreactive T cells. The endocrinopathies commonly associated with IPEX are early-­onset type 1 diabetes mellitus
and autoimmune thyroiditis. Any diagnosis of type 1 diabetes mellitus

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

     

     

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS

APS

GENETIC
ABNOR­
MALITY

INHERI­
TANCE

ONSET

ENDOCRINOPATHIES
CLASSIC
PHENO­TYPE

ADRE­NAL
INSUFFI­
CIENCY

THY­ROID

TD1

HPT

GONAD­AL
INSUFFI­­CIENCY

●●●●

●●

●●

●●●●

●●

MONOGENIC APS
APS-­1

AIRE

AR (AD rare)

Infancy

Candid­iasis, hypo­
parath­yroidism,
Addison disease,
ecto­dermal
dystrophy

IPEX

FOXP3

XL

Infancy

Enteropathy,
type 1 diabetes
in infancy, eczemat­
ous dermatitis

●●●●

●●●●

CTLA4

CLTA4

AD

Infancy

Enteropathy,
cytopenia, lympho­
cytic aggre­gates,
hypo­gamma­glob­­
ulinemia

●●

●

LRBA

LRBA

AR

Infancy

Entero­pathy,
respir­atory
tract disease,
organo­megaly,
hypo­gamma­glob­
ulinemia

●

●

STAT1

STAT1

AD

Infancy

Candid­iasis,
recur­rent
infect­ions, multiple
auto­immunity,
cerebral aneurysm

●●

●

STAT5b

STAT5b

AR

Infancy

Entero­pathy,
respir­atory
tract disease,
recurrent
infec­tions,
growth failure

●●

CD25

IL2RA

AR

Infancy

Entero­pathy,
type 1 diabetes
in infancy,
recurrent
infect­ions

●●●●

●●●●

●●●

●●

●

●●

●

●●●●

●

●

●●●●

●●

●

●

OTHER APS AND APS-­LIKE CONDITIONS
APS-­2

HLA,
MICA,
PTPN22,
CTLA4,
NALP1

Poly­genic

Adult­hood

Addison disease,
auto­immune thyroid
disease, type 1
diabetes

Turner
syn­drome

46, X
(most)

N/A

Congen­ital

Short stature, ovarian
insuffi­ciency, webbed
neck, coarc­tation of
the aorta

Kline­felter
syn­drome

47, XXY
(most)

N/A

Congen­ital

Tall stature, testi­cular
insuf­fi­ciency, gyne­
comastia

N/A (most)

Congen­ital

Hypotonia, epicanthal
folds, Brush­field
spots, single palmar
crease, develop­­
mental delay

Down
Trisomy
syn­drome 21

●●●●

●

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

     

     

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation—cont’d
NONENDOCRINE MANIFESTATIONS
OTHER
ENDO­CRINE

CAN­DIDA
INFEC­TION

OTHER
INFEC­TIONS

MALABSORP­
TION,
ENTEROP­ATHY

●●●●

●●

●●

●

●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●

●

●●●●

●●●●

●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●●

GH
resist­ance,
hyper­pro­
lactinemia

●●●●

AUTO­
IMMUNE
HEPATITIS

VITILIGO

●●

●●

●●

●

ECZEMA,
ALLERGIC
DISEASE

Keratocon­
junctivitis,
periodic fever,
asplenism

●●●●

Cytopenias,
bacterial
infections,
nephritis

Cytopenias, lung
disease, psoriasis
and skin disease

●

Respiratory
infection,
cytopenias,
myasthenia
gravis

●●

●●

Psoriasis,
cytopenia,
vascular, skin
disease

●●●●

●●●●

VZV infections,
cytopenia

●●●●

●●●●

EBV and CMV
infections,
cytopenia

●●

●

●

●

●

●

Tall stature,
gyneco­mastia

Short stature

OTHER

●

●

Short stature

GI
AUTOIM­
MUNITY

Lymphe­dema,
psoriasis, IBD

Lupus, Sjogren
syndrome,
multiple
sclerosis (rare)

●

Congenital heart
disease

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

     

     

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation—cont’d
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS

APS

GENETIC
ABNOR­
MALITY

INHERI­
TANCE

ONSET

ENDOCRINOPATHIES
ADRE­NAL
INSUFFI­
CIENCY

CLASSIC
PHENO­TYPE

DiGeorge
syn­
drome

22q11.2
del

AD

Congen­
ital

Absent thymus,
congenital heart
disease, hypo­­
calcemia, develo­p­
mental delay

ROHHAD

None iden­
tified

N/A

Early
child­
hood

Rapid-­onset obesity,
hypo­thalamic
dysfunc­tion, auto­
nomic dys­regulation,
neuro­blastic tumor

N/A

Post-­
treat­
ment

Oncology treat­
ment, possible
pre-­existing auto­
immunity

Check­
point
inhibitor
IRAE

●

THY­ROID

TD1

HPT

●

●

●●

●

●

GONAD­AL
INSUFFI­­CIENCY

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

before 6-­9 months of age should prompt consideration of a monogenic
APS or a genetic cause of β-­cell dysfunction. Patients with IPEX often
have autoimmune enteropathy and eczematous dermatitis. They may
also have other autoimmunity (e.g., liver, kidney, cytopenias) and
allergic dysregulation (e.g., food allergy, peripheral eosinophilia).
Therapy for IPEX consists of immune modulation with immunosuppressants (e.g., glucocorticoids, tacrolimus), novel therapeutics (e.g.,
abatacept), or stem cell transplantation.

OTHER MONOGENIC IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
DISORDERS

Several other disorders involve failure of peripheral tolerance and
emergence of autoimmunity, often with some degree of immune
dysregulation. These disorders include loss-­of-­function genetic variants in IL2RA (CD25), LRBA, CTLA4, STAT5b, and gain-of-­function
variants in STAT1 and STAT3 that are pathophysiologically similar
to IPEX. Broadly, patients with these IPEX-­like disorders are at
high risk of type 1 diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroiditis (see
Table 608.1). They also have multiple nonendocrine diseases, especially autoimmunity and immunodeficiency affecting the skin, lungs,
and gastrointestinal tract. STAT5b participates in the IL2/STAT5 signal transduction axis necessary for growth hormone signaling and
may also affect prolactin secretion. Therefore patients with STAT5b
defects may have nonautoimmune growth hormone insensitivity and
hyperprolactinemia in addition to immune dysregulation, hypergammaglobulinemia, and multiple autoimmunity. STAT1 gain-of-­
function variants inhibit the normal production of Th17 cytokines,
which leads to chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. These patients
also have increased risk of infection, squamous cell cancer, enteropathy, and arterial aneurysms. Patients with CD25 defects are also at
increased risk of infection because interleukin (IL)-­2 signaling plays
a role in Th17 responses. Many IPEX-­like patients develop nonautoimmune endocrinopathies, including iatrogenic adrenal insufficiency, dysglycemia, hypocalcemia, poor bone health from high-­dose
glucocorticoid therapy, chronic inflammation/infection, and/or
malabsorption/malnutrition.

POLYGENIC AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR
SYNDROME

APS-­2 is a clinical syndrome defined by the presence of two or more
syndrome-­
specific endocrinopathies: autoimmune primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), autoimmune thyroid disease
(Hashimoto thyroiditis or Graves disease), and/or type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Some classification systems subdivide APS-­2 according to

the particular glands affected (e.g., subtype 2, 3, and 4 if adrenal, thyroid, or neither gland, respectively) or other autoimmune manifestations present (e.g., subtype 3A, 3B, and 3C if additional endocrine,
gastrointestinal, or systemic autoimmunity are present, respectively).
However, because there is no clear pathophysiologic distinction
between these subtypes, they can be considered collectively as APS-­2.
When describing the characteristics of APS-­2, it is important to recognize some degree of overlap between patients with clinical APS-­2
and those with a single autoimmune endocrinopathy who may later
develop another and be classified as APS-­2.
Unlike monogenic APSs, which are rare diseases with early-­
childhood onset and a mendelian inheritance pattern, APS-­2 is a
common polygenic disease that usually manifests after the second
decade in a patient with a personal or family history of autoimmune
disease. APS-­2 is most common in middle-­age females (prevalence
near 1 in 20,000). Primary gonadal insufficiency, vitiligo, alopecia, and
chronic atrophic gastritis (with or without pernicious anemia) can
occur. Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism and candidiasis are not typical of APS-­2 and should prompt consideration of APS-­1.
Addison disease is uncommon in the general population (prevalence near 1 in 10,000). However, patients with this condition are at
high risk of developing additional endocrine autoimmunity constituting APS-­2. Two thirds will have evidence of additional subclinical or
clinical autoimmunity. Patients with Addison disease should have close
follow-­up, screening, and education about other autoimmune manifestations. About half of patients with Addison disease have autoimmune
thyroid disease (Schmidt syndrome), and about 10% have type 1 diabetes mellitus (Carpenter syndrome). Less frequent comorbid autoimmune manifestations include Graves disease, ovarian insufficiency,
alopecia, vitiligo, pernicious anemia, or celiac disease.
APS-­2 develops less frequently in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus than in those with Addison disease. Nevertheless, many patients with
type 1 diabetes develop additional autoimmunity, and comorbid autoimmune thyroid and gastrointestinal disease are much more common (each
about 20%) than comorbid adrenal disease (<1%). Because thyroxine and
cortisol affect insulin sensitivity, metabolism, and appetite, unexplained
hypoglycemia or deterioration in glycemic control may be the first clinical
sign of APS-­2 in a patient with preexisting type 1 diabetes mellitus. Unexplained hypoglycemia may also signal the onset of celiac disease. Indeed,
celiac disease often precedes the onset of autoimmune endocrinopathies,
including type 1 diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and Addison disease.
The development of APS-­2 in individuals with autoimmune thyroid disease is relatively infrequent. Nevertheless, the clinician should
consider the possibility of adrenal insufficiency before treating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation—cont’d
NONENDOCRINE MANIFESTATIONS
OTHER
ENDO­CRINE

CAN­DIDA
INFEC­TION

OTHER
INFEC­TIONS

MALABSORP­
TION,
ENTEROP­ATHY

GI
AUTOIM­
MUNITY

AUTO­
IMMUNE
HEPATITIS

VITILIGO

ECZEMA,
ALLERGIC
DISEASE

OTHER

Short
stature

Thymic dysplasia/
aplasia,
congenital
heart disease,
T-­cell deficiency,
cytopenias

Hypotha­lamic
dysfun­ction,
hyperpro­
lactinemia

Autonomic dysreg­
ulation, central
hypoven­tilation

Multiple non-­
endocrine IRAE

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

Table 608.2  Autoantibodies Present in Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes and in Isolated Autoimmune
Endocrinopathies
TISSUE OR GLAND

AUTOANTIGEN

AUTOIMMUNE ENDOCRINOPATHIES
Adrenal
CYP21A2, CYP11A1,
CYP17A1

DISEASE
MANIFESTATION

NOTE

Primary adrenal
insufficiency

Of the adrenal autoantibodies, CYP21A2 is most strongly
associated with adrenal insufficiency. Higher risk of progression
to adrenal insufficiency in children with positive adrenal
autoantibodies (over 80%) compared with adults (near
20%). Adrenal autoantibodies detected in 50% of pediatric
hypoparathyroidism and 1% of pediatric type 1 diabetes

TPO, Tg

Autoimmune thyroiditis
(hypothyroidism)

Frequently positive without clinical thyroid disease

TSHR

Graves disease
(hyperthyroidism)

Only endocrine autoantibody that directly causes autoimmune
endocrinopathy

Pancreatic β cell

IA-­2, GAD65, insulin,
ZnT8

Type 1 diabetes mellitus

Risk of type 1 diabetes increases with the number of positive
autoantibodies; IA-­2, but not GAD65, autoantibodies associated
with time to type 1 diabetes diagnosis in APS-­1

Parathyroid

NALP5, CaSR

Hypoparathyroidism

NALP5 antibodies are present only in hypoparathyroidism caused
by APS-­1

Gonad

CYP11A1, CYP17A1,
NALP5 and TSGA10

Gonadal insufficiency

CYP11A1 antibodies associated with gonadal insufficiency in APS-­1

Pituitary

TDRD6

Hypophysitis

Poorly predictive of clinical pituitary disease

APS-­1

IFN-­ω autoantibodies are 100% sensitive and 99% specific for APS-­
1; IL-­22 autoantibodies associated with time to diagnosis and
diagnosis of candidiasis in APS-­1
IF autoantibodies associated with time to B12 deficiency in APS-­1

Thyroid

NONENDOCRINE DISEASE
Cytokines
IFN-­ω, IFN-­α, IL-­22,
IL-­17F
Gastric

IF, H+/K+ ATPase

Pernicious anemia,
autoimmune gastritis

Small intestine

TTG, gliadin

Celiac disease

Gastrointestinal

TPH, GAD65

Intestinal dysfunction

TPH autoantibodies associated with time to intestinal dysfunction in
APS-­1. Both autoantibodies associated with diagnosis of intestinal
dysfunction in APS-­1
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3430 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 608.2  Autoantibodies Present in Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes and in Isolated Autoimmune
Endocrinopathies—cont’d
TISSUE OR GLAND

AUTOANTIGEN

DISEASE
MANIFESTATION

Liver

CYP1A2, TPH, AADC

Autoimmune hepatitis

Skin melanocytes

Tyrosinase, SOX9,
SOX10, AADC

Vitiligo

Hair follicle

Tyrosine hydroxylase

Alopecia

Lung

KCNRG, BPIFB1

Interstitial lung disease

NOTE
TPH autoantibodies associated with diagnosis of autoimmune
hepatitis in APS-­1

Both autoantibodies present in 90–100% of APS-­1 patients with
interstitial lung disease and are associated with time to diagnosis

AADC, Aromatic L-­amino acid decarboxylase; BPIFB1, bactericidal/permeability-­increasing fold-­containing B1; CaSR, calcium sensing receptor; CYP11A1, side chain cleavage
enzyme; CYP17A1, 17-­α-­hydroxylase; CYP1A2, cytochrome P450 1A2; CYP21A2, 21-­hydroxylase; GAD65, glutamic acid decarboxylase; IA-­2, islet antigen-­2; IF, intrinsic factor;
IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; KCNRG, potassium channel-­regulating protein; NALP5, NACHT leucine-­rich-­repeat protein 5; TDRD6, Tudor domain containing protein 6;
Tg, thyroglobulin; TPH, tryptophan hydroxylase; TPO, thyroid peroxidase; TSGA10, testis-­specific gene 10 protein; TSHR, thyroid-­stimulating hormone receptor; TTG, tissue
transglutaminase; ZnT8, zinc transporter 8.

hypothyroidism in a patient with features suggestive of APS-­2 because
thyroid hormone replacement may precipitate adrenal crisis in this
setting. Autoantibodies to specific tissues may be detectable and may
prompt functional screening before the onset of overt clinical disease
(see Table 608.2); however, the predictive value of these autoantibodies
for the development of clinical disease is variable.
Aberrant T-­cell responses probably play a role in the pathogenesis
of multiple gland destruction present in APS-­2. The risk of autoimmunity directed against the adrenal glands, thyroid gland, and islet cells
appears to be shared across certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
haplotypes and other immune-­related genetic loci. However, the magnitude of this risk varies substantially for each endocrinopathy. The
prevalence of HLA-­D3 and HLA-­D4 alleles is increased in patients
with APS-­2, and they appear to confer an increased risk for the development of this disease. Particular alleles of the major histocompatibility complex class I chain-­related genes A and B (MICA and MICB)
also are associated with APS-­2. Polymorphisms in other genes (e.g.,
PTPN22, CTLA4) have been associated with individual autoimmune
endocrinopathies that constitute APS-­2, but the contribution of these
genes to the pathogenesis of APS-­2 itself is uncertain. Although not
well defined, there are likely environmental factors that promote the
development of autoimmunity in genetically susceptible individuals,
and many of the risk factors associated with endocrine and nonendocrine autoimmunity overlap (see individual chapters on these diseases
for more detailed discussions of risk factors). Next-­generation immune
therapies combined with an understanding of autoimmunity pathways
may lead to targeted treatments to prevent new endocrinopathies (e.g.,
type 1 diabetes mellitus) among those at high risk.

CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES ASSOCIATED
WITH AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR
SYNDROME

Many genetic syndromes involving chromosomal deletions, duplications, and other copy number variations are associated with an
increased risk of autoimmunity, particularly endocrine autoimmunity
affecting the thyroid and pancreatic β cells (see Table 608.1). Clinical
practice guidelines for many of these genetic syndromes recommend
routine screening for autoimmune and endocrine manifestations.
Males with Klinefelter syndrome and females with Turner syndrome
have an increased risk of autoimmunity in multiple systems, including autoimmune endocrine disease. The mechanism of autoimmunity
in trisomy 21 remains unclear, although differences in AIRE gene
expression, HLA susceptibility, and autoantibody profiles have been
described. Thymic dysplasia is a typical feature of DiGeorge syndrome
(22q11.2 deletion), and the resulting immune dysregulation may play
a role in the increased risk of autoimmunity in this disorder. Patients
with genetic syndromes and chromosomal abnormalities may have

nonautoimmune endocrinopathies such as abnormal growth, primary
gonadal failure, and hypoparathyroidism.
Mitochondrial diseases such as Kearns-­Sayre syndrome (progressive external ophthalmoplegia, retinal pigmentation, cardiac conduction defects) and MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic
acidosis, strokelike episodes) have been associated with polyendocrinopathy syndromes, with some rare cases reported to be associated
with autoimmunity. Endocrine manifestations of mitochondrial disease include diabetes mellitus, hypogonadism, adrenal insufficiency,
hypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism. These manifestations may
develop before neurologic and other organ injury and could be an early
clue of mitochondrial dysfunction.

NONGENETIC AUTOIMMUNE CAUSES OF
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINOPATHY

Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation,
and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD) is a rare pediatric syndrome
diagnosed by its cardinal clinical features (see Chapter 468.3). Children
with ROHHAD abruptly develop rapid weight gain and associated
autonomic deficits (e.g., ophthalmologic findings, gastrointestinal dysmotility, thermal dysregulation, bradycardia), central hypoventilation,
and/or hypothalamic dysfunction. Patients have progressive dysfunction of hypothalamic-­pituitary axes such as central hypothyroidism,
growth hormone deficiency, hyperprolactinemia, and vasopressin
dysregulation (see Chapter 468.3). It is hypothesized that ROHHAD
is an autoimmune paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome based on the
presence of cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory markers, response to
immunosuppressive therapy in some patients, and identification of
neuroblastic tumors in about half. Antineural autoantibody profiling and genetic testing have not yet identified the underlying cause of
ROHHAD.
Novel immune-­modulating biologic compounds are used increasingly in the treatment of malignancies and immune disorders. Monoclonal antitumor drugs that inhibit immune checkpoints such as CLTA4,
PD1, and PD-­L1 are associated with immune-­related adverse effects
(IRAEs). Clinically important IRAEs include acute onset of multiple
autoimmune endocrinopathies, including hypophysitis with hypopituitarism (especially with CTLA4-­directed therapies), thyroiditis with
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and primary adrenal insufficiency. Anti-­CD52 antibodies used to treat multiple sclerosis have been linked to the development of Graves disease and
other antibody-­mediated autoimmune diseases (e.g., immune thrombocytopenic purpura). Preexisting autoimmunity may be a risk factor
for developing autoimmune disease after exposure to a wide range of
immunomodulatory therapies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 609 u Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Syndromes

3431

in Chapter 613. In patients with MEN1, bilateral surgical exploration is
generally recommended over focused, minimally invasive approaches
because of the tendency for multiple parathyroid glands to be hyperplastic. In such cases, subtotal (3-­or 3.5-­gland) parathyroidectomy
may be required. MEN1 may be present in 15–70% of pediatric cases
of primary hyperparathyroidism, and this syndrome should be considered in any child or adolescent with primary hyperparathyroidism,
particularly if multigland hyperplasia is present.
Pituitary adenomas are the presenting feature of pediatric MEN1
in about 20% of cases and usually occur after age 10 years, although
they have been reported in patients as young as 5 years. Although these
adenomas most commonly secrete prolactin (60–70%), a few secrete
growth hormone (5–10%) or adrenocorticotrophic hormone (5%), and
the remainder are nonfunctioning (∼25%). Diagnosis and management
are similar to that of sporadic pituitary adenomas except that adenomas
associated with MEN1 may be more locally aggressive and are more
likely to cosecrete multiple pituitary hormones (see Chapter 598).
Patients with MEN1 can develop neoplasia of various enteropancreatic endocrine cells. Such tumors may occur in up to 70% of
patients by adulthood but are found in only about 5–20% of affected
children. Nonfunctioning pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are the
most common pancreatic lesions found in children with MEN1 and
are usually detected by screening imaging. Insulinomas are the most
common functional pancreatic tumor in children with MEN1, occurring in 3–10% of cases, and present with symptoms of hypoglycemia.
These tumors may present before age 10 years but are more common in
adolescence. Although gastrinomas represent over 50% of pancreatic
tumors in adults with MEN1, they are rare in children (∼2%) and occur
after age 15 years. Rarer pancreatic tumors can secrete other hormones
such as glucagon or vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP).
MEN1 is also associated with several other rare tumors. Adrenocortical tumors in children with MEN1 may be benign or malignant, and they

Chapter 609

Multiple Endocrine
Neoplasia Syndromes
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes are characterized by
the development of tumors in two or more endocrine glands. These
syndromes are divided clinically into two types based on the specific
endocrine organs involved (Table 609.1). MEN type 1 is characterized
by tumors of the parathyroid glands, anterior pituitary, and endocrine
pancreas. In contrast, MEN type 2 is characterized by medullary thyroid
cancer and pheochromocytoma. Both types of MEN are usually inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, but sporadic cases can occur.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 1

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) most commonly presents in
the fourth or fifth decade of life, but endocrine tumors can develop as early
as 5 years of age. The endocrine tissues most frequently involved include
the parathyroid glands, pituitary, and cells of the endocrine pancreas.
Primary hyperparathyroidism caused by a parathyroid adenoma or
multigland hyperplasia is the most common manifestation of MEN1,
with a lifetime cumulative incidence of 90–95%. In children with
MEN1, hyperparathyroidism usually presents after 10 years of age and
is often the first endocrine disorder to develop (in about 50% of cases).
The diagnosis and management of hyperparathyroidism are discussed

Table 609.1  Clinical Manifestation of MEN Syndromes
SYNDROME

MEN 1

MEN 2
MEN 2A

MEN 2B

FAMILIAL MTC

Eponym

Wermer syndrome

Sipple syndrome

Gorlin
syndrome

–

Gene

MEN1 ∼85%

RET ∼100%

RET ∼100%

RET ∼100%

Prevalence

1/30,000

1/40,000

1/1,000,000

Hyperparathyroidism

>90%

20–30%

–

–

Duodenopancreatic NETs: nonfunctioning
55%, gastrinoma 40%, insulinoma 10%,
glucagonoma <1%, VIPoma <1%,
somatostatinoma

30–80%

–

–

–

Pituitary adenoma

30–40%

–

–

–

Adrenal cortical tumor

20–40%

–

–

–

Pheochromocytoma

< 1%

50%

50%

–

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC)

–

100%

100%

100%

Thymic NET/bronchopulmonary NET/
gastric NET

2%/5%/30%

Angiofibroma/collagenoma/lipoma

85%/70%/30%

–

–

–

Other tumors: meningioma 8%,
ependymoma, melanoma, thyroid 25%

0–25%

–

–

–

Marfanoid habitus

–

–

75%

–

Mucosal neuroma

–

–

∼100%

–

Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis

–

Up to 36%

–

–

–

MEN, Multiple endocrine neoplasia; NET, neuroendocrine tumor.
Modified from Al-­Salameh, A, Baudry C, Cohen R. Update on multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and 2. La Presse Médicale. 2018;47(9):722–731, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3432 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
may be nonfunctional or hypersecrete cortisol, androgens, or aldosterone.
Pheochromocytomas have been reported rarely. Meningiomas, carcinoid
tumors, and neuroendocrine tumors of the thymus, bronchopulmonary
tree, or stomach can also occur, usually in older adolescents. Older patients
with MEN1 frequently manifest cutaneous angiofibromas or collagenomas, which are benign but may be a useful diagnostic clue.
The diagnosis of MEN1 can be made clinically based on the presence of at least two of the classical endocrine tumor types (parathyroid, pituitary, pancreas) or the presence of one of these tumors in a
first-­degree relative of a patient with known MEN1. Genetic testing
should be used to confirm a clinical diagnosis of MEN1 or to diagnose the condition preclinically in a relative of an affected individual.
The MEN1 gene on chromosome 11q13 encodes the tumor suppressor
menin. A single germline inactivating pathogenic variant in MEN1 is
inherited but is not sufficient to cause tumorigenesis; a second somatic
variant that inactivates the remaining normal allele then leads to tumor
formation in a specific tissue. MEN1 is generally inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, although sporadic variants account for about
10% of cases. Over 1,000 MEN1 variants have been described, including deletions and changes in noncoding regions; therefore genetic testing should include analysis for deletions in patients in whom MEN1
sequencing does not reveal a pathogenic variant. Children diagnosed
with MEN1 should undergo routine age-­based clinical, laboratory, and
imaging surveillance for disease manifestations.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) is a rare genetic disorder
that occurs in about 1 in 2 million individuals and is characterized by the
development of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and pheochromocytoma. MEN2 is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by activating
pathogenic variants in the RET proto-­oncogene, a tyrosine kinase encoded
on chromosome 10q11.2. The clinical features of the syndrome are related
to the specific RET mutation present, although disease manifestations can
vary even among family members carrying the same mutation.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2A

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A) is characterized by MTC,
pheochromocytoma, and primary hyperparathyroidism. At least 50 different RET pathogenic variants have been described in patients with MEN2A,
the majority occurring in exons 10 or 11 (codons 609, 611, 618, 620, or
634) in the RET extracellular domain. Almost all patients with MEN2A
develop MTC, but the occurrence of other manifestations is more variable.
MTC, or its precursor C c­ ell hyperplasia, is usually the first manifestation
to occur, but the age at which it develops is variable. Pheochromocytomas
are often bilateral and may be multiple, and they usually develop in the
third decade or later but may occur in childhood. Hyperparathyroidism
is caused by hyperplasia that may involve one or more parathyroid glands.
Hyperparathyroidism occurs at an average age of about 30 years but can
occur in childhood or adolescence. Variants in RET codon 634 confer a
relatively high risk of pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism compared to variants at other sites.
Additional clinical conditions associated with MEN2A include cutaneous lichen amyloidosis and Hirschsprung disease. Cutaneous lichen
amyloidosis is a dermatologic lesion consisting of pruritic hyperpigmented papules that are usually distributed in the interscapular region
and on extensor surfaces. These skin lesions may develop before MTC
and may provide an early clue to the diagnosis of MEN2A. Some
patients with Hirschsprung disease have variants in RET, particularly
in exon 10. Although the RET variants that cause Hirschsprung disease
are generally loss-­of-­function variants, some of these can nevertheless
cause MEN2A. Therefore individuals with Hirschsprung disease who
carry such RET pathogenic variants should be evaluated for MEN2A.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2B

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN2B) is characterized by MTC
and pheochromocytoma, but not hyperparathyroidism. Rather, the distinguishing features of MEN2B are the presence of multiple neuromas and
a characteristic phenotype that includes Marfan-­like habitus. Nearly all
patients with MEN2B have a specific missense pathogenic variant (M918T)
in the tyrosine kinase catalytic domain of RET. Although MEN2B can be
inherited, about 75% of cases are caused by de novo variants.

MTC in MEN2B can develop early in childhood, including in infancy,
and metastasis of MTC to local and distant sites is often present at diagnosis. Pheochromocytomas occur in about half of patients. The neuromas
of MEN2B can occur throughout the digestive tract, most commonly on
the tongue, buccal mucosa, lips, and conjunctivae. Diffuse proliferation of
nerves and ganglion cells is found in mucosal, submucosal, myenteric, and
subserosal plexuses throughout the digestive tract and may be associated
with gastrointestinal symptoms. Peripheral neurofibromas and café-­au-­lait
patches may be present. Affected individuals may be tall, with arachnodactyly and a Marfan-­like appearance, including scoliosis, pectus excavatum, pes cavus, and muscular hypotonia. The eyelids may be thickened
and everted, lips thickened, and jaw prognathic. Feeding difficulties, poor
sucking, diarrhea, constipation, and failure to thrive can begin in infancy
or early childhood, sometimes years before the appearance of neuromas or
endocrine symptoms.

FAMILIAL MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA

The familial occurrence of MTC without other clinical manifestations of
MEN2 has been termed familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC).
RET variants are commonly present in individuals with FMTC, and
although some families appear to have truly isolated MTC, in other kindreds, the pattern of apparent FMTC may represent MEN2A in which
other manifestations have not yet occurred or have not been diagnosed.
FMTC is frequently regarded as a form of MEN2A, and evaluation for
other manifestations of MEN2A is warranted in patients with FMTC.

MANAGEMENT OF MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE
NEOPLASIA TYPE 2

Genetic testing of affected family members often leads to the diagnosis of
MEN2 in a child before the development of any disease manifestations.
MTC is highly likely to develop in these individuals. Although thyroidectomy is curative if performed before the development of MTC or while
it is still localized to the thyroid gland, the prognosis is poor once MTC
has metastasized beyond the thyroid. Therefore prophylactic thyroidectomy is required in most individuals with MEN2. However, the timing of
prophylactic thyroidectomy must be determined for each patient based on
balancing the likelihood of developing metastatic MTC against the need to
minimize the risks of surgery, which are higher in younger children.
Factors influencing the risk of MTC include the specific RET variants
present, the history of MTC in the family, and serum levels of calcitonin.
The first two factors are not entirely predictive, as MTC behavior can vary
significantly even in family members with the same variant. Some RET
variants are associated with earlier-­onset MTC, and consensus guidelines
categorize RET variants as highest risk (M918T, usually associated with
MEN2B), high risk (codon 634 and 883 mutations), or moderate risk
(other variants) for MTC. Patients at highest risk should undergo thyroidectomy within the first year of life. Those with high-­risk variants should
undergo thyroidectomy at 5 years of age or earlier if calcitonin levels begin
to rise. Patients at moderate risk should be monitored by neck ultrasound
and serum calcitonin levels beginning at age 5 years, and thyroidectomy
should be performed if calcitonin levels rise. However, the timing of surgery may be influenced by other factors, including family history or desire
to avoid prolonged monitoring by proceeding with thyroidectomy. For
patients who do not wish to undergo prophylactic thyroidectomy, regular
careful surveillance is mandatory. Thyroidectomy should be performed
by an experienced thyroid surgeon, especially in the youngest patients, to
minimize the risk of surgical complications. Prophylactic thyroidectomy
reduces morbidity and mortality from MTC in patients with MEN2, many
of whom are found to have C cell hyperplasia, or even MTC, at the time
of prophylactic thyroidectomy. The management of MTC is described in
detail in Chapter 607.
Screening for pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism should
be performed in children with MEN2. The age at which screening
should commence depends on the specific RET variant (11 years for
high and highest risk; 16 years for moderate risk). Management of
pheochromocytoma (see Chapters 555.4 and 613) and hyperparathyroidism (see Chapter 621) are discussed elsewhere.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 610 u Hormones and Peptides of Calcium Homeostasis and Bone Metabolism 3433

Section 3

Disorders of the
Parathyroid Gland
Chapter 610

Hormones and Peptides
of Calcium Homeostasis
and Bone Metabolism
Evan G. Graber and Daniel A. Doyle
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) and vitamin D are the principal regulators of calcium homeostasis (see Chapters 69 and 746). Calcitonin and
PTH-­related peptide (PTHrP) are important primarily in the fetus.

PARATHYROID HORMONE

PTH is an 84–amino acid chain (95 kDa), but its biologic activity
resides in the first 34 residues. In the parathyroid gland, a pre–pro-­
PTH (115–amino acid chain) and a pro-­PTH (90 amino acids) are synthesized. Pre–pro-­PTH is converted to pro-­PTH and pro-­PTH to PTH.
PTH (consisting of amino acids 1-­84) is the major secretory product of
the gland, but it is rapidly cleaved in the liver and kidney into smaller
COOH-­terminal, midregion, and NH2-­terminal fragments.
The occurrence of these fragments in serum has led to the development of a variety of assays. The 1-­34 aminoterminal (N-­terminus) fragments possess biologic activity but are present in low amounts in the
circulation; assay of these fragments is most useful for detecting acute
secretory changes. The carboxyterminal (C-­terminus) and midregion
fragments, although biologically inert, are cleared more slowly from
the circulation and represent 80% of plasma immunoreactive PTH;
concentrations of the C-­terminal fragment are 50-­500 times the level
of the active hormone. The C-­terminal assays are effective in detecting
hyperparathyroidism, but because C-­terminal fragments are removed
from the circulation by glomerular filtration, these assays are less useful for evaluating the secondary hyperparathyroidism characteristic of
renal disease. Only certain sensitive radioimmunoassays for PTH can
differentiate the subnormal concentrations that occur in hypoparathyroidism from normal levels.
When serum levels of calcium fall, the signal is transduced through
the calcium-­sensing receptor, and secretion of PTH increases (Fig.
610.1). PTH stimulates activity of 1α-­
hydroxylase in the kidney,
enhancing production of 1,25-­dihydroxycholecalciferol, also written as
1,25(OH)2D3. The increased level of 1,25(OH)2D3 induces synthesis of
a calcium-­binding protein (calbindin-­D) in the intestinal mucosa, with
resultant absorption of calcium. PTH also mobilizes calcium by directly
enhancing bone resorption, an effect that requires 1,25(OH)2D3. The
effects of PTH on bone and kidney are mediated through binding to
specific receptors on the membranes of target cells and through activation of a transduction pathway involving a G-­protein coupled to the
adenylate cyclase system (see Chapter 594).
The calcium-­sensing receptor regulates the secretion of PTH and
the reabsorption of calcium by the renal tubules in response to alterations in serum calcium concentrations. The gene for the receptor is
located on chromosome 3q13.3-­q21 and encodes a cell surface protein
that is expressed in parathyroid glands and kidneys and belongs to the
family of G-­protein–coupled receptors. In the normally functioning

calcium-­sensing receptor, hypocalcemia induces increased secretion
of PTH and hypercalcemia depresses PTH secretion. Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic variants cause an increased set point with respect to serum
calcium, resulting in hypercalcemia and in the conditions of familial
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism. There is a close genotype/phenotype relationship that determines
severity of illness. Acquired hypocalciuric hypercalcemia may be a
result of autoantibodies to the calcium-­sensing receptor and manifests
with hypercalcemia and hyperparathyroidism. Gain-of-­function variants result in depressed secretion of PTH in response to hypocalcemia,
leading to the syndrome of familial hypocalcemia with hypercalciuria
(see Fig. 610.1).

PARATHYROID HORMONE–RELATED PEPTIDE

PTHrP is homologous to PTH only in the first 13 amino acids of its
amino terminus, 8 of which are identical to PTH. Its gene is on the
short arm of chromosome 12 and that of PTH is on the short arm of
chromosome 11.
PTHrP, like PTH, activates PTH receptors in kidney and bone cells
and increases urinary cyclic adenosine monophosphate and renal production of 1,25(OH)2D3. It is produced in almost every type of cell of
the body, including every tissue of the embryo at some stage of development. PTHrP is critical for normal fetal development. Inactivating variants of the receptor for PTH/PTHrP results in a lethal bone
disorder characterized by short limbs and markedly advanced bone
maturation known as Blomstrand chondrodysplasia (see Fig. 610.1).
PTHrP appears to have a paracrine or autocrine role because serum
levels are low except in a few clinical situations. Cord blood contains
levels of PTHrP that are threefold higher than in serum from adults; it
is produced by the fetal parathyroid glands and appears to be the main
agent stimulating maternal-­fetal calcium transfer. PTHrP appears to be
essential for normal skeletal maturation of the fetus, which requires 30
g of calcium during a normal gestation. During pregnancy, maternal
absorption of calcium increases from about 150 mg daily to 400 mg
during the second trimester.
PTHrP levels are increased during lactation and in patients with
benign breast hypertrophy. Breast milk and pasteurized bovine milk
have levels of PTHrP that are 10,000 times higher than those of normal
plasma. Most instances of the hormonal hypercalcemia syndrome of
malignancy are caused by elevated concentrations of PTHrP.

VITAMIN D

See Chapter 69.

CALCITONIN

Calcitonin is a 32–amino acid polypeptide. Its gene is on chromosome 11p and is tightly linked to that of PTH. The gene for calcitonin
encodes three peptides: calcitonin, a 21–amino acid carboxyterminal
flanking peptide (katacalcin), and a calcitonin gene–related peptide.
Katacalcin and calcitonin are cosecreted in equimolar amounts by the
parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid gland. Calcitonin appears to
be of little consequence in children and adults because very high levels
in patients with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (a tumor arising
from the C cells) do not cause hypercalcemia. In the fetus, circulating
levels are high and appear to augment bone metabolism and skeletal
growth; these high levels are probably stimulated by the normally high
fetal calcium levels. Unlike the high levels in cord blood and circulating
concentrations in young children, levels in older children and adults
are low. Infants and children with congenital hypothyroidism (and presumed deficiency of C cells) have lower levels of calcitonin than normal
children.
Its action appears to be independent of PTH and vitamin D. Its
main biologic effect appears to be the inhibition of bone resorption
by decreasing the number and activity of bone-­resorbing osteoclasts.
This action of calcitonin is the rationale for its use in treatment of Paget
disease. Calcitonin is synthesized in other organs, such as the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, brain, and pituitary. In these organs, calcitonin
is thought to behave as a neurotransmitter to impose a local inhibitory
effect on cell function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3434 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Fig. 610.1 Schematic representation of some of

the components involved in calcium homeostasis. Alterations in extracellular calcium are detected by the
calcium-­sensing receptor (CaSR), which is a 1078−
amino acid, G protein−coupled receptor. The parathyroid hormone (PTH)/parathyroid hormone-related
peptide (PTHrP) receptor, which mediates the actions
of and PTHrP, is also a G protein−coupled receptor.
Thus Ca2+, PTH, and PTHrP involve G protein−coupled
signaling pathways, and interaction with their specific
receptors can lead to activation of Gs, Gi, and Gq,
respectively. Gs stimulates adenylcyclase (AC), which
catalyzes the formation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) from adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Gi
inhibits AC activity. cAMP stimulates protein kinase A
(PKA), which phosphorylates cell-­
specific substrates.
Activation of Gq stimulates phospholipase C (PLC),
which catalyzes the hydrolysis of the phosphoinositide
(PIP2) to inositol triphosphate (IP3), which then increases intracellular calcium, and diacylglycerol (DAG),
activating protein kinase C (PKC). These proximal signals modulate downstream pathways, which results in
specific physiologic effects. Loss of function in several
genes, shown with their respective sites of action on
the right, has been identified in specific disorders of
calcium homeostasis. ADH, autosomal dominant hypocalcemia; APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy; FBHH, familial
benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; FHH, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; HDR, hypoparathyroidism,
sensorineural deafness, and renal anomaly; HPT-JT, hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome; KSS, KearnsSayre syndrome; MELAS, Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes;
MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; MTPD, mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency; NSHPT, neonatal
severe hyperparathyroidism. TBCE, tubulin-specific
chaperone E. (From Thakkerf RV. The parathyroid
glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman
L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 25th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 245.2, p. 1651.)

Ca2+
CaSR

Loss of function
FHH1, NSHPT

Gain of function
ADH1

FHH2

ADH2, hypoparathyroidism

Parathyroid cell

PLC

Gi

Gq/11

AC

AP2σ

ATP

PIP2

FHH3
MELAS, KSS MTPD5

cAMP

DAG + IP3
[Ca2+]i

TBCE

PKC
Proto-oncogenes and
tumor-suppressor genes

Parathyroid tumors (e.g., MEN 1,
HPT-JT, CCND1, Rb, CDC73)

PTH
Transcription factors (e.g.,
GATA3, GCM2, AIRE, FAM 111A)

PTHrP

Target cell
(e.g., kidney,
bone,
cartilage)

Kenny-Caffey type 1
Sanjad-Sakati

Hypoparathyroidism
DiGeorge syndrome,
HDR, hypoparathyroidism,
APECED, Kenny-Caffey type 2

PTH

PTH/PTHrP
receptor

Gs

Gq/11

Blomstrand’s lethal
chondrodysplasia

Jansen’s metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia

Pseudohypoparathyroidism

McCune-Albright
syndrome

AC

PLC
PIP2
IP3 + DAG

ATP
cAMP

Gq/11

ADH2, hypoparathyroidism

FBHH, NSHPT

ADH1

CaSR

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 611

Hypoparathyroidism
Patrick C. Hanley and Daniel A. Doyle
Hypocalcemia is common in neonates between 12 and 72 hours of life,
especially in premature infants, in infants with asphyxia, and in infants of
diabetic mothers (early neonatal hypocalcemia; see Chapter 121.4; Table
611.1 and Fig. 611.1). After the second to third day and during the first
week of life, the type of feeding also is a determinant of the level of serum
calcium (late neonatal hypocalcemia). The role played by the parathyroid glands in these hypocalcemic infants is unclear, although functional
immaturity of the parathyroid glands is invoked as one pathogenetic factor.
In a group of infants with transient idiopathic hypocalcemia (1-­8 weeks
of age), serum levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH) are significantly lower
than those in unaffected infants. It is possible that the functional immaturity is a manifestation of a delay in development of the enzymes that convert glandular PTH to secreted PTH; other mechanisms are possible.

APLASIA OR HYPOPLASIA OF THE PARATHYROID
GLANDS

Aplasia or hypoplasia of the parathyroid glands is often associated
with DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome. This syndrome occurs
in 1 in 4,000 newborns. In 90% of patients, the condition is caused
by a deletion of chromosome 22q11.2 with involvement of the TBX1
gene. Approximately 25% of these patients inherit the chromosomal
abnormality from a parent. Neonatal hypocalcemia occurs in 60%
of affected patients, but it is transitory in the majority; hypocalcemia may recur or can have its onset later in life. Associated abnormalities of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches are common;
these include conotruncal defects of the heart in 25%, velopharyngeal insufficiency in 32%, cleft palate in 9%, renal anomalies
in 35%, and aplasia of the thymus with severe immunodeficiency
in 1%. This syndrome has also been reported in a small number
of patients with a deletion of chromosome 10p13 thought to affect
the NEBL gene, in infants of diabetic mothers, and in infants born
to mothers treated with retinoic acid for acne early in pregnancy.
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the GCM2 gene, which is
a key regulator of parathyroid gland development, leads to isolated
parathyroid aplasia and hypoparathyroidism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 611 u Hypoparathyroidism

3435

Table 611.1  Causes of Hypocalcemia
I. NEONATAL
A. Maternal Disorders
1.	Diabetes mellitus
2.	Toxemia of pregnancy
3.	Vitamin D deficiency
4.	High intake of alkali or magnesium sulfate
5.	Use of anticonvulsants
6.	Hyperparathyroidism
B. Neonatal Disorders
1.	Low birthweight: prematurity, intrauterine growth restriction
2.	Peripartum asphyxia, sepsis, critical illness
3.	Hyperbilirubinemia, phototherapy, exchange transfusion
4.	Hypomagnesemia, hypermagnesemia
5.	Acute/chronic renal failure
6.	Nutrients/medications: high phosphate intake, fatty acids,
phytates, bicarbonate infusion, citrated blood, anticonvulsants,
aminoglycosides
7.	Hypoparathyroidism
8.	Vitamin D deficiency or resistance
9.	Osteopetrosis type II
II. HYPOPARATHYROIDISM
A. Congenital
1.	Transient neonatal
2.	Congenital hypoparathyroidism
a.	Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism
(i)	Autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism (GMC2, PTH)
(ii)	Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (CASR, GNA11)
(iii)	X-­linked hypoparathyroidism (SOX3)
b.	DiGeorge syndrome types 1 and 2 (TBX1, NEBL)
c.	Sanjad-­Sakati syndrome (short stature, retardation,
dysmorphism; HRD) (TBCE)
d.	Kenny-­Caffey syndrome type 1 (short stature, medullary
stenosis, retardation) (TBCE)
e.	Kenny-­Caffey syndrome type 2 (short stature, medullary
stenosis) (FAM111A)
f.	Barakat syndrome (sensorineural deafness, renal dysplasia;
HDR) (GATA3)
g.	Lymphedema-­Hypoparathyroidism syndrome (nephropathy,
mitral valve prolapse and brachytelephalangy).
h.	Mitochondrial disorders (Kearns-­Sayre, Pearson, MELAS,
trifunctional protein deficiency)
3.	Insensitivity to PTH
a.	Blomstrand chondrodysplasia (PTHR1)
b.	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type IA (GNAS)
(i)	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type IB (STX16, GNAS-­A1)
(ii)	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type IC (GNAS)
(iii)	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type II
(iv)	Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
c.	Acrodysostosis with hormone resistance (PRKAR1A)
d.	Hypomagnesemia
4.	CaSR-­activating mutation
a.	Sporadic
b.	Autosomal dominant (G protein subunit α11 mutation)

II. HYPOPARATHYROIDISM—cont’d
B. Acquired
1.	Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I (AIRE gene mutation)
2.	Activating antibodies to the CaSR
3.	Postsurgical, radiation destruction
4.	Infiltrative—excessive iron (hemochromatosis, thalassemia) or
copper (Wilson disease) deposition; granulomatous inflammation,
neoplastic invasion; amyloidosis, sarcoidosis
5.	Hypomagnesemia/hypermagnesemia
III. VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY
IV. OTHER CAUSES OF HYPOCALCEMIA
A. Calcium Deficiency
1.	Nutritional deprivation
2.	Hypercalciuria
B. Disorders of Magnesium Homeostasis
1.	Congenital hypomagnesemia
2.	Acquired
a.	Acute renal failure
b.	Chronic inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal resection
c.	Diuretics
C. Hyperphosphatemia
1.	Renal failure
2.	Phosphate administration (intravenous, oral, rectal)
3.	Tumor cell lysis
4.	Muscle injuries (crush, rhabdomyolysis)
D. Miscellaneous
1.	Hypoproteinemia
2.	Hyperventilation
3.	Drugs: furosemide, aminoglycosides, bisphosphonates, calcitonin,
anticonvulsants, ketoconazole, antineoplastic agents (plicamycin,
asparaginase, cisplatinum, cytosine arabinoside, doxorubicin),
citrated blood products
4.	Hungry bone syndrome
5.	Acute and critical illness: sepsis, acute pancreatitis, toxic shock
a.	Organic acidemia: propionic, methylmalonic, isovaleric

CaSR, Ca2-­sensing receptor; HDR, hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal anomaly; HRD, hypoparathyroidism, retardation, dysmorphism; MELAS, mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and strokelike episode; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
Modified from Root AW, Diamond Jr FB. Disorders of mineral homeostasis in children and adolescents. In: Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:
Table 18.2A.

X-­LINKED RECESSIVE HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Familial clusters of hypoparathyroidism with various patterns of transmission have been described. In two large North American pedigrees,
this disorder appears to be transmitted by an X-­linked recessive gene
located on Xq26-­q27, which has a key role in the development of the
parathyroid glands. In these families, the onset of afebrile hypocalcemic
seizures characteristically occurs in infants from 2 weeks to 6 months
of age. The absence of parathyroid tissue after detailed examination of a
male with this condition suggests a defect in embryogenesis.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE HYPOPARATHYROIDISM
WITH DYSMORPHIC FEATURES

Autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism with dysmorphic features
has been described in Middle Eastern children. Parental consanguinity

occurred for most of several dozen affected patients. Profound hypocalcemia occurs early in life, and dysmorphic features include microcephaly, deep-­set eyes, beaked nose, micrognathia, and large floppy
ears. Intrauterine and postnatal growth restriction are severe, and cognitive impairment is common. The putative gene (TBCE) is on chromosome 1q42-­43. In a few patients with autosomal recessive inheritance
of isolated hypoparathyroidism, pathologic variants of the PTH gene
have been found.

HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, SENSORINEURAL
DEAFNESS, AND RENAL ANOMALY SYNDROME

Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal anomaly
(HDR) occur owing to pathologic variants of the GATA3 gene. The
protein encoded by this gene is essential in the development of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3436 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Hypocalcemia

Confirm with repeat measurement / ionized Ca

Low

Assess vitamin D status with 25hydroxy vitamin D measurement

Intact PTH level

Serum Mg

Normal

Elevated

Low/inappropriately
normal

Vitamin D sufficiency
confirmed (25-hydroxy
vitamin D >20 ng/mL)

Vitamin D
deficiency
confirmed

Evaluate for etiologies of secondary
hyperparathyroidism:
Malabsorption
Vitamin D deficiency
Pseudohypoparathyroidism types 1, 2
Vitamin D–dependent rickets types 1, 2

Evaluate for etiologies of
hypomagnesemia:
Gastrointestinal losses
(vomiting, diarrhea,
malabsorption)
Renal wasting
Alcoholism
Malnutrition
Drug-induced
Perform 24 hr urine and
further testing as appropriate

Evaluate for hypoparathyroidism
Complete medical history, family history, past surgical history for prior
parathyroid, thyroid, or neck surgery
Physical examination (neck scar, candidiasis, signs of tetany, cataracts, short
stature, mental retardation)
Family history: mental retardation, features of autoimmune disorders
(Addison disease, autoimmune thyroid disease), deafness, renal anomalies,
thalassemia, or iron overload
Further lab testing, genetic screening, and testing of family members as
appropriate (activating CaSR mutation; PTH mutation; AIRE, GCMB, or
GATA3 mutational analysis)
Assessment of autoantibodies (21-hydroxylase abs, antiparathyroid abs)
Hearing test, renal imaging (as appropriate)

Evaluate for
gastrointestinal
losses, low dietary
intake, low
sunlight exposure

Replete
vitamin D

Fig. 611.1 Algorithm for the evaluation of hypocalcemia. Abs, autoantibodies; CaSR, Ca2-­sensing receptor; PTH, parathyroid hormone. (From
Bilezikian JP, Khan A, Potts Jr JT, et al. Hypoparathyroidism in the adult: epidemiology, diagnosis, pathophysiology, target-­organ involvement, treatment, and challenges for future research. J Bone Miner Res. 2011;26:2317–2337, Fig. 1.)

parathyroids, auditory system, and kidneys. The GATA3 gene is located
at chromosome 10p14 and is nonoverlapping with the DiGeorge critical region at 10p13 (see Fig. 610.1). Congenital ichthyosis and HDR
have also been reported.

protein–­deficiency syndrome are associated with hypoparathyroidism. A
diagnosis of mitochondrial cytopathy should be considered in patients
with unexplained symptoms, such as ophthalmoplegia, sensorineural
hearing loss, cardiac conduction disturbances, and tetany (see Fig. 610.1).

SUPPRESSION OF NEONATAL PARATHYROID
HORMONE SECRETION BECAUSE OF MATERNAL
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM OR MATERNAL FAMILIAL
HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA

SURGICAL OR INFILTRATIVE
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Neonatal PTH secretion can be suppressed by maternal hyperparathyroidism, resulting in transient hypocalcemia in the newborn infant.
It appears that neonatal hypocalcemia results from suppression of
the fetal parathyroid glands by exposure to elevated levels of calcium
in maternal and hence fetal serum. Tetany usually develops within 3
weeks but may be delayed by 1 month or more if the infant is breastfed.
Seizures may occur within 1 week with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH1) because of maternal Ca2-­sensing receptor (CaSR) loss-­
of-­function pathogenic variants. Hypocalcemia can persist for weeks
or months. When the cause of hypocalcemia in an infant is unknown,
measurements of calcium, phosphorus, and PTH should be obtained
from the mother. Most affected mothers are asymptomatic, and the
cause of their hyperparathyroidism is usually a parathyroid adenoma.

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Patients with autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism have an activating (gain-of-­function) pathogenic variant of the Ca2+-­sensing
receptor, forcing the receptor to an on state with subsequent depression
of PTH secretion even during hypocalcemia. The patients have hypercalciuria. The hypocalcemia is usually mild and might not require
treatment beyond childhood (see Fig. 610.1).

HYPOPARATHYROIDISM ASSOCIATED WITH
MITOCHONDRIAL DISORDERS

Mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants in Kearns-­
Sayre syndrome, MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis,
and strokelike episodes) syndrome, and mitochondrial trifunctional

Removal or damage of the parathyroid glands can complicate thyroidectomy. Hypoparathyroidism has developed even when the parathyroid glands have been identified and left undisturbed at the time of
operation. This may be the result of interference with the blood supply
or of postoperative edema and fibrosis. Symptoms of tetany can occur
abruptly postoperatively and may be temporary or permanent. In
some instances, symptoms develop insidiously and go undetected until
months after thyroidectomy. Occasionally, the first evidence of surgical
hypoparathyroidism may be the development of cataract. The status
of parathyroid function should be carefully monitored in all patients
undergoing thyroidectomy.
Deposition of iron pigment or of copper in the parathyroid glands
(thalassemia, Wilson disease) can also produce hypoparathyroidism.

AUTOIMMUNE HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

An autoimmune mechanism for hypoparathyroidism is strongly
suggested by the finding of parathyroid antibodies and by its frequent association with other autoimmune disorders or organ-­
specific antibodies. Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism is often
associated with Addison disease and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. The association of at least two of these three conditions has
been classified as autoimmune polyglandular disease type I (see
Chapter 608). It is also known as autoimmune polyendocrinopathy,
candidiasis, and ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). This syndrome
is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is not related to
any single human leukocyte antigen–associated haplotype. Approximately one third of pediatric patients with this syndrome have all
three components; 66% have only two of three conditions. The candidiasis almost always precedes the other disorders (70% of cases

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 611 u Hypoparathyroidism

3437

occur in children younger than 5 years of age); the hypoparathyroidism (90% of cases occur after 3 years of age) usually occurs before
Addison disease (90% of cases occur after 6 years of age). A variety
of other disorders, including alopecia areata or totalis, malabsorption disorder, asplenia, pernicious anemia, gonadal failure, autoimmune hepatitis, vitiligo, dental enamel hypoplasia, nail dystrophy,
keratoconjunctivitis, and insulin-­dependent diabetes, occur at various times. Some of these associations might not appear until adult
life. Autoimmune thyroid disease is a rare concomitant finding in
pediatric patients.
Affected siblings can have the same or different constellations of
disorders (hypoparathyroidism, Addison disease). The disorder is
exceptionally prevalent among Finns and Iranian Jews. The gene
for this disorder is designated AIRE (autoimmune regulator); it is
located on chromosome 21q22. It appears to be a transcription factor that plays an essential role in the development of immunologic
tolerance. Patients with Addison disease as part of polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I have demonstrated adrenal-­specific autoantibody reactivity directed against the side-­chain cleavage enzyme.

adequacy but also are low. The serum level of alkaline phosphatase is
normal or low, and the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 is usually low, but high
levels have been found in some children with severe hypocalcemia.
The level of magnesium is normal but should always be checked in
hypocalcemic patients. Levels of PTH are low relative to the calcium
level when measured by immunometric assay. Radiographs of the
bones occasionally reveal an increased density limited to the metaphyses, suggesting heavy metal poisoning, or an increased density of the
lamina dura. Radiographs or CT scans of the skull can reveal calcifications in the basal ganglia. There is a prolongation of the QT interval
on the electrocardiogram, which disappears when the hypocalcemia
is corrected. The electroencephalogram usually reveals widespread
slow activity; the tracing returns to normal after the serum calcium
concentration has been within the normal range for a few weeks,
unless irreversible brain damage has occurred or unless the parathyroid insufficiency is associated with epilepsy. When hypoparathyroidism occurs concurrently with Addison disease, the serum level
of calcium may be normal, but hypocalcemia appears after effective
treatment of the adrenal insufficiency.

IDIOPATHIC HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Treatment

The term idiopathic hypoparathyroidism should be reserved for the
small residuum of children with hypoparathyroidism for whom no
causative mechanism can be defined. Most children in whom onset
of hypoparathyroidism occurs after the first few years of life have
an autoimmune condition. Autoantibodies to the extracellular
domain of the Ca2-­sensing receptor have been identified in some
patients with acquired hypoparathyroidism. One should always
consider incomplete forms of DiGeorge syndrome or an activating Ca2-­
sensing receptor pathogenic variant in the differential
diagnosis.

Clinical Manifestations

There is a spectrum of parathyroid deficiencies with clinical manifestations varying from no symptoms to those of complete and
long-­standing deficiency. Mild deficiency may be revealed only by
appropriate laboratory studies. Muscular pain and cramps are early
manifestations; they progress to numbness, stiffness, and tingling of
the hands and feet. There may be only a positive Chvostek or Trousseau sign or laryngeal and carpopedal spasms. Seizures with or
without loss of consciousness can occur at intervals of days, weeks,
or months. These episodes can begin with abdominal pain, followed
by tonic rigidity, retraction of the head, and cyanosis. Hypoparathyroidism is often mistaken for epilepsy. Headache, vomiting, increased
intracranial pressure, and papilledema may be associated with seizures
and might suggest a brain tumor.
In patients with long-­standing hypocalcemia, the teeth erupt late
and irregularly. Enamel formation is irregular, and the teeth may be
unusually soft. The skin may be dry and scaly, and the nails might
have horizontal lines. Mucocutaneous candidiasis, when present,
antedates the development of hypoparathyroidism; the candidal
infection most often involves the nails, the oral mucosa, the angles
of the mouth, and less often, the skin; it is difficult to treat.
Cataracts in patients with long-­
standing untreated disease
are a direct consequence of hypoparathyroidism; other autoimmune ocular disorders such as keratoconjunctivitis can also
occur. Manifestations of Addison disease, lymphocytic thyroiditis,
pernicious anemia, alopecia areata or totalis, hepatitis, and primary gonadal insufficiency may also be associated with those of
hypoparathyroidism.
Permanent physical and mental deterioration occurs if initiation of
treatment is long delayed.

Laboratory Findings

The serum calcium level is low (5-­7 mg/dL), and the phosphorus
level is elevated (7-­12 mg/dL). Blood levels of ionized calcium (usually approximately 45% of the total) more nearly reflect physiologic

Emergency treatment of neonatal tetany consists of intravenous injections of 5-­10 mL or 1-­3 mg/kg of a 10% solution of
calcium gluconate (elemental calcium 9.3 mg/mL) at the rate
of 0.5-­1.0 mL/min while the heart rate is monitored and a total
dose not to exceed 20 mg of elemental calcium/kg. Additionally, 1,25-­
dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol) should be given.
The initial dosage is 0.25 μg/24 hr; the maintenance dosage
ranges from 0.01-­0.10 g/kg/24 hr to a maximum of 1-­2 μg/24 hr.
Calcitriol has a short half-­life and should be given in two equally
divided doses; it has the advantages of rapid onset of effect (1-­4
days) and rapid reversal of hypercalcemia after discontinuation in
the event of overdosage (calcium levels begin to fall in 3-­4 days).
Calcitriol is supplied as an oral solution.
An adequate intake of calcium should be ensured. Supplemental
calcium can be given in the form of calcium gluconate or calcium
glubionate to provide 800 mg of elemental calcium daily or 25-­
50 mg/kg day dosing of elemental calcium as needed. Foods with
high phosphorus content such as milk, eggs, and cheese should be
reduced in the diet. Other therapies used for some children with
hypoparathyroidism in studies include hormone replacement with
recombinant PTH 1-­34 or recombinant PTH 1-­84 given via a pump
or subcutaneous injections in adult patients who do not respond to
conventional therapy.
Clinical evaluation of the patient and frequent determinations of the
serum calcium levels are indicated in the early stages of treatment to
determine the requirement for calcitriol, calcium supplementation, or
vitamin D2. If hypercalcemia occurs, therapy should be discontinued
and resumed at a lower dose after the serum calcium level has returned
to normal. In long-­standing cases of hypercalcemia, repair of cerebral
and dental changes is not likely. Pigmentation, lowering of blood pressure, or weight loss can indicate adrenal insufficiency, which requires
specific treatment. Patients with autosomal dominant hypocalcemic
hypercalciuria can develop nephrocalcinosis and renal impairment if
treated with vitamin D.

Differential Diagnosis

Magnesium deficiency must be considered in patients with unexplained hypocalcemia. Concentrations of serum magnesium <1.5 mg/
dL (1.2 mEq/L) are usually abnormal (Table 611.2). Administration of
calcium is ineffective, but administration of magnesium promptly corrects both calcium and magnesium levels. Oral supplements of magnesium are necessary to maintain levels of magnesium in the normal
range.
Hypomagnesemia also occurs in malabsorption syndromes such as
Crohn disease and cystic fibrosis. Patients with autoimmune polyglandular disease type I and hypoparathyroidism can also have concurrent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3438 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 611.2  Genetic Causes of Hypomagnesemia
CATEGORIES/NAMES OF
­ ISORDERS*
D

GENE

INHERITANCE

DISTINCTIVE FINDINGS OTHER THAN
­ YPOMAGNESEMIA†
H
Hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis

HYPERCALCIURIC HYPOMAGENESEMIAS
FHHNC type 1

CLDN16

R

Polyuria/polydipsia, elevated serum iPTH, renal failure

FHHNC type 2

CLDN19

R

Same as FHHNC type 1, plus ocular abnormalities

ADHH Bartter syndrome type 5

CASR

D

Hypocalcemia with normal or low PTH

Bartter syndrome, type 3
(classical type)

CLCNKB

R

Gitelman-­like phenotype possible, rarely nephrocalcinosis
Hypocalciuria, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis

GITELMAN-­LIKE HYPOMAGNESEMIAS
Gitelman syndrome

SLC12A3

R

Chondrocalcinosis at older age

Bartter syndrome, type 4

BSND

R

Prenatal complications, renal failure early in life possible

EAST syndrome

KCNJ10

R

Sensorineural deafness, seizures, ataxia

IDH

FXYD2

D

ADTKD/RCAD

HNF1B

D

Renal, genital, and pancreatic abnormalities and MODY5
in highly variable combination and presentation

HPABH4D/RCAD-­like

PCBD1

R

MODY5-­like
Variable

MITOCHONDRIAL HYPOMAGNESEMIAS
HHH

MT-­TI

Mt

Hypertension and hypercholesterolemia

HUPRAS

SARS2

R

Hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure,
and alkalosis

KSS

Mitochondrial deletion

Mt

External ophthalmoplegia, retinopathy and cardiac
conduction defects

HSH

TRPM6

R

Neonatal presentation with severe hypomagnesemia

IRH

EGF

R

Intellectual disability

NISBD2

EGFR

R

Severe inflammation of skin and bowel from birth

HSMR

CNNM2

D/R

Intellectual disability, seizures

ADH/EA1

KCNA1

D

Episodic myokymia

KCS2

FAM111A

D

Impaired skeletal development and hypocalcemic
hypoparathyroidism

Variable

OTHER HYPOMAGNESEMIAS

*ADH, Autosomal dominant hypomagnesemia; ADHH, autosomal dominant hypocalcemia with hypocalciuria; ADTKD, autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease;
EA1, episodic ataxia type 1; EAST, epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness and tubulopathy; FHHNC, familial hypomagnesemia with hypocalcemia and nephrocalcinosis;
HHH, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and hypomagnesemia; HPABH4D, hyperphenylalaninemia BH4-­deficient; HSH, hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia;
HSMR, hypomagnesemia with seizures and mental retardation; HUPRAS, hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure and alkalotic syndrome; IDH, isolated dominant
hypomagnesemia; IRH, isolated recessive hypomagnesemia; KCS2, Kenny-­Chaffey syndrome type 2; KSS, Kearns-­Sayre syndrome; NISBD2, neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel
disease type 2; RCAD, renal cysts and diabetes.
†iPTH, Intact parathyroid hormone; MODY5, maturity onset diabetes of the young type 5.
Modified from Viering DHHM, de Baaij JHF, Walsh SB. et al. Genetic causes of hypomagnesemia, a clinical overview. Pediatr Nephrol. 2017;32:1123–1135.

steatorrhea and low magnesium levels. Therapy with aminoglycosides
causes hypomagnesemia by increasing urinary losses.
It is not clear how low levels of magnesium lead to hypocalcemia.
Evidence suggests that hypomagnesemia impairs release of PTH and
induces resistance to the effects of the hormone, but other mechanisms
also may be operative.
Poisoning with inorganic phosphate leads to hypocalcemia and tetany. Infants administered large doses of inorganic phosphates, either
as laxatives or as sodium phosphate enemas, have had sudden onset of
tetany, with serum calcium levels <5 mg/dL and markedly elevated levels of phosphate. Symptoms are quickly relieved by intravenous administration of calcium. The mechanism of the hypocalcemia is not clear
(see Chapter 73.6).

Hypocalcemia can occur early in treatment of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Hypocalcemia is usually associated with hyperphosphatemia
resulting from destruction of lymphoblasts.
Episodic symptomatic hypocalcemia occurs in Kenny-­Caffey syndrome, which is characterized by medullary stenosis of the long bones,
short stature, delayed closure of the fontanel, delayed bone age, and
eye abnormalities. Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism and abnormal PTH
levels have been found. Autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive
modes of inheritance have been reported. Pathogenic variants of the
TBCE gene (1q43-­44) perturb microtubule organization in diseased
cells in Kenny-­Caffey syndrome type 1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 612 u Pseudohypoparathyroidism

Chapter 612

Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Patrick C. Hanley and Daniel A. Doyle
In pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP, also known as Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy), the parathyroid glands are normal or hyperplastic, and
they can synthesize and secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH). Serum
levels of immunoreactive PTH are elevated even when the patient is
hypocalcemic and may be elevated when the patient is normocalcemic.
Neither endogenous nor administered PTH raises the serum levels of
calcium or lowers the levels of phosphorus. The genetic defects in the
hormone receptor adenylate cyclase system are classified into various
types depending on the phenotypic and biochemical findings (Table
612.1).

TYPE Ia

Type Ia accounts for the majority of patients with PHP. Affected
patients have a genetic defect of the α subunit of the stimulatory guanine nucleotide-­binding protein (Gsα). This coupling factor is required
for PTH bound to cell surface receptors to activate cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP). Heterogeneous pathogenic variants of the
Gsα gene have been documented; the gene is located on chromosome
20q13.2. Deficiency of the Gsα subunit is a generalized cellular defect
and accounts for the association of other endocrine disorders with type
Ia PHP. The defect is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, and
the paucity of father-­to-­son transmissions is thought to be a result of
decreased fertility in males.

3439

Tetany is often the presenting sign. Affected children have a
short, stocky build and a round face. Brachydactyly with dimpling
of the dorsum of the hand is usually present. The second metacarpal
is involved least often. As a result, the index finger occasionally is
longer than the middle finger. Likewise, the second metatarsal is
only rarely affected. There may be other skeletal abnormalities such
as short and wide phalanges, bowing, exostoses, and thickening of
the calvaria. These patients often have obesity, calcium deposits,
and metaplastic bone formation subcutaneously. Moderate degrees
of cognitive impairment, calcification of the basal ganglia, and lenticular cataracts are common in patients whose disease is diagnosed
late.
Some members of affected kindreds may have the usual anatomic
stigmata of PHP type Ia, but serum levels of calcium and phosphorus are normal despite reduced Gsα activity; however, PTH levels
may be slightly elevated. Such patients have been labeled as having pseudo­pseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP). Affected patients
with PPHP have pathologic variants in the GNAS gene inherited
in an autosomal dominant pattern. PPHP patients have inactivating GNAS variants encoding the Gsα subunit that are paternally
inherited. The signs and symptoms of PPHP are similar to those of
patients with PHP type Ia, except patients with PPHP do not have
the characteristic PTH resistance seen in PHP type Ia.
Patients with PHP type Ic also have the usual anatomic stigmata
of PHP along with the laboratory abnormalities associated with
PTH resistance, including elevated phosphorus and PTH in the setting of hypocalcemia. PHP type Ic is differentiated from PHP type
Ia and PPHP in that patients do not have abnormal Gsα activity.
Transition from normocalcemia to hypocalcemia often occurs
with increasing age of the patient. These phenotypically similar but
metabolically dissimilar patients may be in the same family and
have the same pathogenic variants of Gsα protein. It is not known
what other factors cause clinically overt hypocalcemia in some

Table 612.1  Clinical, Biochemical, and Genetic Features of Hypoparathyroid and Pseudohypoparathyroid Disorders
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

PHP 1a

PPHP

PHP 1b

PHP 1c

PHP 2

AHO
manifestations

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Serum calcium

↓

↓

N

↓

↓

↓

Serum PO4

↑

↑

N

↑

↑

↑

Serum PTH

↓

↑

N

↑

↑

↑

Urinary cAMP*
(Chase-­
Auerbach test)

↑

↓

↑

↓

↓

↑

Urinary PO4
(Ellsworth-­
Howard test)

↑

↓

↑

↓

↓

↓

Gsα activity

N

↓

↓

N

N

N

Inheritance

AD, AR, X

AD

AD

AD

AD

Sporadic

?Adenyl cyclase

?cAMP targets

Yes

No

Response to PTH:

Molecular defect

PTH, CaSR, GATA3, Gcm2,
others

GNAS1

GNAS1

GNAS1†

Other hormonal
resistance

No

Yes

No

No

*Plasma cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) responses are similar to those of urinary cAMP.
†Involves deletions that are located upstream of GNAS1.

↓, Decreased; ↑, increased; ?, presumed, but not proved; AD, autosomal dominant; AHO, Albright hereditary osteodystrophy; AR, autosomal recessive; N, normal; PHP,
pseudoparathyroidism; PPHP, pseudopseudoparathyroidism; PTH, parathyroid hormone; X, X-­linked.
From Thakker RV. The parathyroid glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 25th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table
245-­8.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3440 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
affected patients and not in others. There is evidence that the Gsα
variant is paternally transmitted in PPHP and maternally transmitted in patients with type Ia disease. The gene may be imprinted in
a tissue-­specific manner and have different methylation patterns.
In addition to resistance to PTH, resistance to other G protein–coupled receptors for thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH),
gonadotropins, growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH),
calcitonin, and glucagon can result in various metabolic effects.
Clinical hypothyroidism is uncommon, but basal levels of TSH
are elevated and thyrotropin-­releasing hormone–stimulated TSH
responses are exaggerated. Moderately decreased levels of thyroxine and increased levels of TSH have been demonstrated by newborn thyroid-­screening programs, leading to the detection of type
Ia PHP in infancy. In adults, gonadal dysfunction is common, as
manifested by sexual immaturity, amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea,
and infertility. Each of these abnormalities can be related to deficient synthesis of cAMP secondary to a deficiency of Gsα, but it is
not clear why resistance to other G protein–dependent hormones
(corticotropin, vasopressin) are much less affected.
Serum levels of calcium are low, and those of phosphorus and
alkaline phosphatase are elevated. Clinical diagnosis can be confirmed by demonstration of a markedly attenuated response in
urinary phosphate and cAMP after intravenous infusion of the synthetic 1-­34 fragment of human PTH (teriparatide acetate). Definitive diagnosis is established by demonstration of the pathogenic
variant in the G protein gene.

Type Ia with Precocious Puberty

Two males have been reported with both type Ia PHP and gonadotropin-­
independent precocious puberty (see Chapter 600.7). They were found
to have a temperature-­sensitive variant of the Gs protein. Thus at normal body temperature (37°C), the Gs is degraded, resulting in PHP, but
in the cooler temperature of the testes (33°C) the Gs variant results in
constitutive activation of the luteinizing hormone receptor and precocious puberty.

TYPE Ib

Affected patients have normal levels of G protein activity and a
normal phenotypic appearance. These patients have tissue-­specific
resistance to PTH but not to other hormones. Serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, and immunoreactive PTH are the same as those
in patients with type Ia PHP. These patients also show no rise in
cAMP in response to exogenous administration of PTH. Bioactive
PTH is not increased. The pathophysiology of the disorder in this
group of patients is caused by paternal uniparental isodisomy of
chromosome 20q and resulting GNAS1 methylation. This, along
with the loss of the maternal GNAS1 gene, leads to PTH resistance
in the proximal renal tubules, which leads to impaired mineral ion
homeostasis. Pathologic genetic deletions in the STX16 gene are
also associated with PHP type Ib.

ACRODYSOSTOSIS WITH HORMONE RESISTANCE

Patients with acrodysostosis resemble those with PHP type Ia, but
defects in the Gsα subunit are not present. Instead, in one subgroup of
patients there is a defect in the gene encoding PRKAR1A, the cAMP-­
dependent regulatory subunit of protein kinase A that confers resistance to multiple hormones, including PTH. Another subgroup has a
defect in a phosphodiesterase gene Pde4d. This subgroup also carries
the phenotype of PHP type Ia but rarely exhibits the hormone resistance. Acroscyphodysplasia is a distinctive form of metaphyseal dysplasia characterized by the distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyses
embedded in cup-­shaped, large metaphyses known as metaphyseal
scypho or cup deformity and is a phenotypic variation of PHP and
acrodysostosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 613

Hyperparathyroidism
Evan G. Graber and Daniel A. Doyle
Excessive production of parathyroid hormone (PTH) can result from
a primary defect of the parathyroid glands such as an adenoma or
hyperplasia (primary hyperparathyroidism).
More often, the increased production of PTH is compensatory, usually
aimed at correcting hypocalcemic states of diverse origins (secondary
hyperparathyroidism). In vitamin D–deficient rickets and the malabsorption syndromes, intestinal absorption of calcium is deficient, but
hypocalcemia and tetany may be averted by increased activity of the
parathyroid glands. In pseudohypoparathyroidism, PTH levels are
elevated because a pathogenic variant in the Gsα protein interferes with
response to PTH. Early in chronic renal disease, hyperphosphatemia
results in a reciprocal fall in the calcium concentration with a consequent
increase in PTH, but in advanced stages of renal failure, production of
1,25(OH)2D3 is also decreased, leading to worsening hypocalcemia and
further stimulation of PTH. In some instances, if stimulation of the parathyroid glands has been sufficiently intense and protracted, the glands
continue to secrete increased levels of PTH for months or years after kidney transplantation, with resulting hypercalcemia.

ETIOLOGY

Childhood hyperparathyroidism is uncommon. Onset during childhood is usually the result of a single benign adenoma. It usually becomes
manifested after 10 years of age. There have been some kindreds in
which multiple members have hyperparathyroidism transmitted in an
autosomal dominant fashion. Most of the affected family members are
adults, but children have been involved in approximately 30% of the
pedigrees. Some affected patients in these families are asymptomatic,
and disease is detected only by careful study. In other kindreds, hyperparathyroidism occurs as part of the constellation known as the multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes (see Chapter 609) or of
hyperparathyroidism–jaw tumor syndrome.
Neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism is rare. Symptoms develop
shortly after birth and consist of anorexia, irritability, lethargy, constipation, and failure to thrive. Radiographs reveal subperiosteal bone
resorption, osteoporosis, and pathologic fractures. Symptoms may be
mild, resolving without treatment, or can have a rapidly fatal course
if diagnosis and treatment are delayed. Histologically, the parathyroid
glands show diffuse hyperplasia. Affected siblings have been observed
in some kindreds, and parental consanguinity has been reported in
several kindreds. Most cases have occurred in kindreds with the clinical and biochemical features of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.
Infants with neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism may be homozygous
or heterozygous for the pathogenic variant in the Ca2+-­sensing receptor gene, whereas most persons with one copy of this variant exhibit
autosomal dominant familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.
MEN type 1 (see Chapter 609) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hyperplasia or neoplasia of the endocrine pancreas (which
secretes gastrin, insulin, pancreatic polypeptide, and occasionally glucagon), the anterior pituitary (which usually secretes prolactin), and the
parathyroid glands. In most kindreds, hyperparathyroidism is usually the
presenting manifestation, with a prevalence approaching 100% by 50 years
of age and occurring only rarely in children younger than 18 years of age.
With genetic testing, it is possible to detect carriers of the gene with 99%
accuracy at birth, avoiding unnecessary biochemical screening programs.
The gene for MEN type 1 is on chromosome 11q13; it appears to
function as a tumor-­suppressor gene and follows the two-­hit hypothesis of tumor development. The first variant (germinal) is inherited and
is recessive to the dominant allele; this does not result in tumor formation. A second variant (somatic) is required to eliminate the normal
allele, which then leads to tumor formation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 613 u Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism–jaw tumor syndrome is an autosomal dominant (CDC73) disorder characterized by parathyroid adenomas and fibro-­
osseous jaw tumors. Affected patients can also have polycystic kidney
disease, renal hamartomas, and Wilms tumor. Although the condition
affects adults primarily, it has been diagnosed as early as age 10 years. MEN
type 2 may also be associated with hyperparathyroidism (see Chapter 609).
Transient neonatal hyperparathyroidism has occurred in a few
infants born to mothers with hypoparathyroidism (idiopathic or surgical) or with pseudohypoparathyroidism. In each case, the maternal disorder had been undiagnosed or inadequately treated during pregnancy.
The cause of the condition is chronic intrauterine exposure to hypocalcemia with resultant hyperplasia of the fetal parathyroid glands. In
the newborn, manifestations involve the bones primarily, and healing
occurs between 4 and 7 months of age.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

At all ages, the clinical manifestations of hypercalcemia of any cause include
muscle weakness, fatigue, headache, hyporeflexia, anorexia, abdominal
pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, polydipsia and polyuria (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), weight loss, and fever. When hypercalcemia
is of long duration, calcium may be deposited in the renal parenchyma
(nephrocalcinosis), with progressively diminished renal function. Renal
calculi can develop and can cause renal colic and hematuria. Osseous
changes can produce pain in the back or extremities, disturbances of gait,
genu valgum, fractures, and tumors. Height can decrease from compression of vertebrae; the patient can become bedridden. Detection of completely asymptomatic patients is increasing with the advent of automated
panel assays that include serum calcium determinations.
Abdominal pain is occasionally prominent and may be associated with
acute pancreatitis. Parathyroid crisis can occur, manifested by serum
calcium levels >15 mg/dL and progressive oliguria, azotemia, stupor,
and coma. In infants, failure to thrive, poor feeding, and hypotonia are
common. Cognitive impairment, convulsions, and blindness can occur
as sequelae of long-­standing hypercalcemia. Psychiatric manifestations
include depression, confusion, dementia, stupor, and psychosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The serum calcium level is elevated; 39 of 45 children with adenomas had
levels >12 mg/dL. The hypercalcemia is more severe in infants with parathyroid hyperplasia; concentrations ranging from 15 to 20 mg/dL are common, and values as high as 30 mg/dL have been reported. Even when the
total serum calcium level is borderline or only slightly elevated, ionized
calcium levels are often increased. The serum phosphorus level is reduced
to approximately 3 mg/dL or less, and the level of serum magnesium is
low. The urine can have a low and fixed specific gravity, and serum levels of
nonprotein nitrogen and uric acid may be elevated. In patients with adenomas who have skeletal involvement, serum phosphatase levels are elevated,
but in infants with hyperplasia, the levels of alkaline phosphatase may be
normal even when there is extensive involvement of bone.
The ECG may demonstrate a prolonged PR interval, short QT interval, widened QRS complex and bradycardia.
Serum levels of intact PTH are elevated, especially in relation to the
level of calcium. Calcitonin levels are normal. Acute hypercalcemia can
stimulate calcitonin release, but with prolonged hypercalcemia, hypercalcitoninemia does not occur.
The most consistent and characteristic radiographic finding is
resorption of subperiosteal bone, best seen along the margins of the
phalanges of the hands. In the skull, there may be gross trabeculation
or a granular appearance resulting from focal rarefaction; the lamina
dura may be absent. In more advanced disease, there may be generalized rarefaction, cysts, tumors, fractures, and deformities. Approximately 10% of patients have radiographic signs of rickets. Radiographs
of the abdomen can reveal renal calculi or nephrocalcinosis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Other causes of hypercalcemia can result in a similar clinical pattern and
must be differentiated from hyperparathyroidism (Table 613.1 and Fig.
613.1). A low serum phosphorus level with hypercalcemia is characteristic of primary hyperparathyroidism; elevated levels of PTH are also diagnostic. With hypercalcemia of any cause except hyperparathyroidism and

3441

familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, PTH levels are suppressed. Pharmacologic doses of corticosteroids lower the serum calcium level to normal in
patients with hypercalcemia from other causes but generally do not affect
the calcium level in patients with hyperparathyroidism.

TREATMENT

When hyperparathyroidism is clearly established, imaging and possibly surgical exploration are indicated. All glands should be carefully
inspected and if an adenoma is discovered, it should be removed. Very
few instances of carcinoma are known in children. Most neonates with
severe hypercalcemia require total parathyroidectomy; less severe hypercalcemia remits spontaneously in others. Still others have been treated
successfully with bisphosphonates and calcimimetics. The patient should
be carefully observed postoperatively for the development of hypocalcemia and tetany; intravenous administration of calcium gluconate may be
required for a few days. The serum calcium level then gradually returns
to normal, and, under ordinary circumstances, a diet high in calcium and
phosphorus must be maintained for only several months after operation.
CT, real-­time ultrasonography, and subtraction scintigraphy using
sestamibi/technetium-­pertechnetate alone and in combination have
proved effective in localizing a single adenoma versus diffuse hyperplasia in 50–90% of adults. Parathyroid surgeons often rely on intraoperative selective venous sampling with intraoperative assay of PTH for
localizing and removing the source of increased PTH secretion.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis is good if the disease is recognized early and there is appropriate surgical treatment. When extensive osseous lesions are present,
deformities may be permanent. A search for other affected family members is indicated.

613.1 Other Causes of Hypercalcemia
Evan G. Graber and Daniel A. Doyle

FAMILIAL HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA
(FAMILIAL BENIGN HYPERCALCEMIA)

Patients with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia are usually asymptomatic, and the hypercalcemia is identified by chance during routine
investigation for other conditions. Adults may have recurrent pancreatitis,
chondrocalcinosis, or premature vascular calcification. The parathyroid
glands are normal, PTH levels are inappropriately normal, and subtotal
parathyroidectomy does not correct the hypercalcemia. Serum levels of
magnesium are high-­normal or mildly elevated. The ratio of calcium-­to-­
creatinine clearance is usually decreased despite hypercalcemia.
The disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and is
caused by a pathogenic variant (CASR) on chromosome 3q2 in ∼65% of
patients (type 1). In type 2, there is a pathogenic variant in GNA11, and
in type 3, the variant is on AP2S1. The disorder can be diagnosed early
in childhood by serum and urinary calcium concentrations. Detection
of other affected family members is important to avoid inappropriate
parathyroid surgery. The defect in type 1 is an inactivating mutation in
the Ca2+-­sensing receptor gene. This G-­protein–coupled receptor senses
the level of free Ca2+ in the blood and triggers the pathway to increase
extracellular Ca2+ in the face of hypocalcemia. This receptor functions in
the parathyroid and kidney to regulate calcium homeostasis; inactivating mutations lead to an increased set point with respect to serum Ca2+,
resulting in mild to moderate hypercalcemia in heterozygotes.

GRANULOMATOUS DISEASES

Hypercalcemia occurs in 30–50% of children with sarcoidosis and less
often in patients with other granulomatous diseases such as tuberculosis. Levels of PTH are suppressed, and levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 are elevated. The source of ectopic 1,25(OH)2D3 is the activated macrophage,
through stimulation by interferon-­α from T lymphocytes, which are
present in abundance in granulomatous lesions. Unlike renal tubular
cells, the 1α-­hydroxylase in macrophages is unresponsive to homeostatic regulation. Oral administration of prednisone lowers serum levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 to normal and corrects the hypercalcemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3442 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 613.1  Causes of Hypercalcemia
I. NEONATE/INFANT
A.	Maternal Disorders
1.	Excessive vitamin D ingestion, hypoparathyroidism,
pseudohypoparathyroidism
B.	Neonate/Infant
1.	Iatrogenic: excessive intake of calcium, vitamin D, vitamin A
2.	Phosphate depletion
3.	Subcutaneous fat necrosis
4. Williams syndrome (del7q11.23/WBSCR1)
5.	Neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism (CaSR)
6.	Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, Murk-­Jansen type (PTH1R)
7.	Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (CYP24A1)
(25-­hydroxyvitamin D 24-­hydroxylase)
8.	Persistent parathyroid hormone–related protein
9.	Lactase/disaccharidase deficiency (LCT)
10.	Infantile hypophosphatasia (TNSALP)
11.	Mucolipidosis type II (GNPTAB)
12.	Blue diaper syndrome
13.	Antenatal Bartter syndrome types 1 and 2 (SLC12A1, KCNJ1)
14.	Distal renal tubular acidosis
15.	IMAGe syndrome (CDKN1C)
16.	Post bone marrow transplantation for osteopetrosis
17.	Endocrinopathies: primary adrenal insufficiency, severe
congenital hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism
II. HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
A.	Sporadic
1.	Parathyroid hyperplasia, adenoma, carcinoma
B.	Familial
1.	Neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism (CaSR)
2.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN1)
3.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2A (RET)
4.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2B (RET)
5.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 4 (CDKN1B)
6.	McCune-­Albright syndrome (GNAS)
7.	Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism 1 (CDC73)
8.	Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism 2 (jaw tumor syndrome)
(CDC73)
9.	Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism 3
10.	Jansen metaphyseal dysplasia (PTH1R)
C.	Secondary/tertiary
1.	Postrenal transplantation
2.	Chronic hyperphosphatemia
D.	Hypercalcemia of malignancy
1.	Ectopic production of parathyroid hormone–related peptide
2.	Metastatic dissolution of bone

III. FAMILIAL HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA
A.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia I (CaSR)
1.	Loss-­of-­function mutations in CaSR
• Monoallelic: familial benign hypercalcemia
• Biallelic: neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism
B.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia II (GNA11)
C.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia III, Oklahoma variant (AP2S1)
D.	CaSR-­blocking autoantibodies
IV. EXCESSIVE CALCIUM OR VITAMIN D
A.	Milk-­alkali syndrome
B.	Exogenous ingestion of calcium or vitamin D or topical
application of vitamin D (calcitriol or analog)
C.	Ectopic production of calcitriol associated with granulomatous
diseases (sarcoidosis, cat scratch fever; tuberculosis,
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, leprosy;
human immunodeficiency virus; cytomegalovirus; chronic
inflammatory bowel disease, Blau syndrome, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis)
D.	Neoplasia
1.	Primary bone tumors
2.	Metastatic tumors with osteolysis
3.	Lymphoma, leukemia
4.	Dysgerminoma
5.	Pheochromocytoma
6.	Langerhans cell histiocytosis
7.	Tumors secreting parathyroid hormone–related peptide,
growth factors, cytokines, prostaglandins, and osteoclast-­
activating factors
E. Williams-­Beuren syndrome (del7q11.23)
V. IMMOBILIZATION
VI. OTHER CAUSES
A.	Drugs: thiazides, lithium, vitamin A and analogs, calcium, alkali,
antiestrogens, aminophylline, teriparatide, abaloparatide
B.	Total parenteral nutrition
C.	Endocrinopathies: hyperthyroidism, congenital hypothyroidism,
Addison disease, pheochromocytoma
D.	Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide–secreting tumor
E.	Acute or chronic renal failure/administration of aluminum
F.	Hypophosphatasia
G.	Juvenile idiopathic arthritis: cytokine mediated
H.	Late phase of rhabdomyolysis

IMAGe, intrauterine growth restriction, metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, genital abnormalities; WBSCR1, Williams-­Beuren syndrome chromosome region 1.
Adapted from Lietman SA, Germain-­Lee EL, Levine MA. Hypercalcemia in children and adolescents. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22:508–515; Benjamin RW, Moats-­Staats BM, Calikoglu
A, et al. Hypercalcemia in children. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2008;5:778–784; Davies JH. A practical approach to the problems of hypercalcaemia. Endocr Dev. 2009;16:93–114.

HYPERCALCEMIA OF MALIGNANCY

Hypercalcemia often occurs in adults with a wide variety of solid tumors
but is identified much less often in children. It has been reported in infants
with malignant rhabdoid tumors of the kidney or congenital mesoblastic
nephroma and in children with neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma, leukemia, Burkitt lymphoma, dysgerminoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Serum
levels of PTH are rarely elevated. In most patients, the hypercalcemia
associated with malignancy is caused by elevated levels of parathyroid hormone–related peptide and not PTH. Rarely, tumors produce 1,25(OH)2D3
or PTH ectopically.

MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES OF HYPERCALCEMIA

Hypercalcemia can occur in infants with subcutaneous fat necrosis.
Levels of PTH are normal. In one infant, the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 was
elevated, and biopsy of the skin lesion revealed granulomatous infiltration, suggesting that the mechanism of the hypercalcemia was akin to
that seen in patients with other granulomatous disease. In another infant,
although the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 was normal, PTH was suppressed,
suggesting the hypercalcemia was not related to PTH. Treatment with
prednisone is effective. Bisphosphonate therapy has also been effective
in severe cases.

Hypophosphatasia, especially the severe infantile form, is usually associated with mild to moderate hypercalcemia (see Chapter 747). Serum
levels of phosphorus are normal, and those of alkaline phosphatase are
subnormal. The bones exhibit rachitic-­like lesions on radiographs. Urinary
levels of phosphoethanolamine, inorganic pyrophosphate, and pyridoxal
5′-­phosphate are elevated; each is a natural substrate to a tissue-­nonspecific
(liver, bone, kidney) alkaline phosphatase enzyme. Missense variants of
the tissue-­nonspecific alkaline phosphatase enzyme gene result in an inactive enzyme in this autosomal recessive disorder.
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy is manifested by failure to
thrive and hypercalcemia during the first year of life, followed by spontaneous remission. Serum levels of phosphorus and PTH are normal.
The condition has been defined as resulting from increased absorption of calcium from decreased degradation of 1,25(OH)2D3. Pathogenic variants in the CYP24A1 gene that encodes 25-­hydroxyvitamin
D 24-­hydroxylase, the key enzyme in 1,25(OH)2D3 degradation, cause
excessive levels of the active vitamin D metabolite, which, in turn,
causes hypercalcemia in a subset of infants who receive supplemental
vitamin D. An excessive rise in the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 in response to
PTH administration has been reported years after the hypercalcemic
phase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 613 u Hyperparathyroidism

3443

Child with hypercalcemiaa

Plasma PTHb
Low

Plasma 25(OH)Dc

Low/normal
Measure 1,25(OH)2Dg

Low/normal

Consider:
• Drugs - vitamin A intoxication, thiazides,
chemotherapy
• Endocrinopathies - hyperthyroidism, Addison
disease, pheochromocytoma, severe
congenital hypothyroidismf
• Inborn errors of metabolismh,i
• Immobilization
• Congenital syndromes - Williams syndromei
Jansen’s metaphyseal chondrodysplasiai
• Malignancy leading to osteolysis or PTHrP
secretion

High/normal

Consider:
• Tertiary hyperparathyroidism due to chronic renal
failure or hypophosphatemic rickets
• Genetic causes of tumors/hyperplasia such as:
FHH1-3d, MEN1d, MEN2d, MEN3d, MEN4d,
NHSPT d,e, HPT-JTd
• Nonsyndromic primary hyperparathyroidism
(nsPHPT), including FIHPe
• Maternal hypocalcemiaf
High
Consider:
• Vitamin D intoxication
• Enriched formulaf
High

Consider:
• Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia
• Granulomatous diseases
• Malignancy
• Subcutaneous fat necrosis of the
newbornf
• Phosphate depletionf

Fig. 613.1 Algorithm illustrating the clinical approach to investigation of causes of hypercalcemia in a child. aConfirm hypercalcemia, defined as

plasma (or serum) adjusted calcium >10.5 mg/dL (2.60 mmol/L) or ionized calcium >5.25 mg/dL (1.32 mmol/L). bPTH, parathyroid hormone. c25(OH)
D, 25-­hydroxyvitamin D. dFHH1-­3, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia types 1-­3; MEN1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; MEN2, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2; MEN3, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 3; MEN4, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 4; NSHPT, neonatal severe primary
hyperparathyroidism; HPT-­JT, hyperparathyroid–jaw tumor syndrome. eFIHP, Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism. fConditions affecting neonates
(shown in italics). g1,25(OH)2D, 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D. hInborn errors of metabolism, for example, hypophosphatasia, congenital lactase deficiency (CLD), and blue diaper syndrome. iThese syndromes may be associated with dysmorphic features, for example, Williams syndrome, Jansen
metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, and hypophosphatasia. PTHrP, parathyroid hormone-related peptide. (From Stokes VJ, Nielsen MF, Hannan FM,
Thaller RV. Hypercalcemic disorders in children. J Bone Miner Res. 2017;32:2157–2170, Fig. 2.)

Approximately 15% of patients with Williams syndrome may exhibit
hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia is more common in patients <24 months of
age. It is often transient and usually does not require treatment. The phenotype consists of feeding difficulties, slow growth, elfin facies (small mandible, prominent maxilla, upturned nose), renovascular disorders, and a
gregarious “cocktail party” personality. Cardiac lesions include supravalvular aortic stenosis, peripheral pulmonic stenosis, aortic hypoplasia,
coronary artery stenosis, and atrial or ventricular septal defects. Nephrocalcinosis can develop if hypercalcemia persists. The IQ score of 50-­70 is
curiously accompanied by enhanced quantity and quality of vocabulary,
auditory memory, and social use of language. A contiguous gene deletion syndrome with a submicroscopic deletion at chromosome 7q11.23,
which includes deletion of one elastin allele, occurs in 90% of patients and
seems to account for the vascular problems. Definitive diagnosis can be
established by specific fluorescence in situ hybridization. The hypercalcemia and central nervous system symptoms may be caused by deletion of
adjacent genes. Hypercalcemia has been successfully controlled with either
prednisone or calcitonin.
Hypervitaminosis D resulting in hypercalcemia from drinking
milk that has been incorrectly fortified with excessive amounts of

vitamin D has been reported. Not all patients with hypervitaminosis D develop hypercalcemia. Affected infants can manifest failure
to thrive, nephrolithiasis, poor renal function, and osteosclerosis.
Serum levels of 25(OH)D are a better indicator of hypervitaminosis D than levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 because 25(OH)D has a longer
half-­life.
Prolonged immobilization can lead to hypercalcemia and occasionally
to decreased renal function, hypertension, and encephalopathy. Children
who have hypophosphatemic rickets and undergo surgery with subsequent
long-­term immobilization are at risk for hypercalcemia and should therefore have their vitamin D supplementation decreased or discontinued.
Jansen-­type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is a rare genetic disorder
characterized by short-­limbed dwarfism and severe but asymptomatic
hypercalcemia (see Chapter 735). Circulating levels of PTH and parathyroid hormone–related peptide are undetectable. These patients have an
activating PTH–parathyroid hormone–related peptide receptor mutation that results in aberrant calcium homeostasis and abnormalities of the
growth plate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3444 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Section 4

Disorders of the
Adrenal Gland
Chapter 614

Physiology of the Adrenal
Gland
614.1 Histology and Embryology
Perrin C. White
The adrenal gland is composed of two endocrine tissues: the medulla
and the cortex. The chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla are derived
from neuroectoderm, whereas the cells of the adrenal cortex are derived
from mesoderm. Mesodermal cells also contribute to the development
of the gonads. The adrenal glands and gonads have certain common
enzymes involved in steroid synthesis; an inborn error in steroidogenesis in one tissue can also be present in the other.
The adrenal cortex of the older child or adult consists of three zones:
the zona glomerulosa, the outermost zone located immediately beneath
the capsule; the zona fasciculata, the middle zone; and the zona reticularis, the innermost zone, lying next to the adrenal medulla. The zona
fasciculata is the largest zone, constituting approximately 75% of the
cortex; the zona glomerulosa constitutes approximately 15%; and the
zona reticularis approximately 10%. Glomerulosa cells are small, with a
lower cytoplasmic:nuclear ratio, an intermediate number of lipid inclusions, and smaller nuclei containing more condensed chromatin than
the cells of the other two zones. The cells of the zona fasciculata are
large, with a high cytoplasmic:nuclear ratio and many lipid inclusions
that give the cytoplasm a foamy, vacuolated appearance. The cells are
arranged in radial cords. The cells of the zona reticularis are arranged
in irregular anastomosing cords. The cytoplasmic:nuclear ratio is intermediate, and the compact cytoplasm has relatively little lipid content.
The zona glomerulosa synthesizes aldosterone, the most potent
natural mineralocorticoid in humans. The zona fasciculata produces
cortisol, the most potent natural glucocorticoid in humans, and the
zona fasciculata and zona reticularis synthesize the adrenal androgens.
The adrenal medulla consists mainly of neuroendocrine (chromaffin) cells and glial (sustentacular) cells with some connective tissue
and vascular cells. Neuroendocrine cells are polyhedral, with abundant cytoplasm and small, pale-­staining nuclei. Under the electron
microscope, the cytoplasm contains many large secretory granules that
contain catecholamines. Glial cells have less cytoplasm and more basophilic nuclei.
The adrenogonadal primordium differentiates from the coelomic
mesothelium at 4 weeks of gestation at the urogenital ridge, just cephalad to the developing mesonephros. At 5-­6 weeks, it develops into the
steroidogenic cells of the gonads and adrenal cortex; the adrenal and
gonadal cells separate, the adrenal cells migrate retroperitoneally, and
the gonadal cells migrate caudad. At 6-­8 weeks of gestation, the gland
rapidly enlarges, the cells of the inner cortex differentiate to form the
fetal zone, and the outer subcapsular rim remains as the definitive
zone. The primordium of the adrenal cortex is invaded at this time by
sympathetic neural elements of ectodermal origin that differentiate
into the chromaffin cells capable of synthesizing and storing catecholamines. Catechol O-­methyltransferase, which converts norepinephrine
to epinephrine, is expressed later in gestation. By the end of the eighth

week of gestation, the encapsulated adrenal gland is associated with the
upper pole of the kidney. By 8-­10 weeks of gestation, the cells of the
fetal zone are capable of active steroidogenesis.
In the full-­term infant, the combined weight of both adrenal glands
is 7-­9 g. At birth, the inner fetal zone of the cortex makes up approximately 80% of the gland and the outer definitive zone 20%. Within a
few days the fetal cortex begins to involute, undergoing a 50% reduction by 1 month of age. Conversely, the adrenal medulla is relatively
small at birth and undergoes a proportionate increase in size over the
first 6 months after birth. By 1 year, the adrenal glands each weigh <1
g. Adrenal growth thereafter results in adult adrenal glands reaching
a combined weight of 8 g. The zonae fasciculata and glomerulosa are
fully differentiated by about 3 years of age. The zona reticularis is not
fully developed until puberty.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) is essential for fetal adrenal growth and maturation; feedback regulation of ACTH by cortisol
is apparently established by 8-­10 weeks of gestation. Additional factors
important in fetal growth and steroidogenesis include placental chorionic gonadotropins and a number of peptide growth factors produced
by the placenta and fetus.
Many transcription factors are critical for the development of the
adrenal glands. At least four, EMX2, LHX1 (also termed LIM1), WT1,
and WNT4, are required for development of the adrenogonadal primordium. WT1 upregulates expression of steroidogenic factor-­
1
(SF-­1, encoded by the NR5A1 gene). NR5A1 is one of at least three
transcription factors associated with adrenal hypoplasia in humans;
the others are NR0B1 (dosage-­sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, X chromosome; DAX1), and the GLI3 oncogene. Disruption of NR5A1, encoded on chromosome 9q33, results in gonadal
and often adrenal agenesis, absence of pituitary gonadotropes, and an
underdeveloped ventral medial hypothalamus. In-­frame deletions and
frameshift and missense pathogenic variants of this gene are associated
with 46,XX ovarian insufficiency and 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis.
Pathogenic variants in the NR0B1 gene, encoded on Xp21, result in
adrenal hypoplasia congenita and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (see Chapter 615.1). Pathogenic variants in GLI3 on chromosome
7p13 cause Pallister-­Hall syndrome, other features of which include
hypothalamic hamartoblastoma, hypopituitarism, imperforate anus,
and postaxial polydactyly.
The postnatal adrenal cortex is not static but is continually regenerated from a population of stem or progenitor cells under the adrenal
capsule. These cells move radially inward (i.e., centripetally) and can
differentiate into zona glomerulosa or fasciculata cells as needed in
response to the appropriate trophic stimuli (see Chapter 614.3). Several signaling pathways, including sonic hedgehog (SHH) and WNT,
regulate this process. SHH expression is restricted to the peripheral
cortical cells that do not express high levels of steroidogenic genes but
give rise to the underlying differentiated cells of the cortex. Wnt/β-­
catenin signaling maintains the undifferentiated state and adrenal fate
of adrenocortical stem/progenitor cells, in part through induction of
its target genes DAX1 and inhibin-­α, respectively. Adrenal tumors can
result from constitutive activation of the WNT signaling pathway (see
Chapter 617).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

614.2 Adrenal Steroid Biosynthesis
Perrin C. White
Cholesterol is the starting substrate for all steroid biosynthesis (Fig.
614.1). Although adrenal cortex cells can synthesize cholesterol de
novo from acetate, circulating plasma lipoproteins provide most of
the cholesterol for adrenal cortex hormone formation. Receptors for
both low-­density lipoprotein and high-­density lipoprotein cholesterol
are expressed on the surface of adrenocortical cells; the receptor for
high-­density lipoprotein is termed scavenger receptor class B, type I
(SR-­BI). Patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 614 u Physiology of the Adrenal Gland

FETAL ADRENAL

CHOLESTEROL

StAR+
CYP11A1

HSD3B2

CYP21A2

PROGESTERONE

PREGNENOLONE

CYP17A1

3445

CYP21A2

HSD3B2

17-OH PREGNENOLONE

CYP11B2

DEOXYCORTICOSTERONE

CORTISOL

11-DEOXYCORTISOL

17-OH PROGESTERONE

ALDOSTERONE

CYP11B1

SRD5A1
5α-PREGNAN-17α-OL-3,20-DIONE PROGESTERONE

ANDROSTERONE

HSD17B5

AKR1C2/4
17-OH ALLOPREGNANOLONE

ANDROSTANEDIOL

HSD17B6
CYP17A1
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE

FETAL LIVER
16α-OH
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
SULFATE

TESTOSTERONE

HSD3B1

16α-OH-ESTRONE

DIHYDROTESTOSTERONE

ARSC1
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE

HSD3B1

16α-OH-ANDROSTENEDIONE

CYP19A1

SRD5A2

GENITAL
SKIN

DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
SULFATE

16α-OH DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE

ESTRIOL

HSD17B5

ANDROSTENEDIONE

SULT2A1
CYP3A7

ARSC1

HSD17B1

HSD3B2

CYP19A1

CYP19A1

HSD11B2

ANDROSTENEDIONE

HSD17B1

CYP19A1
ESTRONE

ESTRONE

HSD17B1
ESTRADIOL

ESTRADIOL

CORTISONE

PLACENTA

Fig. 614.1 Steroid biosynthesis and metabolism during gestation. Conversions within the fetal adrenal cortex, fetal liver (brown rectangle), male

(i.e., testosterone-­exposed) genital skin (purple rectangle), and placenta (green rectangle) are denoted by arrows; the enzyme mediating each
conversion is also shown. Enzymatic conversions in the adrenal cortex are the same postnatally as prenatally, but cortisol and aldosterone biosynthesis (denoted by yellow and turquoise boxes, respectively) are more prominent, and normally little testosterone is synthesized (pink rectangle). A “backdoor pathway” (lavender rectangle) to convert 17-­hydroxyprogesterone to dihydrotestosterone is active in the fetal adrenal and
may assume particular importance in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616). Many of the involved enzymes are cytochromes P450
(CYPs). The first step in all steroid biosynthesis is importation of cholesterol into mitochondria (white rectangle) mediated by the steroidogenic
acute regulatory (StAR) protein. Adrenal enzymes include CYP11A1, cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc in older terminology); HSD3B2, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Δ5,Δ4 isomerase type 2; CYP17A1, 17β-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase (P450c17); CYP21A2, 21-­hydroxylase
(P450c21); CYP11B1, 11β-­hydroxylase (P450c11); CYP11B2, aldosterone synthase (P450aldo; this enzyme mediates successive 11β-­hydroxylase,
18-­hydroxylase, and 18-­oxidase reactions in the zona glomerulosa for the conversion of deoxycorticosterone to aldosterone); and AKR1C2/4,
aldo-­ketoreductases 1C2 and 1C4. Other enzymes important in the fetoplacental unit include ARSC1, arylsulfatase; CYP19, aromatase (P450arom);
HSD3B1, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Δ5,Δ4 isomerase type 1; HSD11B2, 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; HSD17B1, HSD17B5,
and HSD17B6 are three different 17-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase enzymes; SRD5A1 and SRD5A2, steroid 5α-­reductase types 1 and 2, respectively; and SULT2A1, steroid sulfotransferase.

who lack low-­density lipoprotein receptors have only mildly impaired
adrenal steroidogenesis, suggesting that high-­density lipoprotein is the
more important source of cholesterol. Cholesterol is stored as cholesteryl esters in vesicles and subsequently hydrolyzed by cholesteryl ester
hydrolases to liberate free cholesterol for steroid hormone synthesis.
The rate-­limiting step of adrenal steroidogenesis is importation of
cholesterol across the mitochondrial outer and inner membrane. This
requires several proteins, particularly the steroidogenic acute regulatory
(StAR) protein. The StAR protein has a very short half-­life, and its synthesis is rapidly induced by trophic factors (corticotropin); it is the main
short-­term (minutes to hours) regulator of steroid hormone biosynthesis.
At the mitochondrial inner membrane, the side chain of cholesterol
is cleaved to yield pregnenolone. This is catalyzed by the cholesterol
side-­chain cleavage enzyme (cholesterol desmolase, side-­chain cleavage enzyme, P450scc, CYP11A1—the last term is the current systematic nomenclature), a cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme. Like other CYP
enzymes, this is a membrane-­bound hemoprotein with a molecular
mass of approximately 50 kDa. It accepts electrons from a reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate–dependent mitochondrial electron transport system consisting of two accessory proteins:
adrenodoxin reductase (also called ferredoxin reductase, a flavoprotein)
and adrenodoxin (or ferredoxin; a small protein containing nonheme

iron). CYP enzymes use electrons and O2 to hydroxylate the substrate
and form H2O. In the case of cholesterol side-­chain cleavage, three successive oxidative reactions are performed to cleave the C20,22 carbon
bond. Pregnenolone then diffuses out of mitochondria and enters the
endoplasmic reticulum. The subsequent reactions that occur depend
on the zone of the adrenal cortex.

ZONA GLOMERULOSA

In the zona glomerulosa, pregnenolone is converted to progesterone
by 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2, an oxidized nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide–dependent enzyme of the short-­chain dehydrogenase type. Progesterone is converted to 11-­deoxycorticosterone by
steroid 21-­hydroxylase (CYP21A2, P450c21), which is another CYP
enzyme. Like other such enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum, it uses
an electron transport system with only one accessory protein: P450
oxidoreductase.
Deoxycorticosterone then reenters mitochondria and is converted
to aldosterone by aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2, P450aldo), a CYP
enzyme structurally related to cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme.
Aldosterone synthase also carries out three successive oxidations:
11β-­
hydroxylation, 18-­
hydroxylation, and further oxidation of the
18-­methyl carbon to an aldehyde.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3446 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
ZONA FASCICULATA

ZONA RETICULARIS

In the zona reticularis and to some extent in the zona fasciculata, the 17-­
hydroxylase (CYP17A1) enzyme has an additional
activity: cleavage of the 17,20 carbon-­carbon bond. This converts
17-­hydroxypregnenolone to dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). DHEA
is converted to androstenedione by HSD3B2. This may be further converted in other tissues to testosterone and estrogens.

The Alternative or “Backdoor” Pathway to
Dihydrotestosterone

In addition to the classic pathway via DHEA, androstenedione, and testosterone, the most potent endogenous androgen,
5-­dihydrotestosterone (DHT), can also be synthesized via an alternative or “backdoor” pathway, which is physiologically active during
the major period of human sexual differentiation in the 6th to 10th
week of human fetal development and into the second trimester. To
enter the alternative pathway, progesterone or 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
is 5α-­
reduced by steroid 5α-­
reductase type 1 (SRD5A1) to yield
5α-­
dihydroprogesterone
and
17α-­hydroxydihydroprogesterone.
These three ketosteroids are subsequently 3α-­reduced to allopregnanolone and 17α-­
hydroxyallopregnanolone by isoforms of the
AKR1C enzyme family. CYP17A1 converts allopregnanolone to 17α-­
hydroxyallopregnanolone and then to androsterone by its 17,20-­lyase
activity. Androsterone can then be activated to DHT by sequential 17β-­
reduction and 3α-­oxidase reactions.

FETOPLACENTAL UNIT

Steroid synthesis in the fetal adrenal varies during gestation (see Figs.
614.1 and 614.2). Shortly after the fetal adrenal gland forms (weeks
8-­10), it efficiently secretes cortisol, which is able to negatively feed
back on the fetal pituitary and hypothalamus to suppress ACTH secretion. This is a critical time for differentiation of the external genitalia
in both sexes (see Chapter 616.1); to prevent virilization, the female
fetus must not be exposed to high levels of androgens of adrenal origin, and placental aromatase activity must remain low during this time
to minimize conversion of testosterone to estradiol in male fetuses,
which would interfere with masculinization. After week 12, HSD3B
activity in the fetal adrenal gland decreases and steroid sulfokinase
activity increases. Major steroid products of the midgestation fetal
adrenal gland are DHEA and DHEA sulfate (DHEAS) and, by 16α-­
hydroxylation in the liver, 16α-­hydroxy DHEAS. Aromatase activity
increases in the placenta at the same time, and steroid sulfatase activity
is high as well. The placenta uses DHEA and DHEAS as substrates for
estrone and estradiol synthesis and 16α-­OH DHEAS as a substrate for
estriol synthesis. Cortisol activity is low during the second trimester,
which might serve to prevent premature secretion of surfactant by the
developing fetal lungs; surfactant levels can affect the timing of parturition. As term approaches, fetal cortisol concentration increases because
of increased cortisol secretion and decreased conversion of cortisol to
cortisone by 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD11B2).
Low levels of aldosterone are produced in midgestation, but aldosterone secretory capacity increases near term.

nm o 1/1
Secretion

In the endoplasmic reticulum of the zona fasciculata, pregnenolone and progesterone are converted by 17α-­hydroxylase (CYP17A1,
P450c17) to 17-­
hydroxypregenolone and 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone,
respectively. This enzyme is not expressed in the zona glomerulosa,
which consequently cannot synthesize 17-­
hydroxylated steroids.
17-­Hydroxypregnenolone is converted to 17-­hydroxyprogesterone and
11-­deoxycortisol by the same 3β-­hydroxysteroid and 21-­hydroxylase
enzymes, respectively, as are active in the zona glomerulosa. Thus
inherited disorders in these enzymes affect both aldosterone and cortisol synthesis (see Chapter 616). Finally, 11-­deoxycortisol reenters
mitochondria and is converted to cortisol by steroid 11β-­hydroxylase
CYP11B1 (P450c11). This enzyme is closely related to aldosterone synthase but has low 18-­hydroxylase and nonexistent 18-­oxidase activity.
Thus under normal circumstances the zona fasciculata cannot synthesize aldosterone.

Genital
differentiation

Surfactant
production

Puberty

10,000
1,000
100

DHEAS
Cortisol
10
20
Wk of gestation

10
Birth

20
Age (yr)

Fig. 614.2 Relative levels of cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone sul-

fate (DHEAS) secretion by the fetal adrenal cortex during gestation and
postnatally. Approximate times of several events are shown. Vertical axis
is logarithmic, but values are approximate. Horizontal axis is not to scale.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

614.3 Regulation of the Adrenal Cortex
Perrin C. White

REGULATION OF CORTISOL SECRETION

Glucocorticoid secretion is regulated mainly by ACTH (corticotropin), a 39–amino acid peptide that is produced in the anterior
pituitary (see Fig. 594.2). It is synthesized as part of a larger-­
molecular-­weight precursor peptide known as pro-opiomelanocortin. This precursor peptide is also the source of β-­lipotropin. ACTH
and β-­lipotropin are cleaved further to yield α-­ and β-­melanocyte–
stimulating hormone, corticotropin-­like intermediate lobe peptide,
γ-­lipotropin, β-­ and γ-­endorphin, and enkephalin (see Chapter
594).
ACTH is released in secretory bursts of varying amplitude throughout the day and night. The normal diurnal rhythm of cortisol secretion
is caused by the varying amplitudes of ACTH pulses. Pulses of ACTH
and cortisol occur every 30-­120 minutes, are highest at about the time
of waking, are low in late afternoon and evening, and reach their lowest
point 1 or 2 hours after sleep begins.
Corticotropin-­releasing hormone (CRH), synthesized by neurons of the parvicellular division of the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, is the most important stimulator of ACTH secretion.
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) augments CRH action. Neural stimuli
from the brain cause the release of CRH and AVP (see Chapter 594).
AVP and CRH are secreted in the hypophyseal-­portal circulation in
a pulsatile manner. This pulsatile secretion appears to be responsible for the pulsatile (ultradian) release of ACTH. The circadian
rhythm of ACTH release is probably induced by the corresponding
circadian rhythm of hypothalamic CRH secretion, regulated by the
suprachiasmatic nucleus with input from other areas of the brain.
Cortisol exerts a negative feedback effect on the synthesis and secretion of ACTH, CRH, and AVP. ACTH inhibits its own secretion, a
feedback effect mediated at the level of the hypothalamus. Finally,
the adrenal cortex has intrinsic rhythmicity in its responses to the
ACTH. Thus the secretion of cortisol is a result of the interaction
of the hypothalamus, pituitary, and adrenal glands and other neural
stimuli.
ACTH acts through a specific G protein–coupled receptor (also
termed melanocortin receptor-­2, encoded by the MCR2 gene) to activate adenylate cyclase and increase levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate has short-­term (minutes
to hours) effects on cholesterol transport into mitochondria by increasing expression of StAR protein. The long-­term effects (hours to days)
of ACTH stimulation are to increase the uptake of cholesterol and
the expression of genes encoding the enzymes required to synthesize
cortisol. These transcriptional effects occur at least in part through
increased activity of protein kinase A, which phosphorylates several
transcriptional regulatory factors. MC2R trafficking and signaling are
dependent on the MC2R accessory protein (MRAP). Pathogenic variants in either MC2R or MRAP can cause familial glucocorticoid deficiency (see Chapter 615).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 614 u Physiology of the Adrenal Gland
REGULATION OF ALDOSTERONE SECRETION

The rate of aldosterone synthesis, which is normally 100-­to 1,000-­fold
less than that of cortisol synthesis, is regulated mainly by the renin-­
angiotensin system and by potassium levels, with ACTH having only a
short-­term effect. In response to decreased intravascular volume, renin
is secreted by the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidney. Renin is
a proteolytic enzyme that cleaves angiotensinogen (renin substrate),
an α2-­globulin produced by the liver, to yield the inactive decapeptide
angiotensin I. Angiotensin-­converting enzyme in the lungs and other
tissues rapidly cleaves angiotensin I to the biologically active octapeptide angiotensin II. Cleavage of angiotensin II produces the heptapeptide angiotensin III. Angiotensins II and III are potent stimulators
of aldosterone secretion; angiotensin II is a more potent vasopressor
agent. Angiotensins II and III occupy a G protein–coupled receptor
activating phospholipase C. This protein hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate to produce inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol,
which raise intracellular calcium levels and activate protein kinase C
and calmodulin-­activated kinases. Similarly, increased levels of extracellular potassium depolarize the cell membrane and increase calcium
influx through voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channels. Phosphorylation of transcriptional regulatory factors by calmodulin-­activated
kinases increases transcription of the aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2)
enzyme required for aldosterone synthesis.

REGULATION OF ADRENAL ANDROGEN
SECRETION

The mechanisms by which the adrenal androgens DHEA and androstenedione are regulated are not completely understood. Adrenarche
is a maturational process in the adrenal gland that results in increased
adrenal androgen secretion between the ages of 5 and 20 years. The process begins before the earliest signs of puberty and continues throughout the years when puberty is occurring. Histologically, it is associated
with the appearance of the zona reticularis. Whereas ACTH stimulates
adrenal androgen production acutely and clearly is the primary stimulus for cortisol release, additional factors have been implicated in the
stimulation of the adrenal androgens. These include a relative decrease
in expression of HSD3B2 in the zona reticularis and possibly increases
in 17,20-­lyase activity owing to phosphorylation of CYP17 or increased
cytochrome b5 expression.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

614.4 Adrenal Steroid Hormone Actions
Perrin C. White
Steroid hormones act through several distinct receptors corresponding to the known biologic activities of the steroid hormones: glucocorticoid, mineralocorticoid, progestin, estrogen, and androgen. These
receptors belong to a larger superfamily of nuclear transcription factors
that include, among others, thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors. They have a common structure that includes a carboxyterminal
ligand-­binding domain and a midregion DNA-­binding domain. The
latter domain contains two zinc fingers, each of which consists of a loop
of amino acids stabilized by four cysteine residues chelating a zinc ion.
Unliganded glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors are
found mainly in the cytosol in complexes with other proteins. Hormone molecules diffuse through the cell membrane and bind receptors, changing their conformation and causing them to release their
cytosolic binding proteins and translocate to the nucleus, where they
bind DNA at specific hormone-­response elements. Bound receptors
can recruit other transcriptional coregulatory factors to DNA.
Whereas different steroids can share bioactivities because of their
ability to bind to the same receptor, a given steroid can exert diverse
biologic effects in different tissues. The diversity of hormonal responses
is determined by the different genes that are regulated by each hormone
in different tissues. Additionally, different combinations of coregulators

3447

are expressed in different tissues, allowing each steroid hormone
to have many different effects. Moreover, enzymes can increase or
decrease the affinity of steroids for their receptors and thus modulate
their activity. 11β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (HSD11B1)
converts cortisone, which is not a ligand for the glucocorticoid receptor, to cortisol, which is an active glucocorticoid. This increases local
glucocorticoid concentrations in several tissues, especially the liver,
where glucocorticoids maintain hepatic glucose output (see Chapter
615.4). Overexpression of this enzyme in adipose tissue can predispose
to the development of obesity. Conversely, HSD11B2 oxidizes cortisol
to cortisone, particularly in the kidney, preventing mineralocorticoid
receptors from being occupied by high levels of cortisol (see Chapter
615.4).
Although corticosteroid receptors mainly act in the nucleus, some
responses to both glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids begin within
minutes, an interval too short to be accounted for by increased gene
transcription and protein synthesis. Such nongenomic effects can in
some cases be mediated by cell membrane–associated isoforms of the
classic glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors, which can
couple to a variety of rapid intracellular signaling pathways such as G
proteins. Direct interactions with other proteins, such as ion channels,
have been documented as well, particularly in the nervous system.

ACTIONS OF GLUCOCORTICOIDS

Glucocorticoids are essential for survival. The term glucocorticoid
refers to the glucose-­regulating properties of these hormones. However, glucocorticoids have multiple effects on carbohydrate, lipid, and
protein metabolism. They also regulate immune, circulatory, and renal
function. They influence growth, development, bone metabolism, and
central nervous system activity.
In stress situations, glucocorticoid secretion can increase up to 10-­
fold. This increase is believed to enhance survival through increased
cardiac contractility, cardiac output, sensitivity to the pressor effects
of catecholamines and other pressor hormones, work capacity of the
skeletal muscles, and capacity to mobilize energy stores.

METABOLIC EFFECTS

The primary action of the glucocorticoids on carbohydrate metabolism
is to increase glucose production by increasing hepatic gluconeogenesis. Glucocorticoids also increase cellular resistance to insulin, thereby
decreasing entry of glucose into the cell. This inhibition of glucose
uptake occurs in adipocytes, muscle cells, and fibroblasts. In addition
to opposing insulin action, glucocorticoids can work in parallel with
insulin to protect against long-­term starvation by stimulating glycogen
deposition and production in the liver. Both hormones stimulate glycogen synthetase activity and decrease glycogen breakdown. Glucocorticoid excess can cause hyperglycemia, and glucocorticoid deficiency
can cause hypoglycemia.
Glucocorticoids increase free fatty acid levels by enhancing lipolysis,
decreasing cellular glucose uptake, and decreasing glycerol production, which is necessary for reesterification of fatty acids. This increase
in lipolysis is also stimulated through the permissive enhancement of
lipolytic action of other factors such as epinephrine. This action affects
adipocytes differently according to their anatomic locations. In the
patient with glucocorticoid excess, fat is lost in the extremities, but it
is increased in the trunk (centripetal obesity), neck, and face (moon
facies). This may involve effects on adipocyte differentiation.
Glucocorticoids generally exert a catabolic or antianabolic effect on
protein metabolism. Proteolysis in fat, skeletal muscle, bone, lymphoid,
and connective tissue increases amino acid substrates that can be used
in gluconeogenesis. Cardiac muscle and the diaphragm are almost
entirely spared from this catabolic effect.

Circulatory and Renal Effects

Glucocorticoids have a positive inotropic influence on the heart,
increasing the left ventricular work index. They have a permissive effect
on the actions of epinephrine and norepinephrine on both the heart
and the blood vessels. In the absence of glucocorticoids, decreased cardiac output and shock can develop; in states of glucocorticoid excess,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3448 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
hypertension is often observed. This may be a result of activation of the
mineralocorticoid receptor (see Chapter 615.4), which occurs when
renal HSD11B2 is saturated by excessive levels of glucocorticoids.

Growth

In excess, glucocorticoids inhibit linear growth and skeletal maturation in children, apparently through direct effects on the epiphyses.
However, glucocorticoids are also necessary for normal growth and
development. In the fetus and neonate, they accelerate the differentiation and development of various tissues, including the hepatic and
gastrointestinal systems, along with the production of surfactant in
the fetal lung. Glucocorticoids are often given to pregnant women at
risk for delivery of premature infants to accelerate these maturational
processes.

Immunologic Effects

Glucocorticoids play a major role in immune regulation. They inhibit
synthesis of glycolipids and prostaglandin precursors and the actions
of bradykinin. They also block secretion and actions of histamine and
proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-­α, interleukin-­1,
and interleukin-­6), thus diminishing inflammation. High doses of glucocorticoids deplete monocytes, eosinophils, and lymphocytes, especially T cells. They do so at least in part by inducing cell-­cycle arrest
in the G1 phase and by activating apoptosis through glucocorticoid
receptor–mediated effects. The effects on lymphocytes are primarily
exerted on T-­helper 1 cells and hence on cellular immunity, whereas
the T-­helper 2 cells are spared, leading to a predominantly humoral
immune response. Pharmacologic doses of glucocorticoids can also
decrease the size of immunologic tissues (spleen, thymus, and lymph
nodes).
Glucocorticoids increase circulating polymorphonuclear cell counts,
mostly by preventing their egress from the circulation. Glucocorticoids
decrease diapedesis, chemotaxis, and phagocytosis of polymorphonuclear cells. Thus the mobility of these cells is altered such that they do
not arrive at the site of inflammation to mount an appropriate immune
response. High levels of glucocorticoids decrease inflammatory and
cellular immune responses and increase susceptibility to certain bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic infections.

Effects on Skin, Bone, and Calcium

Glucocorticoids inhibit fibroblasts, leading to increased bruising and
poor wound healing through cutaneous atrophy. This effect explains
the thinning of the skin and striae that are seen in patients with Cushing syndrome.
Glucocorticoids have the overall effect of decreasing serum calcium
and have been used in emergency therapy for certain types of hypercalcemia. This hypocalcemic effect probably results from a decrease in
the intestinal absorption of calcium and a decrease in the renal reabsorption of calcium and phosphorus. Serum calcium levels, however,
generally do not fall below normal because of a secondary increase in
parathyroid hormone secretion.
The most significant effect of long-­term glucocorticoid excess on
calcium and bone metabolism is osteoporosis. Glucocorticoids inhibit
osteoblastic activity by decreasing the number and activity of osteoblasts. Glucocorticoids also decrease osteoclastic activity but to a lesser
extent, leading to low bone turnover with an overall negative balance.
The tendency of glucocorticoids to lower serum calcium and phosphate
levels causes secondary hyperparathyroidism. These actions decrease
bone accretion and cause a net loss of bone mineral.

Central Nervous System Effects

Glucocorticoids readily penetrate the blood-­brain barrier and have
direct effects on brain metabolism. They decrease certain types of
central nervous system edema and are often used to treat increased
intracranial pressure. In large doses, they stimulate appetite and cause
insomnia with a reduction in rapid eye movement sleep. There is an
increase in irritability and emotional lability, with an impairment
of memory and ability to concentrate. Mild to moderate glucocorticoid excess for a limited period often causes a feeling of euphoria or

well-­being, but glucocorticoid excess and deficiency can both be associated with clinical depression. Glucocorticoid excess produces psychosis
in some patients.
Glucocorticoid effects in the brain are mediated largely through
interactions with both the mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid
receptors (sometimes referred to in this context as type I and type II
corticosteroid receptors, respectively). Activation of type II receptors
increases sensitivity of hippocampal neurons to the neurotransmitter
serotonin, which might help explain the euphoria associated with high
doses of glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids suppress release of CRH in
the anterior hypothalamus, but they stimulate it in the central nucleus
of the amygdala and lateral bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, where
it can mediate fear and anxiety states. Glucocorticoids and other steroids might have nongenomic effects by modulating activities of both
γ-­aminobutyric acid and N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptors.

ACTIONS OF MINERALOCORTICOIDS

The most important mineralocorticoids are aldosterone and, to a
lesser degree, 11-­deoxycorticosterone; corticosterone and cortisol
are normally not important as mineralocorticoids unless secreted
in excess. Mineralocorticoids have more limited actions than glucocorticoids. Their major function is to maintain intravascular
volume by conserving sodium and eliminating potassium and
hydrogen ions. They exert these actions in the kidney, gut, and
salivary and sweat glands. Aldosterone can have distinct effects in
other tissues. Mineralocorticoid receptors are found in the heart
and vascular endothelium, and aldosterone increases myocardial
fibrosis in heart failure.
Mineralocorticoids have their most important actions in the distal
convoluted tubules and cortical collecting ducts of the kidney, where
they induce reabsorption of sodium and secretion of potassium. In the
medullary collecting duct, they act in a permissive fashion to allow
vasopressin to increase osmotic water flux. Thus patients with mineralocorticoid deficiency can develop weight loss, hypotension, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia, whereas patients with mineralocorticoid
excess can develop hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis
(see Chapters 615, 616, and 620).
The mechanisms by which aldosterone affects sodium excretion are
incompletely understood. Most effects of aldosterone are presumably
the result of changes in gene expression mediated by the mineralocorticoid receptor, and indeed levels of subunits of both the Na+, K+-­
adenosine triphosphatase and the epithelial sodium channel increase
in response to aldosterone. Additionally, aldosterone increases expression of the serum-­and glucocorticoid-­regulated kinase, which indirectly reduces turnover of epithelial sodium channel subunits and thus
increases the number of open sodium channels.
The mineralocorticoid receptor has similar affinities in vitro for
cortisol and aldosterone, yet cortisol is a weak mineralocorticoid
in vivo. This discrepancy results from the action of HSD11B2, which
converts cortisol to cortisone. Cortisone is not a ligand for the receptor, whereas aldosterone is not a substrate for the enzyme. Pharmacologic inhibition (as occurs with excessive consumption of licorice) or
genetic deficiency of this enzyme allows cortisol to occupy renal mineralocorticoid receptors and produce sodium retention and hypertension; the genetic condition is termed apparent mineralocorticoid
excess syndrome.

ACTIONS OF THE ADRENAL ANDROGENS

Many actions of adrenal androgens are exerted through their conversion to active androgens or estrogens such as testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, estrone, and estradiol. In males, <2% of the biologically
important androgens are derived from adrenal production, whereas
in females approximately 50% of androgens are of adrenal origin. The
adrenal contribution to circulating estrogen levels is mainly important
in pathologic conditions such as feminizing adrenal tumors. Adrenal
androgens contribute to the physiologic development of pubic and
axillary hair during normal puberty. They also play an important role
in the pathophysiology of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, premature

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 614 u Physiology of the Adrenal Gland
adrenarche, adrenal tumors, and Cushing syndrome (see Chapters
616-­619).
In humans, circulating levels of DHEA and DHEAS, the chief adrenal androgen precursors, reach a peak in early adulthood and then
decline. This has led to speculation that some age-­related physiologic
changes might be reversed by DHEA administration, and beneficial
effects have been suggested (but not proved) on insulin sensitivity,
bone mineral density, muscle mass, cardiovascular risk, obesity, cancer
risk, autoimmunity, and the central nervous system.

3449

614.5 Adrenal Medulla
Perrin C. White

Many synthetic analogs of cortisone and hydrocortisone are available. Prednisone and prednisolone are derivatives with an additional double bond in ring A. Similar to cortisone, prednisone is not
an active steroid, but it is converted to prednisolone by HSD11B1
in the liver. Prednisone and prednisolone are 4-­5 times as potent in
antiinflammatory and carbohydrate activity but have slightly less
effect on retention of water and sodium than cortisol. Halogenated
derivatives have different effects. Betamethasone and dexamethasone have 25-­40 times the glucocorticoid potency of cortisol but
have little mineralocorticoid effect. These analogs are usually used
in pharmacologic doses for their antiinflammatory or immunosuppressive properties. The antiinflammatory activity of fludrocortisone is about 15 times that of hydrocortisone, but fludrocortisone is
more than 125 times as active a mineralocorticoid; it is used to treat
aldosterone deficiency.

The principal hormones of the adrenal medulla are the physiologically active catecholamines: dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine (Fig. 614.3). Catecholamine synthesis also occurs in the brain, in
sympathetic nerve endings, and in chromaffin tissue outside the adrenal medulla. Metabolites of catecholamines are excreted in the urine,
principally 3-­methoxy-­4-­hydroxymandelic acid, metanephrine, and
normetanephrine. Urinary metanephrines and catecholamines are
measured to detect pheochromocytomas of the adrenal medulla and
sympathetic nervous system (see Chapter 621).
The proportions of epinephrine and norepinephrine in the adrenal
gland vary with age. In early fetal stages, there is practically no epinephrine;
at birth, norepinephrine remains predominant. However, in adults, norepinephrine accounts for only 10–30% of the pressor amines in the medulla.
The effects of catecholamines are mediated through a series of G
protein–coupled adrenergic receptors. Both epinephrine and norepinephrine raise the mean arterial blood pressure, but only epinephrine
increases cardiac output. By increasing peripheral vascular resistance,
norepinephrine increases systolic and diastolic blood pressures with
only a slight reduction in the pulse rate. Epinephrine increases the pulse
rate and, by decreasing the peripheral vascular resistance, decreases the
diastolic pressure. The hyperglycemic and calorigenic effects of norepinephrine are much less pronounced than are those of epinephrine.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Synthetic Corticosteroids

Fig. 614.3 Biosynthesis (above dashed line) and me-

tabolism (below dashed line) of the catecholamines
norepinephrine and epinephrine. Enzymes: 1, tyrosine
hydroxylase; 2, dopa decarboxylase; 3, dopamine β-­
oxidase; 4, phenylethanolamine-­
N-­methyltransferase;
5, catechol O-­methyltransferase; 6, monoamine oxidase.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3450 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 615

Adrenocortical
Insufficiency and
Altered Sensitivity to
Corticosteroids
Perrin C. White
In primary adrenal insufficiency, congenital or acquired lesions of
the adrenal cortex prevent production of cortisol and often aldosterone (Table 615.1). Acquired primary adrenal insufficiency is termed
Addison disease. Dysfunction of the anterior pituitary gland or hypothalamus can cause a deficiency of corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic
hormone [ACTH]) and lead to hypofunction of the adrenal cortex,
termed secondary adrenal insufficiency; the term tertiary adrenal insufficiency is sometimes used to denote cases arising from hypothalamic
dysfunction (Tables 615.2 and 615.3).

615.1 Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
Perrin C. White
Primary adrenal insufficiency in children is most frequently caused by
genetic conditions that are often, but not always, manifested in infancy
and, less often, by acquired problems such as autoimmune conditions
(Table 615.4) or syndromes (Table 615.5). Susceptibility to autoimmune conditions often has a genetic basis, and so these distinctions
are not absolute.

INHERITED ETIOLOGIES
Inborn Defects of Steroidogenesis

The most common causes of adrenocortical insufficiency in infancy
are the salt-­losing forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH,
see Chapter 616). Approximately 75% of infants with 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, almost all infants with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, and
most infants with a deficiency of 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
manifest salt-­losing symptoms in the newborn period because they
are unable to synthesize either cortisol or aldosterone. Relatively mild
pathogenic variants in STAR (which controls cholesterol importation
into mitochondria) or CYP11A1 (which encodes the cholesterol side-­
chain cleavage enzyme) can cause adrenal insufficiency manifesting in
childhood.
Aside from CAH and autoimmune adrenalitis, a genetic cause can
be identified in >65% of patients with primary adrenal insufficiency
presenting in childhood. These can be grouped into several categories:
(1) ACTH unresponsiveness (familial glucocorticoid deficiency); (2)
adrenal hypoplasia congenita caused by pathogenic variants in orphan
nuclear hormone receptors that affect expression of other genes; (3)
defects in lipid metabolism, particularly adrenoleukodystrophy; (4)
syndromes associated with intrauterine growth restriction, adrenal
hypoplasia, and disorders of sexual development, such as IMAGe and
MIRAGE syndromes (activating variants of CDKN1C and SAMD9,
respectively), and type 2 IMAGe syndrome (POLE1 gene); and (5) deficiency of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species detoxification (NNT
and TXNRD2 genes).

Familial Glucocorticoid Deficiency

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency is a form of chronic adrenal insufficiency characterized by isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids, elevated

levels of ACTH, and generally normal aldosterone production, although
salt-­losing manifestations present in most other forms of adrenal insufficiency occasionally occur. Patients may have hypoglycemia, seizures,
and increased pigmentation during the first decade of life. The disorder
affects both sexes equally and is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. There is marked adrenocortical atrophy with relative sparing
of the zona glomerulosa. Pathogenic variants in the gene for the ACTH
receptor (MCR2) have been described in approximately 25% of these
patients, most of which affect trafficking of receptor molecules from
the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell surface. Another 10–20% of cases
are caused by variants in MRAP, which encodes a melanocyte receptor
accessory protein required for this trafficking.
Another syndrome of ACTH resistance occurs in association with
achalasia and alacrima (triple A or Allgrove syndrome). These patients
often have a progressive neurologic disorder that includes autonomic
dysfunction, intellectual disability, motor neuropathy, and occasional
deafness. This syndrome is autosomal recessive; the AAAS gene has
been mapped to chromosome 12q13. The encoded protein, aladin,
might help to regulate nucleocytoplasmic transport of other proteins.

Adrenal Hypoplasia Congenita

Adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC) is a relatively frequent cause of
adrenal insufficiency in males, along with CAH, autoimmune disease,
and adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). AHC is predominantly a failure of
development of the definitive zone of the adrenal cortex; the fetal zone
may be relatively normal. Consequently, adrenal insufficiency generally
becomes evident as the fetal zone involutes postnatally (see Chapter
614), with onset in infancy or in the first 2 years of life but occasionally in later childhood or even adulthood. In some cases, aldosterone
deficiency becomes evident before cortisol deficiency.
The disorder is caused by pathogenic variants of NR0B1 (DAX1),
a member of the nuclear hormone receptor family, located on Xp21.
Males with AHC often do not undergo puberty as a result of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism caused by the same variant of NR0B1.
Cryptorchidism, sometimes noted in these males, is probably an early
manifestation of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, but often testicular
function in infants is normal, with a typical or even an unusually prolonged testosterone surge in the first month of life.
AHC occasionally occurs as part of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome together with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, glycerol kinase
deficiency, cognitive impairment, or a combination of these conditions.
The transcription factor NR5A1 (steroidogenic factor-­1, SF-­1) is
required for adrenal and gonadal development (see Chapter 614).
Males with heterozygous variants in NR5A1 have impaired development of the testes despite the presence of a normal copy of the gene on
the other chromosome and can appear to be female, similar to patients
with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616). Rarely, such patients
also have adrenal insufficiency.
Adrenal hypoplasia is also occasionally seen in patients with
Pallister-­Hall syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in GLI3.

Disorders of Lipid Metabolism

In adrenal leukodystrophy (ALD), adrenocortical deficiency is associated with demyelination in the central nervous system (see Chapters
106.2 and 639.3). High levels of very long-­chain fatty acids are found
in tissues and body fluids, resulting from their impaired β-­oxidation in
the peroxisomes.
The most common form of ALD is an X-­linked disorder with various presentations. The most common clinical picture is of a degenerative neurologic disorder appearing in childhood or adolescence and
progressing to severe dementia and deterioration of vision, hearing,
speech, and gait, with death occurring within a few years. Neurologic
symptoms may be subtle at onset, sometimes consisting only of behavioral changes or deteriorating academic performance. Generalized
but incomplete alopecia, resembling that of chemotherapy, is a characteristic but inconsistent finding. A milder form of X-­linked ALD is
adrenomyeloneuropathy, which begins in later adolescence or early
adulthood. Patients may have evidence of adrenal insufficiency before,
at the time of, or after neurologic symptoms develop, often with years

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids

3451

Table 615.1  Causes of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

HLA-­DR3, DR4, CTLA4,
BACH2, PTPN22, GATA3,
CLEC16, MIC-­A, MIC-­B,
NALP1, and AIRE

Hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, premature ovarian insufficiency,
vitiligo, type 1 diabetes, pernicious anemia, other organ-­specific
autoimmune features

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
type 1

AIRE (240300)

Hypoparathyroidism, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, other
autoimmune disorders, lymphomas (rarely)

Immunodeficiency 31C

STAT1 (614162)

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, susceptibility to Staphylococcus
aureus and other bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, polyendocrinopathy
(including hypothyroidism and type 1 diabetes), cerebral aneurysms

Peroxisomal Defects
X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy

ABCD1 (300100)

Progressive neurodegeneration, behavioral changes, cognitive decline,
loss of speech, hearing, and vision, dementia, spasticity, seizures

Refsum disease

PEX7 (266500)

Least severe form of peroxisome biosynthesis defects

Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy
(autosomal recessive)

PEX1 (601539)

Craniofacial abnormalities, liver dysfunction, absence of peroxisomes

Zellweger syndrome

PEX1 (214100)

Craniofacial abnormalities, hepatomegaly, severe intellectual disability
and growth failure, hypotonia, deafness, blindness, genitourinary
abnormalities, stippled epiphyses

Mitochondrial DNA
deletions (530000)

External ophthalmoplegia, retinal degeneration, cardiac conduction
defects, other endocrinopathies

Hemorrhage

—

Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage of the newborn baby, primary
antiphospholipid syndrome, anticoagulation

Trauma or Surgery

—

Bilateral adrenalectomy

Infection

—

Septic shock, meningococcal sepsis (Waterhouse-­Friderichsen
syndrome), tuberculosis, fungal infections (e.g., histoplasmosis,
cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, and blastomycosis), African
trypanosomiasis, cytomegalovirus, HIV-­1, syphilis

Infiltration

—

Metastatic cancers, primary adrenal lymphoma, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis
(rare), hemochromatosis

DRUGS

—

Ketoconazole, rifampicin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, aminoglutethimide,
mitotane, abiraterone acetate, etomidate, suramin, mifepristone,
nivolumab, pembrolizumab

IMPAIRED STEROIDOGENESIS
Impaired Cholesterol Transport
Steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein (congenital lipoid adrenal
hyperplasia)

StAR (201710)

46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency

ADRENAL DESTRUCTION
Autoimmunity
Autoimmune primary adrenal
insufficiency and autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type 2

Mitochondrial Defects
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome

Steroidogenic Enzyme or Cofactor Deficiency Causing Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
HSD3B2 (201810)
46,XX and 46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency
type 2
21-­hydroxylase

CYP21A2 (201 910)

46,XX DSD, hyperandrogenism

11β-­hydroxylase

CYP11B1 (202 010)

46,XX DSD, arterial hypertension

CYP17A1 deficiency

CYP17A1 (202 110)

46,XY DSD, arterial hypertension, gonadal insufficiency

P450 oxidoreductase

POR (201 750)

46,XX and 46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency, bone malformation,
dysfunction of all endoplasmic CYP450 enzymes

Steroidogenic Enzyme Deficiency (Noncongenital Adrenal Hyperplasia)
P450 side-­chain cleavage enzyme
CYP11A1 (118 485)
46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency
Aldosterone synthase

CYP11B2 (124 080)

Defects of Cholesterol Synthesis or Metabolism
Wolman disease (lysosomal acid lipase LIPA (278 000)
deficiency, and cholesterol ester
storage disease)

Isolated mineralocorticoid deficiency
Diffuse punctate adrenal calcification, xanthomatous changes in multiple
organs, hypercholesterolemia, steatorrhea, poor prognosis
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3452 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 615.1  Causes of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency—cont’d
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz disease

DHCR7 (270 400)

Intellectual disability, craniofacial malformations, limb abnormalities,
growth failure

Abetalipoproteinemia

MTP (200 100)

Ataxia, retinopathy, acanthocytosis, fat malabsorption

ADRENAL DYSGENESIS
X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia
congenital

NROB1 (300 200)

Combined primary and secondary hypogonadism, Duchenne muscular
dystrophy in contiguous gene syndrome

Adrenal hypoplasia steroidogenic
factor-­1 deficiency

NR5A1 (184757)

46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency

IMAGe syndrome

CDKN1C (300 290)

Intrauterine growth restriction, metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal
insufficiency, genital anomalies

MIRAGE syndrome

SMAD9 (617 053)

Myelodysplasia, infection, adrenal hypoplasia, growth restriction, genital
anomalies, enteropathy

Pallister-­Hall syndrome

GLI3 (165 240)

Hypothalamic hamartoblastoma, hypopituitarism, imperforate anus,
postaxial polydactyly

Meckel syndrome

MKS1 (249 000)

CNS malformation, polycystic kidneys with fibrotic liver changes,
polydactyly

Pseudotrisomy 13

(264 480)

Holoprosencephaly, severe facial anomalies, postaxial polydactyly,
various other congenital defects, and normal chromosomes

Hydrolethalus syndrome

HYLS1 (236 680)

Severe prenatal-­onset hydrocephalus, polydactyly

Galloway-­Mowat syndrome

WDR73 (251 300)

Early-­onset severe encephalopathy, intractable epilepsy, nephrotic
syndrome, microcephaly, hiatal hernia

ACTH RESISTANCE
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency
type 1

MC2R (202 200)

Tall stature, isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids, generally normal
aldosterone production

MRAP (607398)

Isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids, generally normal aldosterone
production

IMPAIRED REDOX HOMEOSTASIS
Triple A syndrome (Allgrove
syndrome)

AAAS (231550)

Alacrimia, achalasia, neurologic impairment, deafness, intellectual
disability, hyperkeratosis

Mitochondrial deficiency of free
radical detoxification

NNT (614736)
and TRXR2 (606448)

NNT: hypoglycemia, hyperpigmentation, low cortisol concentration,
increased ACTH concentration, isolated deficiency of
glucocorticoids; TRXR2: isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids

MISCELLANEOUS
Defects in DNA repair

MCM4 (609981)

Natural killer cell deficiency, growth failure, increased chromosomal
breakage

Bioinactive ACTH

POMC (201400)

—

Sphingosine-­1-­phosphate lyase 1

SGPL1 (617575)

Steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome, ichthyosis, primary hypothyroidism,
cryptorchidism, immunodeficiency, neurologic defects

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency
type 2

*www.omim.org
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; DSD, disorder of sex development; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
Modified from Husebye ES, Pearce SH, Krone NP, Kämpe O. Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet. 2021;397:613–629, Table 1.

separating their presentation. X-­linked ALD is caused by pathogenic
variants in ABCD1 located on Xq28. The gene encodes a transmembrane transporter involved in the importation of very long-­chain fatty
acids into peroxisomes. Clinical phenotypes can vary even within
families, perhaps owing to modifier genes or other unknown factors.
There is no correlation between the degree of neurologic impairment
and severity of adrenal insufficiency. Prenatal diagnosis by DNA analysis and family screening by very long-­chain fatty acid assays and gene
analysis are available. Females who are heterozygous carriers of the
X-­linked ALD gene can develop neurologic symptoms in midlife or
later; adrenal insufficiency is rare. This condition is part of the newborn screening panel.
Neonatal ALD is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. Infants have
neurologic deterioration and have or acquire evidence of adrenocortical dysfunction. Most patients have severe, progressive cognitive
impairment and die before 5 years of age. This disorder is a subset of

Zellweger (cerebrohepatorenal) syndrome, in which peroxisomes do
not develop at all owing to pathogenic variants in any of several genes
(PEX5, PEX1, PEX10, PEX13, and PEX26) controlling the development
of peroxisomes.
Patients with disorders of cholesterol synthesis or metabolism, including abetalipoproteinemia with deficient lipoprotein B–containing lipoproteins (such as low-­density lipoprotein), and homozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia, with impaired or absent low-­density lipoprotein
receptors, have mildly impaired adrenocortical function. Heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia patients have normal adrenocortical function, which is unaffected by treatment with statin (HMG-­CoA reductase
inhibitor) drugs. Adrenal insufficiency has been reported in patients
with Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder
manifesting with facial anomalies, microcephaly, limb anomalies, and
developmental delay (see Chapter 106.3), caused by pathogenic variants
in the gene coding for sterol Δ7-­reductase on chromosome 11q12-­q13.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids

3453

Table 615.2  Causes of Secondary Adrenal Insufficiency in the Form of Pituitary Disorders
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

ACQUIRED CAUSES
Steroid withdrawal syndrome

PDGFD

Endogenous glucocorticoid hypersecretion caused by Cushing syndrome and
exogenous glucocorticoid administration for more than 2 wk

Opioids

—

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

Tumor

—

Craniopharyngioma, glioma, meningioma, ependymoma, germinoma, intrasellar or
suprasellar metastases, adenoma, carcinoma

Trauma

—

Pituitary stalk lesions, battered child syndrome, vehicular trauma

Pituitary apoplexy (Sheehan
syndrome)

—

High blood loss or hypotension

CONGENITAL CAUSES
Aplasia or Hypoplasia
PROP1 deficiency

PROP1 (262600)

Additional deficiency of growth hormone, prolactin, thyroid-­stimulating hormone,
and luteinizing hormone or follicle-­stimulating hormone, or both

LHX4 deficiency

LHX4 (262700)

Additional deficiency of growth hormone and thyroid-­stimulating hormone

SOX3 deficiency

SOX3 (312000)

Additional deficiencies of pituitary hormones

Isolated ACTH Deficiency
TBX19 deficiency

TBX19 (201400)

Severe neonatal-­onset adrenal insufficiency

Proopiomelanocortin

POMC (609734)

Adrenal insufficiency, early-­onset obesity, red hair pigmentation

Proprotein convertase 1

PCSK1 (600955)

Hypoglycemia, malabsorption, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

*www.omim.org.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
From Husebye ES, Pearce SH, Krone NP, Kämpe O. Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet. 2021;397:613–629, Table 2.

Table 615.3  Causes of Tertiary Adrenal Insufficiency
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

ACQUIRED CAUSES
Steroid withdrawal syndrome

PDGFD

Endogenous glucocorticoid hypersecretion caused by Cushing syndrome
and exogenous glucocorticoid administration for more than 2 wk

Opioids

—

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

Inflammatory disorders

—

Abscess, meningitis, encephalitis

Trauma

—

—

Radiation therapy

—

Craniospinal irradiation in leukemia and irradiation for tumors outside the
hypothalamic-­pituitary area

Surgery

—

—

Tumor

—

Craniopharyngioma, glioma, meningioma, ependymoma, germinoma,
intrasellar or suprasellar metastases

Infiltrative diseases

—

Sarcoidosis, histiocytosis X, hemochromatosis

CONGENTIAL CAUSES
Septo-­optic dysplasia (de Morsier
syndrome)

HESX1 (182230)

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency, optic nerve hypoplasia, midline
brain defects

—

—

Corticotropin-releasing hormone
deficiency

*www.omim.org.
OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
From Husebye ES, Pearce SH, Krone NP, Kämpe O. Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet. 2021;397:613–629, Table 3.

This impairs the final step in cholesterol synthesis with marked elevation of 7-­dehydrocholesterol and abnormally low cholesterol. Wolman
disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the gene encoding human lysosomal acid lipase on chromosome
10q23.2-­23.3. Cholesteryl esters accumulate in lysosomes in most organ
systems, leading to organ failure. Infants during the first or second month
of life have hepatosplenomegaly, steatorrhea, abdominal distention, and
failure to thrive. Adrenal insufficiency and bilateral adrenal calcification
are present, and death usually occurs in the first year of life.

Multisystem Syndromes Associated with Growth
Restriction

Pathogenic variants in genes that affect DNA replication may be associated with primordial dwarfism, immune deficiency, and adrenal
insufficiency. Minichromosome maintenance-­
deficient 4 homolog
(MCM4) functions to integrate several protein kinase signals that
regulate progression of DNA replication through the S phase. Homozygous deficiency of MCM4 causes a primary immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by severe intrauterine and extrauterine growth

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3454 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 615.4  Frequencies of Etiologies of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
ETIOLOGY

%

AGE AT DIAGNOSIS

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

59

Infancy

Autoimmune

16

Childhood to adolescence

APECED (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–
candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy)

6

Childhood to adolescence

Adrenoleukodystrophy

4

Childhood to adolescence

Other genetic causes

14*

Hemorrhage

1

Infancy

*See Table 615.5.
Data from Perry R, Kecha O, Paquette J, et al. Primary adrenal insufficiency in children: twenty years’ experience at the Sainte-­Justine Hospital, Montreal. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2005;90:3243–3250; Hsieh S, White PC. Presentation of primary adrenal insufficiency in childhood. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:E925–E928.

Table 615.5  Other Genetic Etiologies for Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
GENE

FUNCTION

SYNDROME

FREQUENCY* %

MC2R

Melanocortin (ACTH) receptor

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 1

22

MRAP

Melanocortin receptor accessory protein

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 2

4

NROB1

DAX1 orphan nuclear receptor

X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita

6†

NR5A1

SF-­1 orphan nuclear receptor

Gonadal dysgenesis

<1

STAR

Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein

Nonclassic lipoid adrenal hyperplasia

8

CYP11A1

Cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme

Nonclassic lipoid adrenal hyperplasia

8

NNT

Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 4

8

AAAS

Aladin (nuclear transport protein)

Triple A syndrome

5

SAMD9

Factor inhibiting cell proliferation

MIRAGE syndrome

3

CDKN1C

Cyclin-­dependent kinase inhibitor

IMAGE syndrome

1

POLE

Subunit of DNA polymerase

IMAGE syndrome type 2

rare

*Frequencies are from 95 Turkish and 155 United Kingdom patients in whom congenital adrenal hyperplasia, autoimmune etiologies, and metabolic disorders (e.g.,
adrenoleukodystrophy) had been excluded.
†Many cases of X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita had already been identified, so this frequency is an underestimate.

restriction, microcephaly, decreased numbers of natural killer (NK)
cells, recurrent viral infections, and adrenal insufficiency. It is relatively
frequent (1 in 2,506) in the Irish Traveller population.
MIRAGE syndrome is a form of syndromic adrenal hypoplasia,
characterized by myelodysplasia, infections, restriction of growth,
adrenal hypoplasia, genital abnormalities, and enteropathy. It is often
fatal within the first decade of life, usually because of invasive infection. It is caused by pathogenic variants in SAMD9 on chromosome
7q21, which encodes a protein that inhibits cell proliferation. Disease-­
causing variants are heterozygous and usually arise de novo. When
expressed in cultured cells, the abnormal proteins strongly inhibit cell
proliferation. There is a risk that affected cells will attempt to escape
growth inhibition by selectively losing chromosome 7 carrying the
variant causing haploinsufficiency of SAMD9. This can cause myelodysplastic syndrome.
IMAGE syndrome consists of intrauterine growth restriction,
metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia, and genital anomalies.
Two forms have been identified: an autosomal dominant form caused
by pathogenic variants in CDKN1C and an autosomal recessive form
caused by variants in POLE. Adrenal insufficiency in cases associated
with CDKN1C variants tends to present in early infancy, whereas in
cases caused by POLE variants, it is manifested during early childhood.
The recessive form is also associated with immunodeficiency and is
therefore sometimes termed IMAGEI syndrome.
The CDKN1C gene product, also called p57(KIP2), binds G1 cyclin/
CDK complexes and thus inhibits cell proliferation. It is located in the
imprinted region of chromosome 11p15 and is preferentially expressed

from the maternal allele. Inactivating variants in this gene cause some
cases of Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (see Chapter 113), which is
associated with macrosomia and tumor risk. Variants that interfere
with binding of CDKN1C to DNA polymerase delta auxiliary protein
enhance the growth inhibitory effect of CDKN1C (gain of function)
and cause IMAGE syndrome when maternally inherited. Thus both
genes involved in IMAGE syndrome have roles in DNA replication
and repair.

Deficiency of Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species
Detoxification

Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase (NNT) is a mitochondrial
protein that catalyzes transfer of a hydride ion between nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide, NAD(H), and oxidized nicotinamide dinucleotide phosphate, NADP(H). Its deficiency manifests generally in infancy
or early childhood, and most patients have both mineralocorticoid and
glucocorticoid deficiencies. A pathogenic variant in TXNRD2 has been
identified in a single kindred with glucocorticoid deficiency.

Type 1 Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy Syndrome

Although autoimmune Addison disease most often occurs sporadically, it can occur as a component of two syndromes, each consisting
of a constellation of autoimmune disorders (see Chapter 608). Type
1 autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome (APS-­1), also known
as autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) syndrome, is inherited in a mendelian autosomal recessive
manner, whereas APS-­2 has complex inheritance. Patients with APS-­1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
may have autoantibodies to the adrenal cytochrome P450 enzymes
CYP21A2, CYP17A1, and CYP11A1. The presence of such antibodies
indicates a high likelihood of the development of Addison disease or,
in female patients, ovarian failure. Adrenal failure can evolve rapidly
in APS-­1; death in patients with a previous diagnosis and unexplained
deaths in siblings of patients with APS-­1 have been reported, indicating the need to closely monitor patients with APS-­1 (or any child with
unexplained hypoparathyroidism) and to thoroughly evaluate apparently unaffected siblings of patients with this disorder.

Corticosteroid-­Binding Globulin Deficiency and
Decreased Cortisol-­Binding Affinity

Corticosteroid-­binding globulin deficiency (SERPINA6 pathogenic variant) and decreased cortisol-­binding affinity result in low levels of plasma
cortisol but normal urinary free cortisol and normal plasma ACTH levels.
A high prevalence of hypotension and fatigue has been reported in some
adults with abnormalities of corticosteroid-­binding globulin deficiency.

ACQUIRED ETIOLOGIES
Autoimmune Addison Disease

The most common cause of Addison disease is autoimmune destruction of the glands. The glands may be so small that they are not visible at
autopsy, and only remnants of tissue are found in microscopic sections.
Usually, the medulla is not destroyed, and there is marked lymphocytic
infiltration in the area of the former cortex. In advanced disease, all
adrenocortical function is lost, but early in the clinical course, isolated
cortisol deficiency can occur. Most patients have antiadrenal cytoplasmic antibodies in their plasma; 21-­hydroxylase (CYP21A2) is the
most commonly occurring biochemically defined autoantigen.
Addison disease can occur as a component of two autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndromes. Type 1 (APS-­1) was discussed previously.
Type 2 autoimmune polyendocrinopathy (APS-­2) consists of Addison disease associated with autoimmune thyroid disease (Schmidt syndrome) or type 1 diabetes (Carpenter syndrome) (see Chapter 608).
Frequencies of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­D3 and HLA-­D4
alleles are increased in these patients and appear to confer an increased
risk for development of this disease; particular alleles at the major histocompatibility complex class I chain–related genes A and B (MICA
and MICB) also are associated with this disorder. Polymorphisms in
genes involved in other autoimmune disorders have been inconsistently associated with primary adrenal insufficiency, and their contribution to its pathogenesis must be regarded as uncertain. These include
the class II, major histocompatibility complex, transactivator (CIITA),
C-­type lectin domain family 16, member A (CLEC16A), and protein
tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 22 (PTPN22). The disorder is
most common in middle-­age females and can occur in many generations of the same family. Antiadrenal antibodies, specifically antibodies
to the CYP21A2, CYP17A1, and CYP11A1 enzymes, are also found in
these patients. Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency may also be seen in
patients with celiac disease and mitochondrial gene mutations.
Adrenal insufficiency remains a risk among patients previously treated
with a prolonged course of steroids when stressed with an infection or
trauma. Despite being “tapered or weaned” from the steroids, subclinical
adrenal insufficiency may develop weeks to months later if stressed (see
Chapter 615.2).

3455

of adrenocortical carcinoma and refractory Cushing syndrome (see
Chapters 617 and 619), is cytotoxic to the adrenal cortex and can also
alter extraadrenal cortisol metabolism. Signs of adrenal insufficiency
occur in a substantial percentage of patients treated with mitotane.
Etomidate, used in the induction and maintenance of general anesthesia,
inhibits 11β-­hydroxylase (CYP11B1), and a single induction dose can
block cortisol synthesis for 4-­8 hours or longer. This may be problematic in severely stressed patients, particularly if repeated doses are used
in a critical care setting. Abiraterone acetate, an androgen biosynthesis
inhibitor that is used to treat metastatic prostate carcinoma, inhibits
cortisol biosynthesis but leaves corticosterone biosynthesis unimpaired.
This drug is not currently encountered in pediatric practice. Immune
checkpoint inhibitors may rarely cause primary adrenal insufficiency.
Although not themselves a cause of adrenal insufficiency, rifampicin and
anticonvulsive drugs such as phenytoin and phenobarbital reduce the
effectiveness and bioavailability of corticosteroid replacement therapy by
inducing steroid-­metabolizing enzymes in the liver.

Hemorrhage into Adrenal Glands

Hemorrhage into adrenal glands can occur in the neonatal period as a
result of a difficult labor (especially breech presentation), or its etiology
might not be apparent (Fig. 615.1). An incidence rate of 3 in 100,000
live births has been suggested. The hemorrhage may be sufficiently
extensive to result in death from exsanguination or hypoadrenalism.
An abdominal mass, anemia, unexplained jaundice, or scrotal hematoma may be the presenting sign. Often, the hemorrhage is asymptomatic initially and is identified later by calcification of the adrenal gland.
Fetal adrenal hemorrhage has also been reported. Postnatally, adrenal
hemorrhage most often occurs in patients being treated with anticoagulants. It can also occur as a result of child abuse.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Primary adrenal insufficiency leads to cortisol and often aldosterone
deficiencies. The signs and symptoms of adrenal insufficiency are most
easily understood in the context of the normal actions of these hormones (see Chapter 614; Table 615.6).

Infection

Tuberculosis was a common cause of adrenal destruction in the past but
is currently much less prevalent. The most common infectious etiology for
adrenal insufficiency is meningococcemia (see Chapter 237); adrenal crisis from this cause is referred to as Waterhouse-­Friderichsen syndrome.
Patients with AIDS can have a variety of subclinical abnormalities in the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal (HPA) axis, but frank adrenal insufficiency is rare. However, drugs used in the treatment of AIDS can affect
adrenal hormone homeostasis.

Drugs

Fig. 615.1 Contrast-­enhanced coronal CT confirming intraadrenal lo-

Ketoconazole, an antifungal drug, can cause adrenal insufficiency by
inhibiting adrenal enzymes. Mitotane (o,p′-­DDD), used in the treatment

calization of a round hyperdense lesion compatible with a large calcification. (From Llano JP, Beaufils E, Nicolino M. Uncommon cause of large
paravertebral calcification in a child. J Pediatr. 2013;162:881, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3456 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 615.6  Clinical Manifestations and Biochemical Findings in Adrenal Insufficiency
PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISM

PREVALENCE (%)*

SYMPTOMS
Fatigue

Glucocorticoid deficiency

90

Anorexia, weight loss

Glucocorticoid deficiency

90

Nausea, vomiting

Glucocorticoid deficiency, mineralocorticoid deficiency

90

Salt craving (primary adrenal insufficiency
only)

Mineralocorticoid deficiency

20

Myalgia or joint pain

Glucocorticoid deficiency

SIGNS
Low blood pressure, orthostatic hypotension

Mineralocorticoid deficiency, glucocorticoid deficiency

70-­100

Excess of proopiomelanocortin-­derived peptides

70

Mineralocorticoid deficiency, glucocorticoid deficiency
(leading to decreased free water excretion)

90

Hyperkalemia (primary adrenal insufficiency
only)

Mineralocorticoid deficiency

50

Hypoglycemia

Glucocorticoid deficiency

30

Ketosis

Glucocorticoid deficiency

30

Low random cortisol level

Glucocorticoid deficiency

80

Eosinophilia, lymphocytosis

Glucocorticoid deficiency

High ACTH level (primary adrenal
insufficiency only)

Glucocorticoid deficiency

100

High plasma renin activity (primary adrenal
insufficiency only)

Mineralocorticoid deficiency

100

Skin or mucosal hyperpigmentation (primary
adrenal insufficiency only)
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Hyponatremia

*Prevalence data are for primary insufficiency only. Blanks indicate that no pediatric prevalence data are available.
Data from Hsieh S, White PC. Presentation of primary adrenal insufficiency in childhood J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:E925–E928.

Cortisol deficiency decreases cardiac output and vascular tone;
moreover, catecholamines such as epinephrine have decreased inotropic and pressor effects in the absence of cortisol. These problems are
initially manifested as orthostatic hypotension in older children and
can progress to frank shock in patients of any age. They are exacerbated by aldosterone deficiency, which causes hypovolemia owing to
decreased resorption of sodium in the distal nephron.
Hypotension and decreased cardiac output decrease glomerular filtration and thus decrease the ability of the kidney to excrete free water.
Vasopressin (AVP) is secreted by the posterior pituitary in response
to hypotension and as a direct consequence of lack of inhibition by
cortisol. These factors decrease plasma osmolality and lead to hyponatremia. Hyponatremia is also caused by aldosterone deficiency and
may be much worse when both cortisol and aldosterone are deficient.
In addition to hypovolemia and hyponatremia, aldosterone deficiency causes hyperkalemia by decreasing potassium excretion in the
distal nephron. Cortisol deficiency alone does not cause hyperkalemia.
Cortisol deficiency decreases negative feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary, leading to increased secretion of ACTH. Hyperpigmentation is caused by ACTH and other peptide hormones
(γ-­melanocyte–stimulating hormone) arising from the ACTH precursor, proopiomelanocortin. In patients with a fair complexion, the skin
can have a bronze cast. Pigmentation may be more prominent in skin
creases, mucosa, and scars. In dark-­skinned patients, it may be most
readily appreciated in the gingival and buccal mucosa.
Hypoglycemia is a feature of adrenal insufficiency. It is often accompanied by ketosis as the body attempts to use fatty acids as an alternative energy source. Ketosis may cause or be aggravated by anorexia,
nausea, and vomiting, all of which occur frequently.
The clinical presentation of adrenal insufficiency depends on the
age of the patient, whether both cortisol and aldosterone secretion
are affected, and to some extent on the underlying etiology. The most

common causes in early infancy are inborn errors of steroid biosynthesis, sepsis, AHC, and adrenal hemorrhage. Infants have a relatively
greater requirement for aldosterone than do older children, possibly
owing to immaturity of the kidney and to the low sodium content of
human breast milk and infant formula. Hyperkalemia, hyponatremia,
and hypoglycemia are prominent presenting signs of adrenal insufficiency in infants. Ketosis is not consistently present because infants
generate ketones less well than do older children. Hyperpigmentation
is not usually seen because this takes weeks or months to develop, and
orthostatic hypotension is obviously difficult to demonstrate in infants.
Infants can become ill very quickly. There may be only a few days
of decreased activity, anorexia, and vomiting before critical electrolyte
abnormalities develop.
In older children with Addison disease, symptoms include muscle
weakness, malaise, anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, and orthostatic
hypotension. These may be of insidious onset. It is not unusual to elicit,
in retrospect, an episodic history spanning years with symptoms being
noticeable only during intercurrent illnesses. Such patients can present
with acute decompensation (adrenal crisis) during relatively minor
infectious illnesses. Some of these patients have been initially misdiagnosed
with chronic fatigue syndrome, postmononucleosis syndrome, chronic
Lyme disease, or psychiatric disorders (depression or anorexia nervosa).
Hyperpigmentation is often, but not necessarily, present. Hyponatremia is present at diagnosis in almost 90% of patients. Hyperkalemia
tends to occur later in the course of the disease in older children than
in infants and is present in only half of patients at diagnosis. Normal
potassium levels must never be presumed to rule out primary adrenal
insufficiency.
Hypoglycemia and ketosis are common. The clinical presentation can
be easily confused with gastroenteritis or other acute infections. Chronicity of symptoms can alert the clinician to the possibility of Addison disease, but this diagnosis should be considered in any child with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
orthostatic hypotension, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, and ketosis. Salt
craving is seen in primary adrenal insufficiency with mineralocorticoid
deficiency. Fatigue, myalgias, fever, eosinophilia, lymphocytosis, hypercalcemia, and anemia may be noted with glucocorticoid deficiency.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hypoglycemia, ketosis, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia have been
discussed. An electrocardiogram is useful for quickly detecting hyperkalemia in a critically ill child. Acidosis is often present, and the blood
urea nitrogen level is elevated if the patient is dehydrated.
Cortisol levels are sometimes at the low end of the normal range but
are invariably low when the patient’s degree of illness is considered.
ACTH levels are high in primary adrenal insufficiency but can take
time to be reported by the laboratory. Similarly, aldosterone levels may
be within the normal range but inappropriately low considering the
patient’s hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and hypovolemia. Plasma renin
activity is elevated. Blood eosinophils may be increased in number, but
this is rarely useful diagnostically.
Urinary excretion of sodium and chloride is increased and urinary
potassium is decreased, but these are difficult to assess in random urine
samples. Accurate interpretation of urinary electrolytes requires more
prolonged (24 hours) urine collections and knowledge of the patient’s
sodium and potassium intake.
The most definitive test for adrenal insufficiency is measurement of
serum levels of cortisol before and after administration of ACTH; resting levels are low and do not increase normally after administration of
ACTH. Occasionally, normal resting levels that do not increase after
administration of ACTH indicate an absence of adrenocortical reserve.
A low initial level followed by a significant response to ACTH can indicate secondary adrenal insufficiency. Traditionally, this test has been
performed by measuring cortisol levels before and 30 or 60 minutes
after giving 0.250 mg of cosyntropin (ACTH 1-­24) by rapid intravenous infusion. Aldosterone will transiently increase in response to this
dose of ACTH and may also be measured. A low-­dose test (1 μg ACTH
1-­24/1.73 m2) is a more sensitive test of pituitary-­adrenal reserve but
has somewhat lower specificity (more false-­positive tests).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Upon presentation, Addison disease often needs to be distinguished
from more acute illnesses such as gastroenteritis with dehydration

3457

or sepsis. Additional testing is directed at identifying the specific
cause for adrenal insufficiency. When CAH is suspected, serum levels of cortisol precursors (17-­hydroxyprogesterone) should be measured along with cortisol in an ACTH stimulation test (see Chapter
616) (Fig. 615.2). Elevated levels of very long-­chain fatty acids are
diagnostic of ALD (see Chapter 639.3). Many genetic etiologies for
primary adrenal insufficiency may be identified by direct genetic
testing, but it can take weeks for results to become available. The
presence of antiadrenal antibodies suggests an autoimmune pathogenesis. Patients with autoimmune Addison disease must be closely
observed for the development of other autoimmune disorders. In
children, hypoparathyroidism is a commonly associated disorder,
and it is suspected if hypocalcemia and elevated phosphate levels are
present.
Ultrasonography, CT, or MRI can help to define the size of the adrenal glands, but this is not usually necessary.

TREATMENT

Treatment of acute adrenal insufficiency must be immediate and vigorous. If the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency has not been established,
a blood sample should be obtained before therapy to determine electrolytes, glucose, ACTH, cortisol, aldosterone, and plasma renin activity. If the patient’s condition permits, an ACTH stimulation test can be
performed while initial fluid resuscitation is underway. An intravenous
solution of 5% glucose in 0.9% saline should be administered to correct hypoglycemia, hypovolemia, and hyponatremia. Hypotonic fluids
(e.g., 5% glucose in water or 0.2% saline) must be avoided because they
can precipitate or exacerbate hyponatremia. If hyperkalemia is severe,
it can require treatment with intravenous calcium and/or bicarbonate,
intrarectal potassium-­binding resin (sodium polystyrene sulfonate,
Kayexalate), or intravenous infusion of glucose and insulin. A water-­
soluble form of hydrocortisone, such as hydrocortisone sodium succinate, should be given intravenously. As much as 10 mg for infants,
25 mg for toddlers, 50 mg for older children, and 100 mg for adolescents should be administered as a bolus and a similar total amount then
given in divided doses at 6-­hour intervals for the first 24 hours. These
doses may be reduced during the next 24 hours if progress is satisfactory. Adequate fluid and sodium repletion is achieved by intravenous
saline administration, aided by the mineralocorticoid effect of high
doses of hydrocortisone.

Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
Infants, selected
children and adults

All > 6 months age

17-OH-Progesterone

21-OH-Antibody
(-)b

(-)
(+)a

(-)

CT Adrenals
(-)

Genetic Syndromes
(Rare CAH, AHC)
CAH

(-)

(+)

(+)

(+)

Infiltrative Disease
Adrenal Hemorrhage
Infections
Malignant Tumors

VLCFA (Males)

Autoimmune AI
Consider APS-1,
APS-2

Adrenoleukodystrophy

Idiopathic PAI

Fig. 615.2 Algorithm for the diagnostic approach to the patient with primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI). The most common causes of PAI are auto-

immune destruction of the adrenal cortex in adults and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) in children. These etiologies can be screened for using
21-­hydroxylase antibodies and a baseline serum 17-­hydroxyprogesterone level, respectively. Males with negative 21-­hydroxylase antibodies should
be tested for adrenoleukodystrophy with plasma VLCFAs. If these diagnoses are excluded, a CT scan of the adrenals may reveal evidence of adrenal
infiltrative processes or metastases, but this is of low yield in children and adolescents. The individual’s clinical picture and family history may render
some steps in the algorithm redundant or suggest specific genetic syndromes. The latter includes subtypes of autoimmune polyglandular syndromes
or specific rare genetic disorders where adrenal failure is part of a broader phenotype. AHC, Adrenal hypoplasia congenita; AI, adrenal insufficiency;
APS-1, type 1 autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome; VLCFA, very long-­chain fatty acid. a17-­OH-­progesterone >1,000 ng/dL is diagnostic for
21-­OH deficiency. bVLCFA should be measured in the initial evaluation of preadolescent boys. (Adapted from Husebye ES, Allolio B, Arlt W, et al.
Consensus statement on the diagnosis, treatment, and follow-­up of patients with primary adrenal insufficiency. J Intern Med. 2014;275:104–115.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3458 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Caution should be exercised in the rare patient with concomitant
adrenal insufficiency and hypothyroidism, because thyroxine can
increase cortisol clearance. Thus an adrenal crisis may be precipitated
if hypothyroidism is treated without first ensuring adequate glucocorticoid replacement.
After the acute manifestations are under control, most patients
require chronic replacement therapy for their cortisol and aldosterone
deficiencies. Hydrocortisone (cortisol) may be given orally in daily
doses of 10 mg/m2/24 hr in three divided doses; some patients require
15 mg/m2/24 hr to minimize fatigue, especially in the morning. Dividing the hydrocortisone into four doses daily may yield more physiologic drug profiles, but adherence to such frequent dosing may be
problematic. Timed-­release preparations of hydrocortisone are available in Europe and are undergoing clinical trials in the United States as
of 2021. Subcutaneous infusion of hydrocortisone with a pump has also
been examined in clinical trials; although this has the advantage that
it can very closely mimic normal diurnal variation in cortisol secretion, it is expensive and has not yet entered routine clinical practice.
Equivalent doses (20–25% of the hydrocortisone dose) of prednisone
or prednisolone may be divided and given twice daily. ACTH levels
may be used to monitor adequacy of glucocorticoid replacement in
primary adrenal insufficiency; in CAH, levels of precursor hormones
are used instead. Blood samples for monitoring should be obtained at
a consistent time of day and in a consistent relation to (i.e., before or
after) the hydrocortisone dose. Normalizing ACTH levels is unnecessary and can require excessive doses of hydrocortisone; in general,
morning ACTH levels high in the normal range to 3-­4 times normal
are satisfactory. Because untreated or severely undertreated patients
can acutely decompensate during relatively minor illnesses, assessment
of symptoms (or lack thereof) should not be used as a substitute for
biochemical monitoring. During situations of stress, such as periods
of infection or minor operative procedures, the dose of hydrocortisone
should be increased twofold to threefold. Major surgery under general
inhalation anesthesia requires high intravenous doses of hydrocortisone similar to those used for acute adrenal insufficiency.
If aldosterone deficiency is present, fludrocortisone, a synthetic mineralocorticoid, is given orally in doses of 0.05-­0.2 mg daily. Measurements
of plasma renin activity are useful in monitoring the adequacy of mineralocorticoid replacement. Chronic overdosage with glucocorticoids
leads to obesity, short stature, and osteoporosis, whereas overdosage with
fludrocortisone results in hypertension and occasionally hypokalemia.
Replacement of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in adults remains
controversial; prepubertal children do not normally secrete large
amounts of DHEA. Many adults with Addison disease complain of
having decreased energy, and replacing DHEA can improve this problem, particularly in women in whom adrenal androgens represent
approximately 50% of total androgen secretion.
Additional therapy might need to be directed at the underlying
cause of the adrenal insufficiency regarding infections and certain
metabolic defects. Previous therapeutic approaches to ALD included
administration of glycerol trioleate and glycerol trierucate (Lorenzo’s
oil), bone marrow transplantation, and lovastatin (see Chapter 639.3).
Introducing a normal ABCD1 gene into autologous stem cells with a
lentiviral vector (officially termed elivaldogene autotemcel) has shown
excellent results in preventing neurologic progression, but it remains
investigational as of 2021.

potent glucocorticoid and that agent is suddenly withdrawn or the dose
is tapered too quickly. Patients at risk for this problem include those
with leukemia, asthma (particularly when patients are transitioned
from oral to inhaled corticosteroids), and collagen vascular disease or
other autoimmune conditions and those who have undergone tissue
transplants or neurosurgical procedures. The maximal duration and
dosage of glucocorticoid that can be administered before encountering
this problem is not known, but it is assumed that high-­dose glucocorticoids (the equivalent of >10 times physiologic cortisol secretion) can
be administered for less than 1 week without requiring a subsequent
taper of dose. On the other hand, when high doses of dexamethasone
are given to children with leukemia, it can take 6 months or longer after
therapy is stopped before tests of adrenal function return to normal.
Signs and symptoms of adrenal insufficiency are most likely in patients
who are subsequently subjected to stresses such as severe infections or
additional surgical procedures.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Aldosterone secretion is unaffected in secondary adrenal insufficiency
because the adrenal gland is, by definition, intact and the renin-­
angiotensin system is not involved. Thus signs and symptoms are those
of cortisol deficiency. Newborns often have hypoglycemia. Older children can have orthostatic hypotension or weakness. Hyponatremia
may be present.
When secondary adrenal insufficiency is the consequence of an
inborn or acquired anatomic defect involving the pituitary, there may be
signs of associated deficiencies of other pituitary hormones. The penis
may be small in male infants if gonadotropins are also deficient. Infants
with secondary hypothyroidism are often jaundiced. Children with associated growth hormone deficiency grow poorly after the first year of life.

615.2 Secondary and Tertiary Adrenal
Insufficiency
Perrin C. White

ABRUPT CESSATION OF ADMINISTRATION OF
CORTICOSTEROIDS

Secondary adrenal insufficiency most commonly occurs when the
HPA axis is suppressed by prolonged administration of high doses of a

Corticotropin (Adrenocorticotropic Hormone)
Deficiency

Pituitary or hypothalamic dysfunction can cause corticotropin deficiency (see Chapter 595), usually associated with deficiencies of other
pituitary hormones such as growth hormone and thyrotropin. Destructive lesions in the area of the pituitary, such as craniopharyngioma and
germinoma, are the most common causes of corticotropin deficiency.
In many cases the pituitary or hypothalamus is further damaged during surgical removal or radiotherapy of tumors in the midline of the
brain. Traumatic brain injury (see Chapter 750) frequently causes pituitary dysfunction, especially in the first days after the injury. However,
corticotropin deficiency is difficult to detect in that period owing to
frequent use of high doses of dexamethasone to minimize brain swelling, and permanent corticotropin deficiency is unusual after traumatic
brain injury. In rare instances, autoimmune hypophysitis is the cause
of corticotropin deficiency.
Congenital lesions of the pituitary also occur. The pituitary alone
may be affected, or additional midline structures may be involved, such
as the optic nerves or septum pellucidum. The latter type of abnormality is termed septo-­optic dysplasia, or de Morsier syndrome (see Chapter 631.9). More severe developmental anomalies of the brain, such as
anencephaly and holoprosencephaly, can also affect the pituitary. These
disorders are usually sporadic, although a few cases of autosomal recessive inheritance have occurred. Isolated deficiency of corticotropin has
been reported, including in several sets of siblings. Patients with multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies caused by pathogenic variants in
the PROP1 gene may develop progressive ACTH/cortisol deficiency.
Isolated deficiency of corticotropin-­releasing hormone has been documented in an Arab kindred as an autosomal recessive trait.
Up to 60% of children with Prader-­Willi syndrome (see Chapter
99.8) have some degree of secondary adrenal insufficiency as assessed
by provocative testing with metyrapone, although diurnal cortisol levels are normal. The clinical significance of this finding is uncertain, but
it might contribute to the relatively high incidence of sudden death
with infectious illness that occurs in this population. Although it is not
yet a standard of care, some endocrinologists advocate treating patients
who have Prader-­Willi syndrome with hydrocortisone during febrile
illness.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
Some children with pituitary abnormalities have hypoplasia of
the midface. Children with optic nerve hypoplasia can have obvious visual impairment. They usually have a characteristic wandering nystagmus, but this is often not apparent until several months
of age.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Because the adrenal glands themselves are not directly affected, the
diagnosis of secondary adrenal insufficiency is sometimes challenging. The most commonly used test to diagnose secondary adrenal
insufficiency is low-­dose ACTH stimulation testing (1 μg/1.73 m2 of
cosyntropin given intravenously), the rationale being that there will
be some degree of atrophy of the adrenal cortex if normal physiologic
ACTH stimulation is lacking. Thus this test may be falsely negative in
cases of acute compromise of the pituitary (e.g., injury or surgery).
Such circumstances rarely pose a diagnostic dilemma; in general, this
test provides excellent sensitivity and specificity. Although assays vary
somewhat, a threshold cortisol level of 18-­20 μg/dL 30 minutes after
cosyntropin administration may be used to dichotomize normal and
abnormal responses.
There seems to be little reason to use stimulation with corticotropin-­
releasing hormone instead of ACTH; although the corticotropin-­
releasing hormone test has the theoretical advantage of testing the
ability of the anterior pituitary to respond to this stimulus by secreting ACTH (thus distinguishing secondary and tertiary adrenal insufficiency), in practice it does not provide improved sensitivity and
specificity, and the agent is not as widely available.

TREATMENT

Iatrogenic secondary adrenal insufficiency (caused by chronic glucocorticoid administration) is best avoided by use of the smallest
effective doses of systemic glucocorticoids for the shortest period.
When a patient is thought to be at risk, tapering the dose rapidly
to a level equivalent to or slightly less than the physiologic replacement (∼10 mg/m2/24 hr of hydrocortisone) and further tapering
over several weeks can allow the adrenal cortex to recover without
the patient developing signs of adrenal insufficiency. Patients with
anatomic lesions of the pituitary should be treated indefinitely with
glucocorticoids. Mineralocorticoid replacement is not required.
In patients with panhypopituitarism, treating cortisol deficiency
can increase free water excretion, thus unmasking central diabetes
insipidus. Electrolytes must be monitored carefully when initiating
cortisol therapy in panhypopituitary patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

615.3 Adrenal Insufficiency in the Critical
Care Setting
Perrin C. White
Critical illness–related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI)
is encountered in up to 20–50% of critically ill pediatric patients,
often as a transient condition. In many cases, it is considered functional or relative in nature, meaning that cortisol levels are within
normal limits but cannot increase sufficiently to meet the demands
of critical illness. The causes are heterogeneous (see Chapter
615.1). They include adrenal hypoperfusion from shock, particularly septic shock, as is often seen in meningococcemia. Inflammatory mediators during septic shock, particularly interleukin-­6, can
suppress ACTH secretion, directly suppress cortisol secretion, or
both. Etomidate, used as sedation for intubation, inhibits steroid
11β-­hydroxylase and thus blocks cortisol biosynthesis. Neurosurgical patients with closed head trauma or with tumors that involve
the hypothalamus or pituitary might have ACTH deficiency in the
context of panhypopituitarism. Some children have been previously
treated with systemic corticosteroids (e.g., children with leukemia) and have suppression of the HPA axis for that reason. In the

3459

intensive care nursery, premature infants have not yet developed
normal cortisol biosynthetic capacity and thus may not be able to
secrete adequate amounts of this hormone when ill.
Additionally, plasma clearance of cortisol is markedly reduced during critical illness, owing to decreased activity of cortisol-­metabolizing
enzymes in the liver and kidney. Although this may help defend
plasma levels of cortisol in the context of decreased cortisol secretion,
the inflammation associated with sepsis may increase glucocorticoid
resistance through activation of mitogen-­
activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) and decreased activity of their regulators, dual-­specific phosphatases (DUSPs).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cortisol is required for catecholamines to have their normal pressor
effects on the cardiovascular system (see Chapters 614.4 and 614.5).
Accordingly, adrenal insufficiency is often suspected in hypotensive
patients who do not respond to intravenous pressor agents. Patients
may be at increased risk for hypoglycemia or a presentation resembling the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, but these conditions commonly occur in the context of sepsis,
and the contribution of adrenal insufficiency may be difficult to
distinguish.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Although low random cortisol levels in severely stressed patients are
certainly abnormal, very high levels are also associated with a poor
outcome in such patients; the latter situation presumably reflects
a maximally stimulated adrenal cortex with diminished reserve.
ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation testing is generally considered
the best way to diagnose adrenal insufficiency in this setting (see
Chapter 615.1); evidence suggests that the low-­dose (1 μg/1.73 m2)
test may be superior to the 250-­μg standard dose test, although this
remains controversial. In general, a peak cortisol level <18 μg/dL
or an increment of <9 μg/dL from baseline is considered suggestive
for adrenal insufficiency in this context. In evaluating cortisol levels, cortisol in the circulation is mostly bound to cortisol-­binding
globulin; in hypoproteinemic states, total cortisol levels may be
decreased, whereas free cortisol levels might be normal. It may be
prudent to measure free cortisol before initiating treatment when
total cortisol is low and albumin is <2.5 g/dL, but such measurements are not readily available in all institutions.

TREATMENT

It is likely that stress doses of hydrocortisone (e.g., 100 mg/m2/
day) improve responses to pressor agents in patients with shock
and documented adrenal insufficiency (Waterhouse-­Friderichsen
syndrome). In adults with sepsis, corticosteroids probably reduce
intensive care unit (ICU) and hospital length of stay and 28-­day and
hospital mortality, but there are limited data regarding treatment
efficacy in critically ill children. The Surviving Sepsis Guidelines
suggest using IV hydrocortisone (or not using it) to treat pediatric septic shock only if fluids and vasopressor therapy are unable
to restore hemodynamic stability. This is a weak recommendation
with low-­quality evidence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

615.4 Altered End-­Organ Sensitivity to
Corticosteroids
Perrin C. White
Diseases can result from altered actions of hormones at their
physiologic targets. These may be caused by abnormal metabolism
of hormones, mutations in hormone receptors, or defects in cellular effectors (such as ion channels) that are targets of hormone
action.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3460 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
GENERALIZED GLUCOCORTICOID RESISTANCE

Patients with generalized glucocorticoid resistance have target-­tissue
insensitivity to glucocorticoids. The condition is usually inherited in
an autosomal dominant manner, but sporadic cases occur. Impairment
of normal negative feedback of cortisol at the levels of the hypothalamus and pituitary activates the HPA axis, with consequent increases in
ACTH and cortisol concentrations. Generalized glucocorticoid resistance is caused by pathogenic variants in the glucocorticoid receptor
(NR3C1). Most variants are heterozygous; glucocorticoid receptors
usually bind DNA as dimers, and three out of four dimers will contain
at least one abnormal receptor molecule when a heterozygous variant
is present.

Clinical Manifestations

The excess ACTH secretion causes adrenal hyperplasia with
increased production of adrenal steroids with mineralocorticoid
activity, including cortisol, deoxycorticosterone, and corticosterone, and also androgens and precursors, including androstenedione, DHEA, and DHEA sulfate. The high cortisol concentrations do
not cause Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 619) because of the insensitivity to glucocorticoids; conversely, most signs and symptoms of
adrenal insufficiency are absent except for the frequent occurrence
of chronic fatigue and occasional anxiety (neonatal hypoglycemia was reported in one very unusual patient with a homozygous
null variant). The mineralocorticoid and androgen receptors are
normally sensitive to their ligands. Signs of mineralocorticoid
excess, such as hypertension and hypokalemic alkalosis, are frequently noted. The increased concentrations of adrenal androgens
may cause ambiguous genitalia in females and gonadotropin-­
independent precocious puberty in children of either gender; acne,
hirsutism, and infertility in both sexes; menstrual irregularities in
females; and oligospermia in males. Testicular adrenal rest tumors
and ACTH-­secreting pituitary adenomas occasionally occur.

Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis of generalized glucocorticoid resistance is suggested
by elevated serum cortisol concentrations and increased 24-­hour
urinary free cortisol excretion in the absence of Cushing syndrome.
Levels of other adrenal steroids are also increased. Plasma concentrations of ACTH may be normal or high. The circadian pattern
of ACTH and cortisol secretion is preserved, although at higher-­
than-­normal concentrations, and there is resistance of the HPA axis
to dexamethasone suppression. Sequencing of the NR3C1 gene can
confirm the diagnosis.

Differential Diagnosis

Generalized glucocorticoid resistance should be distinguished from
relatively mild cases of Cushing syndrome (whether caused by a
pituitary adenoma or adrenal tumor, see Chapter 619); the latter
is more likely to be associated with excessive weight gain or poor
linear growth. Adrenocortical tumors may secrete mineralocorticoids such as deoxycorticosterone and also androgens, but ACTH
levels are often suppressed and, of course, the tumor can usually
be visualized with appropriate imaging techniques. CAH (see
Chapter 616), particularly 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency, may present with hypertension and signs of androgen excess, but in that
condition cortisol levels are low and levels of cortisol precursors
(17-­
hydroxyprogesterone, 11-­
deoxycortisol) are elevated. Obese
patients may be hypertensive and have hyperandrogenism, but cortisol secretion should be readily suppressed by dexamethasone.

Treatment

The goal of treatment is to suppress the excess secretion of ACTH,
thereby suppressing the increased production of adrenal steroids
with mineralocorticoid and androgenic activity. This requires administration of high doses of a pure glucocorticoid agonist such as dexamethasone (typically ∼20-­40 μg/kg/day) with careful titration to
suppress endogenous corticosteroid secretion without causing signs

of glucocorticoid excess such as excessive weight gain or suppression
of linear growth.

CORTISONE REDUCTASE DEFICIENCY

Levels of active glucocorticoids in target tissues are modulated by two
isozymes of 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The HSD11B2 isozyme converts cortisol to an inactive metabolite, cortisone; the two steroids differ in the presence of an 11β-­hydroxyl versus an 11-­oxo group,
respectively. Pathogenic variants in this enzyme cause the syndrome
of apparent mineralocorticoid excess. Conversely, the HSD11B1 isozyme converts cortisone to cortisol, and so it is sometimes referred to
as cortisone reductase. This isozyme is expressed at high levels in glucocorticoid target tissues, particularly the liver, where it ensures adequate levels of active glucocorticoids (cortisol and corticosterone) to
meet metabolic demands without requiring excessive adrenal cortisol
secretion.
The HSD11B1 isozyme is located in the endoplasmic reticulum (i.e.,
it is a microsomal enzyme) and functions as a dimer. It accepts electrons from reduced nicotine–adenine dinucleotide phosphate, which
is generated within the endoplasmic reticulum by hexose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase, an enzyme distinct from cytoplasmic glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase.
Apparent cortisone reductase deficiency is caused by homozygous
pathogenic variants in hexose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase that prevent generation of reduced nicotine–adenine dinucleotide phosphate
within the endoplasmic reticulum and thus starve HSD11B1 of its
essential cofactor for the reductase reaction. Very rare patients have
been reported to have heterozygous variants in HSD11B1 itself and
thus have “true” cortisone reductase deficiency; because the enzyme
functions as a homodimer, heterozygous variants are able to impair
three fourths of all dimers.

Clinical Manifestations

Because circulating cortisone is not converted to cortisol, the circulating half-­life of cortisol is decreased, and the adrenal cortex must
secrete additional cortisol to compensate. This leads to adrenocortical overactivity analogous to, but generally much milder than, that
seen in generalized glucocorticoid resistance. This is usually not
severe enough to cause hypertension, presenting instead with mild
to moderate signs of androgen excess such as hirsutism, oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, and infertility in females and precocious pseudopuberty (axillary and pubic hair and penile enlargement, but not
testicular enlargement) in males.

Laboratory Findings

The ratio of cortisol to cortisone in blood is lower than usual. The same
is true of urinary metabolites, typically measured as a ratio of the sum
of the tetrahydrocortisol and allotetrahydrocortisol excretion to that
of tetrahydrocortisone. These determinations are best accomplished by
gas chromatography followed by mass spectrometry and are available
in specialized reference laboratories. Absolute levels of cortisol and
ACTH are within normal limits.

Differential Diagnosis

Cortisone reductase deficiency should be distinguished from and
is much less common than other causes of androgen excess such as
polycystic ovarian syndrome and nonclassical CAH as a result of
21-­hydroxylase deficiency.

Treatment

Treatment is aimed at decreasing adrenal overactivity and thus reducing secretion of androgens. This can be accomplished by administration of hydrocortisone.

ALTERED END-­ORGAN SENSITIVITY TO
MINERALOCORTICOIDS
Pseudohypoaldosteronism

Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1) is a monogenic disease
in which aldosterone action is deficient and patients are thus unable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
to resorb urinary sodium or excrete potassium properly. There are
two forms. A relatively mild autosomal dominant form is caused by
pathogenic variants in NR3C2 encoding the human mineralocorticoid receptor. A heterozygous variant is sufficient to cause disease
because the mineralocorticoid receptor interacts with DNA as a
dimer, and three fourths of the dimers are defective in individuals
carrying heterozygous variants (assuming mutant protein is synthesized). A more severe autosomal recessive form is usually the result
of homozygous pathogenic variants in the α (SCNN1A), β (SCNN1B),
or γ (SCNN1G) subunits of the epithelial Na+ channel; one reported
case of severe autosomal recessive disease was caused by homozygous
variants in NR3C2.
PHA1 should not be confused with pseudohypoaldosteronism
type 2, a rare mendelian syndrome characterized by hyperkalemia and,
in contrast to PHA1, by hypertension from excessive renal sodium
reabsorption. This disorder is caused by variants in the renal regulatory
kinases WNK1 and WNK4 or components of an E3 ubiquitin ligase
complex, Kelch-­like 3 (KLHL3) and Cullin 3 (CUL3).
Transient or “secondary” (nongenetic) pseudohypoaldosteronism
can occur in infants, mainly male, with urinary tract malformations
and/or urinary tract infections.

Clinical Manifestations

Infants with PHA1 present with hyperkalemia, hyponatremia,
hypovolemia, hypotension, and failure to thrive. In more severe
(usually autosomal recessive) cases, salt loss is not confined to the
kidney, but instead occurs from most epithelia. Mothers may report
that the skin of their affected infants tastes salty. Some infants suffer from cystic fibrosis–like pulmonary symptoms. It is often difficult
to control electrolyte abnormalities in patients with the autosomal
recessive form, leading to frequent hospitalizations and a need for
close clinical monitoring.
It is noteworthy that signs and symptoms of aldosterone deficiency tend to remit as the patients get older, particularly in the
autosomal dominant form. This is similar to what is seen in actual
aldosterone deficiency, as occurs in the salt-­losing forms of CAH
or aldosterone synthase deficiency. The kidney matures after early
infancy to become more efficient at excreting potassium, and
although breast milk and infant formula are low in sodium, the
normal adult Western diet is relatively high in sodium, thus compensating for the renal salt wasting.

Laboratory Findings

Infants have marked hyperkalemia and hyponatremia. Both plasma
renin and aldosterone are markedly elevated. Levels of cortisol and
ACTH are normal. If hypovolemia is severe, patients may develop
prerenal azotemia. With severe hyperkalemia, the electrocardiogram may include tall-­peaked T waves or ventricular tachycardia.

3461

may be accomplished by mixing the formula with polystyrene
resin (Kayexalate) and then decanting the formula before feeding.
Fludrocortisone, a synthetic mineralocorticoid, may be efficacious
in milder autosomal dominant cases if administered in high doses
(titrating up to ∼0.5 mg daily). Significant electrolyte abnormalities require treatment with IV normal saline and rectal polystyrene
resin. Severe hyperkalemia may require glucose and insulin infusions to keep it under control.
Secondary PHA owing to urinary tract infections or malformations
generally resolves when the underlying condition is treated.

ACTIVATING PATHOGENIC VARIANTS IN THE
MINERALOCORTICOID RECEPTOR

In contrast to PHA1, the S810L (serine-­810 to leucine) variant of
NR3C2 causes autosomal dominant, severe, early-­onset hypertension. This variant alters the ligand specificity of the mineralocorticoid
receptor so that it is activated by cortisone and so HSD11B2 cannot
protect it. It is also activated by progesterone, and consequently the
hypertension is exacerbated by pregnancy. Conversely, the glucocorticoid and progesterone receptor antagonist mifepristone (RU-­486)
antagonizes the mutant receptor and might be useful therapeutically
in nonpregnant individuals.

APPARENT MINERALOCORTICOID EXCESS

The syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in HSD11B2
encoding the type 2 isozyme of 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.
The mineralocorticoid receptor has nearly identical affinities for
aldosterone (the main mineralocorticoid hormone) and cortisol,
yet cortisol is normally only a weak mineralocorticoid in vivo. This
is because HSD11B2 is expressed along with the mineralocorticoid
receptor in most target tissues such as the renal cortical collecting
duct epithelium. It converts cortisol to cortisone, which is not an
active steroid, thus preventing it from occupying the mineralocorticoid receptor. In contrast, aldosterone is not a substrate for the
enzyme because its 11β-­hydroxyl group forms a hemiketal with
the 18-­aldehyde group of the steroid and is thus not accessible to
the enzyme. Thus in the absence of HSD11B2, cortisol efficiently
occupies the mineralocorticoid receptor, and because cortisol concentrations are normally far higher than those of aldosterone, this
results in signs and symptoms of mineralocorticoid excess.
A similar clinical picture occurs with excessive consumption of licorice or licorice-­flavored chewing tobacco; licorice contains compounds,
including glycyrrhetinic and glycyrrhizic acids, that inhibit HSD11B2.
Carbenoxolone, an antihypertensive drug that is not marketed in the
United States, has similar effects.

Clinical Manifestations

PHA in infants should be distinguished from other causes of hyperkalemia and hyponatremia. These include renal failure of any cause,
CAH, aldosterone synthase deficiency, and other causes of adrenocortical insufficiency such as AHC. Patients with renal failure will
have elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, but these may also
be seen in severely dehydrated patients with PHA or adrenal insufficiency. Patients with any form of adrenal insufficiency in this clinical
context will have low or low-­normal aldosterone levels (with elevated
plasma renin), in contrast to the elevated aldosterone levels seen in
PHA. Patients with CAH have elevated levels of steroid precursors
such as 17-­hydroxyprogesterone (in patients with 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency), and patients with most forms of adrenal insufficiency
have elevated ACTH levels.

Affected infants often have some degree of intrauterine growth
restriction, with birthweights of 2 kg typical for term infants.
Infants and children often fail to thrive. Severe hypertension (to
∼200/120 mm Hg) is almost always present. In some patients, the
hypertension tends to be labile or paroxysmal with severe emotional stress as a precipitating factor. Complications of hypertension have included cerebrovascular accidents. Several patients have
died during infancy or adolescence, either from electrolyte imbalances leading to cardiac arrhythmias or from vascular sequelae of
hypertension. Hypokalemic alkalosis can eventually cause nephrocalcinosis (often visible on renal ultrasound) and nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus leading to polyuria and polydipsia. Deleterious
effects on muscle range from elevations in serum creatine phosphokinase to rhabdomyolysis. Electrocardiograms show left ventricular
hypertrophy.

Treatment

Laboratory Findings

Differential Diagnosis

Infants must be given sodium supplementation (initially IV and
then oral or enteral), typically approximately 8 mEq/kg/day. Potassium levels in the infant formula often need to be reduced, which

Hypokalemia and alkalosis are common but not consistently present. Sodium levels are generally in the upper part of the reference range. Aldosterone and renin levels are very low because the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3462 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
hypertension and hypervolemia are independent of aldosterone
concentrations. Serum cortisol and ACTH levels are generally
within normal limits. The serum half-­life of cortisol is increased,
but the test for this requires a radioactive tracer and is not clinically
available. Total urinary excretion of cortisol metabolites is markedly decreased. The urinary ratio of free cortisol to free cortisone is
elevated, as is the ratio of urinary tetrahydrocortisol plus allotetrahydrocortisol to tetrahydrocortisone.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes other forms of severe childhood
hypertension such as renal artery anomalies, but relatively few conditions present with suppressed renin and aldosterone levels. Liddle syndrome has a similar presentation but no abnormalities in
the steroid profile, typically has an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance, and does not respond to treatment with mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. Hypertensive forms of CAH (see Chapter 616) also have suppressed renin and aldosterone levels, but they
present with signs of androgen excess (11β-­hydroxylase deficiency)
or androgen deficiency (17α-­hydroxylase deficiency); the latter can
be difficult to appreciate in young children. The steroid profiles in
CAH differ from those seen in apparent mineralocorticoid excess
syndrome.
Patients with severe Cushing syndrome may have high enough
cortisol levels to overwhelm renal HSD11B2, leading to severe
hypertension with alterations in urinary cortisol-­
to-­
cortisone
ratios. This occurs most often in patients with ectopic ACTH
syndrome. This generally does not present a diagnostic dilemma
because other signs of Cushing syndrome are present, including
high cortisol levels.

Treatment

Treatment includes a low-­salt diet, potassium supplementation, and
mineralocorticoid receptor blockade with spironolactone or eplerenone; a sodium channel blocker, such as amiloride or triamterene, may
work at least as well. In principle, suppression of cortisol secretion with
dexamethasone (which does not bind the mineralocorticoid receptor)
should work, but in practice it is much less effective than mineralocorticoid receptor blockade.

Chapter 616

Congenital Adrenal
Hyperplasia and Related
Disorders
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a family of autosomal recessive disorders of cortisol biosynthesis (normal adrenal steroidogenesis
is discussed in Chapter 614). Cortisol deficiency increases secretion of
corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH]), which, in turn,
leads to adrenocortical hyperplasia and overproduction of intermediate metabolites. Depending on the enzymatic step that is deficient, there
may be signs, symptoms, and laboratory findings of mineralocorticoid
deficiency or excess; incomplete virilization or precocious puberty in
affected males; and virilization or sexual infantilism in affected females
(Figs. 616.1 and 616.2, Table 616.1).

616.1 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 21-­Hydroxylase Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
More than 90% of CAH cases are caused by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. This P450 enzyme (CYP21A2, P450c21) hydroxylates progesterone and 17-­hydroxyprogesterone to yield 11-­deoxycorticosterone
and 11-­deoxycortisol, respectively (see Fig. 614.1 in Chapter 614).
These conversions are required for synthesis of aldosterone and cortisol, respectively. Both hormones are deficient in the most severe,

LIDDLE SYNDROME

Liddle syndrome is a form of hypertension and hypokalemia that
is clinically similar to the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid
excess, but it is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. It is
caused by an activating pathogenic variant in the β (SCNN1B) or
γ (SCNN1G) subunits of the epithelial sodium channel. Most of
these mutations prevent the channel subunits from being ligated to
ubiquitin and targeted to the proteasome for degradation, a process
that is normally regulated indirectly by aldosterone. The net effect
is to increase the number of open channels at the apical surface of
epithelial cells of the renal collecting duct, thus facilitating sodium
resorption and potassium excretion.

Clinical Manifestations, Laboratory Findings, and
Differential Diagnosis

Liddle syndrome is characterized by severe early-­onset hypertension
and by hypokalemia, which may not be persistent. Aldosterone and
renin levels are suppressed, but all steroid hormone levels are normal.
The differential diagnosis is the same as that for apparent mineralocorticoid excess.

Treatment

The mainstays of treatment are a low-­salt diet, potassium supplementation, and a sodium channel blocker such as amiloride or triamterene.
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists such as spironolactone are
ineffective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

B

C

Fig. 616.1 A, A 6-­yr-­old female with congenital virilizing adrenal hy-

perplasia. The height age was 8.5 yr, and the bone age was 13 yr. B, Notice the clitoral enlargement and labial fusion. C, Her 5-­yr-­old brother
was not considered to be abnormal by the parents. The height age was
8 yr, and the bone age was 12.5 yr.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders

A

B

3463

C

Fig. 616.2 Three virilized females with untreated congenital adrenal hyperplasia. All were erroneously assigned male sex at birth, and each had

a normal female sex-­chromosome complement. Infants A and B had the salt-­wasting form and received the diagnosis early in infancy. Infant C was
referred at 1 yr of age because of bilateral cryptorchidism. Notice the completely penile urethra; such complete masculinization in females with
adrenal hyperplasia is rare; most of these infants have the salt-­wasting form.

salt-­wasting form of the disease. Slightly less severely affected patients
are able to synthesize adequate amounts of aldosterone but have
elevated levels of androgens of adrenal origin; this is termed simple
virilizing disease. These two forms are collectively termed classic
21-­hydroxylase deficiency. Patients with nonclassic disease have relatively mildly elevated levels of androgens and may be asymptomatic or
have signs of androgen excess at any time after birth. Clinical presentation is dependent, in part, on the genotype (Table 616.2).

less severely affected than the other), in which case the severity of disease expression is largely determined by the activity of the less severely
affected of the two alleles.
Closely adjacent to, but on the opposite DNA strand from, CYP21 is
the tenascin-­X (TNX) gene, which encodes a connective tissue protein.
Rarely, deletions of CYP21 extend into TNX. Such patients may have a
contiguous gene syndrome (see Chapter 99.1) consisting of CAH and
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Aldosterone and Cortisol Deficiency

Classic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency occurs in approximately 1 in 14,000-­
18,000 births in most populations. Approximately 70% of affected
infants have the salt-­losing form, whereas 30% have the simple virilizing form of the disorder. In the United States, CAH is less common
in African Americans compared with White children (1:42,000 vs
1:15,500). Nonclassic disease has a prevalence of approximately 1 in
1,000 in the general population but occurs more frequently in specific
ethnic groups such as Ashkenazi Jews and Hispanics.

GENETICS

There are two steroid 21-­hydroxylase genes—CYP21P (CYP21A1P,
CYP21A) and CYP21 (CYP21A2, CYP21B)—which alternate in tandem with two genes for the fourth component of complement (C4A
and C4B) in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p21.3 between the HLA-­B and HLA­DR loci. Many other genes are in this cluster. CYP21 is the active gene;
CYP21P is 98% identical in DNA sequence to CYP21 but is a pseudogene because of at least 10 different pathogenic variants. Although
almost 300 variants have been reported, more than 90% of abnormal
alleles causing 21-­hydroxylase deficiency are the result of recombinations between CYP21 and CYP21P. Approximately 20% are deletions
generated by unequal meiotic crossing-­
over between CYP21 and
CYP21P, whereas the remainder are nonreciprocal transfers of deleterious variants from CYP21P to CYP21, a phenomenon termed gene
conversion.
The deleterious variants in CYP21P have different effects on enzymatic activity when transferred to CYP21. Several variants completely
prevent synthesis of a functional protein, whereas others are missense
variants that yield enzymes with 1–50% of normal activity. Disease
severity correlates well with the variants carried by an affected individual; patients with salt-­wasting disease usually carry variants on both
alleles that result in no enzymatic activity. Patients are frequently compound heterozygotes for different types of variants (i.e., one allele is

Because both cortisol and aldosterone require 21-­hydroxylation for
their synthesis, both hormones are deficient in the most severe, salt-­
wasting form of the disease. This form constitutes approximately 70%
of cases of classic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. The signs and symptoms
of cortisol and aldosterone deficiency, and the pathophysiology underlying them, are essentially those described in adrenal insufficiency
(see Chapter 615). These include progressive weight loss, anorexia,
vomiting, dehydration, weakness, hypotension, hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. These problems typically first develop in
affected infants at approximately 10-­14 days of age. Without treatment,
shock, cardiac arrhythmias, and death may occur within days or weeks.
CAH differs from other causes of primary adrenal insufficiency in that
precursor steroids accumulate proximal to the blocked enzymatic conversion. Because cortisol is not synthesized efficiently, ACTH levels are high,
leading to hyperplasia of the adrenal cortex and levels of precursor steroids that may be hundreds of times normal. In the case of 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, these precursors include 17-­hydroxyprogesterone and progesterone. Progesterone and perhaps other metabolites act as antagonists
of the mineralocorticoid receptor and thus may exacerbate the effects of
aldosterone deficiency in untreated patients.
It is not unusual for children with classic CAH to require hospitalization for intercurrent illnesses during childhood. This is most likely
to occur in the first 2 years of life and to be precipitated by gastroenteritis, because such illnesses may cause fluid and electrolyte losses, and
vomiting may interfere with medication dosing. Children requiring
high fludrocortisone doses are most likely to be hospitalized, presumably because those patients have the greatest propensity to salt wasting.

Prenatal Androgen Excess

The most important problem caused by accumulation of steroid precursors is that 17-­hydroxyprogesterone is shunted into the pathway for
androgen biosynthesis, leading to high levels of androstenedione that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3464 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 616.1  Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
DISORDER

AFFECTED GENE
AND CHROMOSOME

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

THERAPEUTIC MEASURES

21-­Hydroxylase
deficiency, classic form

CYP21
6p21.3

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol, ↑ACTH
↑↑ Baseline and ACTH-­
stimulated 17-­hydroxy-­
progesterone

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Mineralocorticoid
deficiency (salt-­
wasting crisis)

Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia
↑ Plasma renin

Mineralocorticoid
(fludrocortisone)
replacement; sodium chloride
supplementation

Ambiguous genitalia
in females

↑ Serum androgens

Vaginoplasty and clitoral
recession

Postnatal virilization in
males and females

↑ Serum androgens

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

21-­Hydroxylase
deficiency, nonclassic
form

CYP21
6p21.3

May be asymptomatic;
precocious
adrenarche,
hirsutism, acne,
menstrual
irregularity, infertility

↑ Baseline and ACTH-­stimulated
17-­hydroxyprogesterone
↑ Serum androgens

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

11β-­Hydroxylase
deficiency

CYP11B1
8q24.3

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol,
↑ ACTH

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

↑↑ Baseline and ACTH-­
stimulated 11-­deoxycortisol
and deoxycorticosterone

3β-­Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
deficiency, classic form

17α-­Hydroxylase/17,20-­
lyase deficiency

HSD3B2
1p13.1

CYP17
10q24.3

Ambiguous genitalia
in females

↑ Serum androgens

Vaginoplasty and clitoral
recession

Postnatal virilization in
males and females

↑ Serum androgens

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Hypertension

↓ Plasma renin, hypokalemia

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol,
↑ ACTH
↑↑ Baseline and ACTH-­
stimulated Δ5 steroids
(pregnenolone, 17-­hydroxy-­
pregnenolone, DHEA)

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Mineralocorticoid
deficiency (salt-­
wasting crisis)

Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia
↑ Plasma renin

Mineralocorticoid
(fludrocortisone)
replacement; sodium chloride
supplementation

Ambiguous genitalia
in females and males

↑ DHEA, ↓ androstenedione,
testosterone, and estradiol

Surgical correction of genitals
and sex hormone replacement
as necessary, consonant with
sex of rearing

Precocious
adrenarche,
disordered puberty

↑ DHEA, ↓ androstenedione,
testosterone, and estradiol

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Cortisol deficiency
(corticosterone
is an adequate
glucocorticoid)

↓ Cortisol, ↑ ACTH
↑ DOC, corticosterone
Low 17α-­hydroxylated steroids;
poor response to ACTH

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
administration

Ambiguous genitalia
in males

↓ Serum androgens; poor
response to hCG

Orchidopexy or removal
of intraabdominal testes;
sex hormone replacement
consonant with sex of rearing

Sexual infantilism

↓ Serum androgens or estrogens

Sex hormone replacement
consonant with sex of rearing

Hypertension

↓ Plasma renin; hypokalemia

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders

3465

Table 616.1  Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia—cont’d
DISORDER

AFFECTED GENE
AND CHROMOSOME

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

THERAPEUTIC MEASURES

Congenital lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia

STAR
8p11.2

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↑ ACTH
Low levels of all steroid
hormones, with decreased or
absent response to ACTH

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Mineralocorticoid
deficiency (salt-­
wasting crisis)

Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia
↓ Aldosterone, ↑ plasma renin

Mineralocorticoid
(fludrocortisone)
replacement; sodium chloride
supplementation

Ambiguous genitalia
in males

Decreased or absent response
to hCG in males

Orchidopexy or removal
of intraabdominal testes;
sex hormone replacement
consonant with sex of rearing

Poor pubertal
development or
premature ovarian
failure in females

↑ FSH, ↑ LH, ↓ estradiol (after
puberty)

Estrogen replacement

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol, ↑ ACTH
↑ Pregnenolone, ↑ progesterone

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Ambiguous genitalia
in males and females

↑ Serum androgens prenatally,
↓ androgens and estrogens at
puberty

Surgical correction of genitals
and sex hormone replacement
as necessary, consonant with
sex of rearing

Maternal virilization
Antley-­Bixler
syndrome

Decreased ratio of estrogens to
androgens

P450 oxidoreductase
deficiency

POR
7q11.3

↓, Decreased; ↑, increased; ↑↑, markedly increased; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DOC, 11-­deoxycorticosterone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating
hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone.

Table 616.2  Genotype-­Phenotype Correlations in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Owing to 21-­Hydroxylase Deficiency
VARIANT GROUP

A

B

C

Enzymatic activity, % normal

Nil

1–2%

20–50%

CYP21 variants (phenotype
generally corresponds to the
least affected allele)

Gene deletion
Exon 3 del 8 bp
Exon 6 cluster
Q318X
R356W

I172N

P30L
V281L
P453S

Intron 2 splice*
Severity

Salt wasting

Simple virilizing

Nonclassic

Aldosterone synthesis

Low

Normal

Normal

Age at diagnosis (without
newborn screening)

Infancy

Infancy (females)
Childhood (males)

Childhood to adulthood, or
asymptomatic

Virilization

Severe

Moderate to severe

None to mild

Incidence

1/20,000

1/50,000

1/500

*This variant is associated with both salt-­wasting and simple virilizing disease.

are converted outside the adrenal gland to testosterone. This problem
begins in affected fetuses by 8-­10 weeks of gestation and leads to abnormal genital development in females (see Figs. 616.1 and 616.2).
The external genitalia of males and females normally appear identical
early in gestation (see Chapter 622). Affected females who are exposed
in utero to high levels of androgens of adrenal origin have masculinized external genitalia (see Figs. 616.1 and 616.2). This is manifested
by enlargement of the clitoris and by partial or complete labial fusion.
The vagina usually has a common opening with the urethra (urogenital
sinus). The clitoris may be so enlarged that it resembles a penis; because
the urethra opens below this organ, some affected females may be mistakenly presumed to be males with hypospadias and cryptorchidism.

The severity of virilization is usually greatest in females with the salt-­
losing form of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency (see Table 616.2). The internal genital organs are normal because affected females have normal
ovaries and not testes and thus do not secrete antimüllerian hormone.
Prenatal exposure of the brain to high levels of androgens may influence subsequent sexually dimorphic behaviors in affected females.
Females may demonstrate aggressive play behavior, tend to be interested in masculine toys such as cars and trucks, and often show
decreased interest in playing with dolls. Women may have decreased
interest in maternal roles. There is an increased frequency of homosexuality in affected females. Nonetheless, most function heterosexually
and do not have gender identity confusion or dysphoria. It is unusual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3466 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
for affected females to assign themselves a male role except in some
with the severest degree of virilization.
Male infants appear normal at birth. The diagnosis may not be made
in males until signs of adrenal insufficiency develop. Because patients
with this condition can deteriorate quickly, infant males are more likely
to die than infant females. For this reason, all 50 American states and
many countries have instituted newborn screening for this condition
(see Chapter 616.2).

Postnatal Androgen Excess

Untreated or inadequately treated children of both sexes develop additional signs of androgen excess after birth. Males with the simple virilizing form of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency often have a delayed diagnosis
because they appear normal and rarely develop adrenal insufficiency.
Signs of androgen excess include rapid somatic growth and accelerated skeletal maturation. Affected patients are tall in childhood,
but premature closure of the epiphyses causes growth to stop relatively
early, and adult stature is stunted (see Fig. 616.1). Muscular development may be excessive. Pubic and axillary hair may appear, and acne
and a deep voice may develop. The penis, scrotum, and prostate may
become enlarged in affected males; however, the testes are usually
prepubertal in size so that they appear small relative to the enlarged
penis. Occasionally, ectopic adrenocortical cells in the testes of patients
become hyperplastic similarly to the adrenal glands, producing testicular adrenal rest tumors (see Chapter 624). The clitoris may become
further enlarged in affected females (see Fig. 616.1). Although the
internal genital structures are female, breast development and menstruation may not occur unless the excessive production of androgens
is suppressed by adequate treatment.
Similar but usually milder signs of androgen excess may occur in
nonclassic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency (see Table 616.2). In this attenuated form, cortisol and aldosterone levels are normal and affected
females have normal genitals at birth. Males and females may present with precocious pubarche and early development of pubic and
axillary hair. Hirsutism, acne, menstrual disorders, and infertility
may develop later in life, but many females and males are completely
asymptomatic.

Adrenomedullary Dysfunction

Development of the adrenal medulla requires exposure to the extremely
high cortisol levels normally present within the adrenal gland. Thus
patients with classic CAH have abnormal adrenomedullary function, as
evidenced by blunted epinephrine responses, decreased blood glucose,
and lower heart rates with exercise. Ability to exercise is unimpaired,
and the clinical significance of these findings is uncertain. Adrenomedullary dysfunction may exacerbate the cardiovascular effects of cortisol
deficiency in untreated or undertreated patients.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

See Table 616.1.
Patients with salt-­losing disease have typical laboratory findings
associated with cortisol and aldosterone deficiency, including hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and, often, hypoglycemia,
but these abnormalities can take 10-­14 days or longer to develop after
birth. Blood levels of 17-­hydroxyprogesterone are markedly elevated.
However, levels of this hormone are high during the first 2-­3 days of
life even in unaffected infants and especially if they are ill or premature. After infancy, once the circadian rhythm of cortisol is established,
17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels vary in the same circadian pattern,
being highest in the morning and lowest at night. Blood levels of cortisol are usually low in patients with the salt-­losing type of disease. They
are often normal in patients with simple virilizing disease but inappropriately low in relation to the ACTH and 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
levels. In addition to 17-­hydroxyprogesterone, levels of androstenedione and testosterone are elevated in affected females; testosterone is
not elevated in affected males because normal infant males have high
testosterone levels compared with those seen later in childhood. Levels of urinary 17-­ketosteroids and pregnanetriol are elevated but are
now rarely used clinically because blood samples are easier to obtain

than 24-­hour urine collections. ACTH levels are elevated but have no
diagnostic utility over 17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels. Plasma levels of
renin are elevated, and serum aldosterone is inappropriately low for the
renin level. However, renin levels are high in normal infants in the first
few weeks of life.
Diagnosis of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency is most reliably established
by measuring 17-­hydroxyprogesterone before and 30 or 60 minutes
after an intravenous bolus of 0.125-­0.25 mg of cosyntropin (ACTH
1-­24). Nomograms exist that readily distinguish between unaffected
individuals and patients with nonclassic and classic 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency. Heterozygous carriers of this autosomal recessive disorder
tend to have higher ACTH-­stimulated 17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels
than genetically unaffected individuals, but there is significant overlap between subjects in these two categories. However, in infants with
frank electrolyte abnormalities or circulatory instability, it may not be
possible or necessary to delay treatment to perform this test, as levels
of precursors will be sufficiently elevated on a random blood sample to
make the diagnosis.
Genotyping is clinically available and may help to confirm the diagnosis. Because the gene conversions that generate most pathogenic
alleles may transfer more than one variant, at least one parent should
also be genotyped to determine which variants are on each allele.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Disorders of sexual development are discussed more generally in
Chapter 628. The initial step in evaluating an infant with ambiguous
genitalia is a thorough physical examination to define the anatomy of
the genitals, locate the urethral meatus, palpate the scrotum or labia
and the inguinal regions for testes (palpable gonads usually indicate
the presence of testicular tissue and that the infant is a genetic male),
and look for any other anatomic abnormalities. Ultrasonography is
helpful in demonstrating the presence or absence of a uterus and can
often locate the gonads. A rapid karyotype (such as fluorescence in
situ hybridization of interphase nuclei for X and Y chromosomes) can
quickly determine the genetic sex of the infant. These results are all
likely to be available before the results of hormonal testing and together
allow the clinical team to advise the parents as to the genetic sex of the
infant and the anatomy of internal reproductive structures. Injection of
contrast medium into the urogenital sinus of a virilized female demonstrates a vagina and uterus; surgeons use this information to formulate
a plan for surgical management.

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS

Prenatal diagnosis of 21-­hydroxylase is possible late in the first trimester by analysis of DNA obtained by chorionic villus sampling or during
the second trimester by amniocentesis. This is usually done because the
parents already have an affected child. Most often, the CYP21A2 gene
is analyzed for frequently occurring pathogenic variants; less common
variants may be detected by DNA sequencing. Cell-­free fetal DNA may
be an adjunctive noninvasive testing method to help guide decision-­
making for possible prenatal treatment with dexamethasone, given that
prenatal sex typing can be performed as early as 6-­9 weeks. As of 2021,
cell-­free fetal DNA testing for this disorder is not yet available as part
of routine clinical care.

NEWBORN SCREENING

Because 21-­hydroxylase deficiency is often undiagnosed in affected
males until they have severe adrenal insufficiency, all states in the
United States and many other countries have instituted newborn
screening programs. These programs analyze 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
levels in dried blood obtained by heelstick and absorbed on filter paper
cards; the same cards are screened in parallel for other congenital
conditions, such as hypothyroidism and phenylketonuria. Potentially
affected infants are typically quickly recalled for additional testing
(electrolytes and repeat 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone determination) at
approximately 2 weeks of age. Infants with salt-­wasting disease often
have abnormal electrolytes by this age but are usually not severely ill.
Screening programs are effective in preventing many cases of adrenal crisis in affected males. The nonclassic form of the disease is not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders
reliably detected by newborn screening, but this is of little clinical significance because adrenal insufficiency does not occur in this type of
21-­hydroxylase deficiency.
The main difficulty with current newborn screening programs is that
to reliably detect all affected infants, the cutoff 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
levels for first-­tier screening are set so low that there is a very high
frequency of false-­positive results (i.e., the test has a low positive predictive value of as little as 1%). This problem is worst in premature
infants. Positive predictive value can be improved by using cutoff levels
based on gestational age and by using more specific second-­tier screening methods such as liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass
spectrometry.

TREATMENT
Glucocorticoid Replacement

Cortisol deficiency is treated with glucocorticoids. Treatment also suppresses excessive production of androgens by the adrenal cortex and
thus minimizes problems such as excessive growth and skeletal maturation and virilization. This often requires larger glucocorticoid doses
than are needed in other forms of adrenal insufficiency, typically 12-­15
mg/m2/24 hr of hydrocortisone daily administered orally in 3 divided
doses. Affected infants usually require dosing at the high end of this
range. Double or triple doses are indicated during periods of stress,
such as infection or surgery. Glucocorticoid treatment must be continued indefinitely in all patients with classic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency
but may not be necessary in patients with nonclassic disease unless
signs of androgen excess are present. Therapy must be individualized. It
is desirable to maintain linear growth along percentile lines; crossing to
higher height percentiles may suggest undertreatment, whereas loss of
height percentiles often indicates overtreatment with glucocorticoids.
Overtreatment is also suggested by excessive weight gain. Pubertal
development should be monitored by periodic examination, and skeletal maturation is evaluated by serial radiographs of the hand and wrist
for bone age. Hormone levels, particularly 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
and androstenedione, should be measured early in the morning, before
taking the morning medications, or at a consistent time in relation to
medication dosing. Desirable 17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels are in
the high-­normal range or several times normal; low-­normal levels can
usually be achieved only with excessive glucocorticoid doses. Hydrocortisone is the preferred glucocorticoid in growing children because
its shorter half-­life minimizes adverse side effects such as growth suppression, which is seen with longer half-­life glucocorticoids. It is available as tablets, immediate-­release granules, and a custom-­compounded
suspension. Use of continuous subcutaneous pump infusion devices
to deliver hydrocortisone in a pattern more closely approximating the
normal diurnal rhythm variation in cortisol secretion has been studied but has not entered clinical practice. Clinical trials for delayed-­
release hydrocortisone tablets are currently underway in the pediatric
population.
Menarche occurs at the appropriate age in most females in whom
good control has been achieved; it may be delayed in females with
suboptimal control. Children with simple virilizing disease, particularly males, are frequently not diagnosed until 3-­7 years of age, at
which time skeletal maturation may be 5 years or more in advance of
chronological age. In some children, especially if the bone age is 12
years or more, spontaneous central (i.e., gonadotropin-­dependent)
puberty may occur when treatment is instituted, because therapy with
hydrocortisone suppresses production of adrenal androgens and thus
stimulates release of pituitary gonadotropins if the appropriate level of
hypothalamic maturation is present. This form of superimposed true
precocious puberty may be treated with a gonadotropin hormone–
releasing hormone analog such as leuprolide (see Chapter 600.1).
Males with 21-­hydroxylase deficiency who have had inadequate corticosteroid therapy may develop testicular adrenal rest tumors, which
may regress with increased steroid dosage. Testicular MRI, ultrasonography, and color flow Doppler examination help to define the
character and extent of disease. Testis-­sparing surgery to resect steroid-­
unresponsive tumors may be required in adult men to preserve fertility.

3467

Mineralocorticoid Replacement

Patients with salt-­wasting disease (i.e., aldosterone deficiency) require
mineralocorticoid replacement with fludrocortisone. Infants may have
very high mineralocorticoid requirements in the first few months of
life, usually 0.1-­0.3 mg daily in 2 divided doses, but occasionally up to
0.4 mg daily, and often require sodium supplementation (sodium chloride 8 mmol/kg) in addition to the mineralocorticoid. Older infants
and children are usually maintained with 0.05-­0.1 mg daily of fludrocortisone. In some patients, simple virilizing disease may be easier to
control with a low dose of fludrocortisone in addition to hydrocortisone
even when these patients have normal aldosterone levels in the absence
of mineralocorticoid replacement. Therapy is evaluated by monitoring
of vital signs; tachycardia and hypertension are signs of overtreatment
with mineralocorticoids. Serum electrolytes should be measured frequently in early infancy as therapy is adjusted. Plasma renin activity is
a useful way to determine adequacy of therapy; it should be maintained
in or near the normal range but not suppressed.
Additional approaches to improve outcome have been proposed but
have not yet become the standard of care. These include an antiandrogen such as flutamide to block the effects of excessive androgen levels
and/or an aromatase inhibitor such as anastrozole or letrozole, which
blocks conversion of androgens to estrogen and thus retards skeletal
maturation, a process that is sensitive to estrogens in both males and
females. Aromatase inhibitors generally should not be used in pubertal females, except in combination with a gonadotropin-­
releasing
hormone agonist because this will expose the ovaries to excessive levels of gonadotropins. Growth hormone, with or without gonadotropin–releasing hormone agonists, has been suggested to improve adult
height. Corticotropin-­releasing hormone receptor antagonists such as
crinecerfont and tildacerfont are in phase 2-­3 studies as of 2021; they
may reduce ACTH secretion, thus suppressing secretion of abnormal
steroids at lower glucocorticoid doses than otherwise necessary. This
strategy may reduce the adverse effects of high glucocorticoid doses.
Abiraterone acetate, a CYP17A1 inhibitor that suppresses secretion of
androgens and estrogens and is used for treatment of prostate cancer,
may also permit reductions in glucocorticoid dosing and is in early-­
phase trials for CAH as of 2021.

Surgical Management of Ambiguous Genitals

Significantly virilized females usually undergo surgery between 2 and
6 months of age. If there is severe clitoromegaly, the clitoris is reduced
in size, with partial excision of the corporal bodies and preservation
of the neurovascular bundle; however, moderate clitoromegaly may
become much less noticeable without surgery as the patient grows.
Vaginoplasty and correction of the urogenital sinus usually are performed at the time of clitoral surgery; revision in adolescence is often
necessary.
Risks and benefits of surgery should be fully discussed with parents
of affected females. There is limited long-­term follow-­up of functional
outcomes in patients who have undergone modern surgical procedures. It appears that female sexual dysfunction increases in frequency
and severity in those with the most significant degrees of genital virilization and with the degree of enzymatic impairment (prenatal androgen exposure) caused by each patient’s pathogenic variant (see Table
616.2). Sex assignment of infants with disorders of sexual differentiation (including CAH) is usually based on expected sexual functioning
and fertility in adulthood, with early surgical correction of the external
genitalia to conform with the sex assignment. The majority of females
with CAH identify as female gender and are heterosexual. Gender dysphoria is not common with CAH; it occurs mostly in females with the
salt-­wasting form of the disease and the greatest degree of virilization.
Lay and medical opponents of genital surgery for other disorders of
sexual differentiation raise the concern that it ignores any prenatally
influenced gender role effects from androgen exposure and precludes
the patient from having any decision as to the patient’s own preferred
sexual identity and what surgical correction of the genitals should be
performed. They advocate that treatment should be aimed primarily at
educating the patient, family, and others about the medical condition

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3468 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and its treatment. They propose that surgery should be delayed until
the patient decides on what, if any, surgery should be performed. There
have not been any studies comparing early with late surgery. Not all lay
groups support delaying surgery, and many agree with appropriate surgery during infancy. Severely virilized genotypic (XX) females raised
as males have generally functioned well in the male gender as adults.
In adolescent and adult females with poorly controlled
21-­hydroxylase deficiency (hirsutism, obesity, amenorrhea), bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy (with hormone replacement) may
be an alternative to standard medical hormone replacement therapy,
but because the adrenal glands have been removed, patients treated
in this way may be more susceptible to acute adrenal insufficiency
if treatment is interrupted. Moreover, they may exhibit signs of
elevated ACTH levels such as abnormal pigmentation. There have
also been reports of development of adrenal rest tumors in women
after adrenalectomy, which defeats the purpose of adrenalectomy
and allows the recurrence of androgen excess.

Prenatal Treatment

Besides genetic counseling, the main goal of prenatal diagnosis is to
facilitate prenatal treatment of affected females. Mothers with pregnancies at risk may be given dexamethasone, a steroid that readily crosses the placenta, in an amount of 20 μg/kg pre-­pregnancy
maternal weight daily in 2 or 3 divided doses. This suppresses secretion of steroids by the fetal adrenal, including secretion of adrenal
androgens. If started by 6 weeks of gestation, it ameliorates virilization of the external genitals in affected females. Chorionic villus
biopsy is then performed to determine the sex and genotype of the
fetus; therapy is continued only if the fetus is an affected female.
DNA analysis of fetal cells isolated from maternal plasma for sex
determination and CYP21 gene analysis may permit earlier identification of the affected female fetus. Treatment should be considered
only in affected female fetuses. Children exposed to this therapy
have slightly lower birthweights. Reports of failure to thrive, strokelike events, and midline defects have been observed in treated cases.
Effects on personality or cognition, such as increased shyness, have
been suggested but not consistently observed. At present there is
insufficient information to determine whether the long-­term risks
are acceptable, particularly in the males and unaffected females
who derive no direct benefit from the treatment. Maternal side
effects of prenatal treatment have included edema, excessive weight
gain, hypertension, glucose intolerance, cushingoid facial features,
and severe striae. Consensus statements from professional societies
recommend that prenatal treatment be carried out only under institutional protocols, but it is sometimes offered as an option outside
the research setting by some high-­risk obstetricians.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

11β-­Hydroxylase deficiency accounts for approximately 5% of cases of
adrenal hyperplasia; its incidence in the general population has been
estimated as 1 in 250,000 to 1 in 100,000. The disorder occurs relatively
frequently in Israeli Jews of North African origin (1 in 5,000-­7,000 live
births). In this ethnic group, almost all alleles carry an Arg448 to His
(R448H) variant in CYP11B1, but many other variants have been identified. This disorder presents in a classic, severe form and very rarely in
a nonclassic, milder form.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although cortisol is not synthesized efficiently, aldosterone synthetic
capacity is normal, and some corticosterone is synthesized from progesterone by the intact aldosterone synthase enzyme. Thus it is unusual
for patients to manifest signs of adrenal insufficiency such as hypotension or hypoglycemia. On the contrary, approximately 65% of patients
become hypertensive, although this can take several years to develop.
Hypertension is probably a consequence of elevated levels of deoxycorticosterone, which has mineralocorticoid activity. Infants may transiently develop signs of mineralocorticoid deficiency after treatment
with hydrocortisone is instituted. This is presumably from sudden suppression of deoxycorticosterone secretion in a patient with atrophy of
the zona glomerulosa caused by chronic suppression of renin activity.
All signs and symptoms of androgen excess that are found in
21-­
hydroxylase deficiency may also occur in 11β-­hydroxylase
deficiency.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Plasma levels of 11-­deoxycortisol and deoxycorticosterone are elevated.
Because deoxycorticosterone and some metabolites have mineralocorticoid activity, plasma renin activity is suppressed. Consequently, aldosterone levels are low even though the ability to synthesize aldosterone
is intact. Hypokalemic alkalosis occasionally occurs.

TREATMENT

Patients are treated with hydrocortisone in doses similar to those used
for 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. Mineralocorticoid replacement is sometimes transiently required in infancy but is rarely necessary otherwise.
Hypertension often resolves with glucocorticoid treatment but may
require additional therapy if it is of long standing. Calcium channel
blockers may be beneficial under these circumstances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.3 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 3β-­Hydroxysteroid
Dehydrogenase Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang

616.2 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 11β-­Hydroxylase
Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Deficiency of 11β-­hydroxylase is caused by a pathologic variant in
the CYP11B1 gene located on chromosome 8q21-­
q22. CYP11B1
mediates 11-­hydroxylation of 11-­deoxycortisol to cortisol. Because
11-­deoxycortisol is not converted to cortisol, levels of corticotropin are
high. In consequence, precursors—particularly 11-­deoxycortisol and
deoxycorticosterone—accumulate and are shunted into androgen biosynthesis in the same manner as occurs in 21-­hydroxylase deficiency.
The adjacent CYP11B2 gene encoding aldosterone synthase is generally
unaffected in this disorder, so patients are able to synthesize aldosterone normally.

Deficiency of 3β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3β-­HSD)
occurs in less than 2% of patients with adrenal hyperplasia. This
enzyme is required for conversion of Δ5 steroids (pregnenolone,
17-­
hydroxypregnenolone, dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA]) to Δ4
steroids (progesterone, 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone, and androstenedione). Thus deficiency of the enzyme results in decreased synthesis of
cortisol, aldosterone, and androstenedione but increased secretion of
DHEA (see Fig. 614.1 in Chapter 614). The 3β-­HSD isozyme expressed
in the adrenal cortex and gonad is encoded by the HSD3B2 gene located
on chromosome 1p13.1. More than 30 pathogenic variants in HSD3B2
have been described in patients with 3β-­HSD deficiency.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Because cortisol and aldosterone are not synthesized in patients with
the classic form of the disease, infants are prone to salt-­wasting crises.
Because androstenedione and testosterone are not synthesized, males

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders
are incompletely virilized; varying degrees of hypospadias may occur,
with or without bifid scrotum or cryptorchidism. Because DHEA levels
are elevated and this hormone is a weak androgen, females are mildly
virilized, with slight to moderate clitoral enlargement. Postnatally, continued excessive DHEA secretion can cause precocious adrenarche.
During adolescence and adulthood, hirsutism, irregular menses, and
polycystic ovarian disease occur in females. Males manifest variable
degrees of hypogonadism, although appropriate male secondary sexual development may occur. However, a persistent defect of testicular
3β-­HSD is demonstrated by the high Δ5:Δ4 steroid ratio in testicular
effluent.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The hallmark of this disorder is the marked elevation of the Δ5
steroids (such as 17-­
hydroxypregnenolone and DHEA) preceding the enzymatic block. Patients may also have elevated levels of
17-­hydroxyprogesterone because of the extraadrenal 3β-­HSD activity that occurs in peripheral tissues; these patients may be mistaken
for patients with 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. The ratio of 17-­hydrox
ypregnenolone:17-­hydroxyprogesterone is markedly elevated in 3β-­
HSD deficiency, in contrast to the decreased ratio in 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency. Plasma renin activity is elevated in the salt-­wasting form.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It is not unusual for children with premature adrenarche, or females
with signs of androgen excess, to have mild to moderate elevations in
DHEA levels. It has been suggested that such individuals have nonclassic 3β-­HSD deficiency. Variants in HSD3B2 are usually not found
in such individuals, and a nonclassic form of this deficiency may be
quite rare. The activity of 3β-­HSD in the adrenal zonae fasciculata and
reticularis, relative to CYP17A1 (17-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase) activity,
normally decreases during adrenarche to facilitate DHEA synthesis,
and so modest elevations in DHEA in preteenage children or women
usually represent a normal variant.

3469

with normal cortisol synthesis). These include an accessory electron
transfer protein, cytochrome-­b5, (CYB5) and variants in two aldo-­keto
reductases AKR1C2 and AKR1C4. These AKR1C isozymes normally
catalyze 3α-­HSD activity, which allows synthesis of the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone through an alternative backdoor biosynthetic
pathway that does not include testosterone as an intermediate (see
Chapter 614).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

Patients with 17-­hydroxylase deficiency cannot synthesize cortisol, but their ability to synthesize corticosterone is intact. Because
corticosterone is an active glucocorticoid, patients do not develop
adrenal insufficiency. Deoxycorticosterone, the immediate precursor of corticosterone, is synthesized in excess. This can cause
hypertension, hypokalemia, and suppression of renin and aldosterone secretion, as occurs in 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency. However, in contrast to 11β-­
hydroxylase deficiency, patients with
17-­hydroxylase deficiency are unable to synthesize sex hormones.
Affected males are incompletely virilized and present as phenotypic
females (but the gonads are usually palpable in the inguinal region
or the labia) or with sexual ambiguity. Affected females usually
present with failure of sexual development at the expected time of
puberty. 17-­Hydroxylase deficiency in females must be considered
in the differential diagnosis of primary hypogonadism (see Chapter 626). Levels of deoxycorticosterone are elevated, and renin and
aldosterone are consequently suppressed. Cortisol and sex steroids
are unresponsive to stimulation with ACTH and human chorionic
gonadotropin, respectively.
Patients with isolated 17,20-­lyase deficiency have deficient androgen
synthesis with normal cortisol synthesis and therefore do not become
hypertensive.

TREATMENT

Patients require glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone, respectively, as in
21-­
hydroxylase deficiency. Incompletely virilized genetic males
in whom a male sex of rearing is contemplated may benefit from
several injections of 25 mg of a depot form of testosterone every 4
weeks early in infancy to increase the size of the phallus. They may
also require testosterone replacement at puberty.

Patients with 17-­
hydroxylase deficiency require glucocorticoid
replacement with hydrocortisone to suppress secretion of deoxycorticosterone and thus control hypertension. Additional antihypertensive
medication may be required. Females require estrogen replacement
at puberty. Genetic males may require either estrogen or androgen
supplementation depending on the sex of rearing. Because of the possibility of malignant transformation of abdominal testes, genetic males
with severe 17-­hydroxylase deficiency being reared as females require
gonadectomy at or before adolescence.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.4 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 17-­Hydroxylase Deficiency

616.5 Lipoid Adrenal Hyperplasia

TREATMENT

Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Less than 1% of CAH cases are caused by 17-­hydroxylase deficiency, but the condition is apparently more common in Brazil
and China. A single polypeptide, CYP17A1, catalyzes two distinct reactions: 17-­
hydroxylation of pregnenolone and progesterone to 17-­hydroxypregnenolone and 17-­hydroxyprogesterone,
respectively, and the 17,20-­lyase reaction–mediating conversion
of 17-­
hydroxypregnenolone to DHEA and, to a lesser extent,
17-­hydroxyprogesterone to Δ4-­
androstenedione. DHEA and
androstenedione are steroid precursors of testosterone and estrogen (see Fig. 614.1 in Chapter 614). The enzyme is expressed in
both the adrenal cortex and the gonads and is encoded by a gene
on chromosome 10q24.3. Most pathogenic variants affect both the
hydroxylase and lyase activities, but rare variants can affect either
activity alone.
Pathogenic variants in genes other than CYP17A1 can have the same
phenotype as 17,20-­lyase deficiency (i.e., deficient androgen synthesis

Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Lipoid adrenal hyperplasia is a rare disorder, most frequently found in
Japanese persons. Patients with this disorder exhibit marked accumulation of cholesterol and lipids in the adrenal cortex and gonads associated with severe impairment of all steroidogenesis. Lipoid adrenal
hyperplasia is usually caused by pathogenic variants in the gene for
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), a mitochondrial protein
that promotes the movement of cholesterol from the outer to the inner
mitochondrial membrane. However, pathogenic variants in CYP11A1
(which encodes the cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme) have been
reported in more than 30 patients. A milder, nonclassic form of StAR
deficiency has been reported.
Some cholesterol is able to enter mitochondria even in the absence
of StAR, so it might be supposed that this disorder would not completely impair steroid biosynthesis. However, the accumulation of
cholesterol in the cytoplasm is cytotoxic, eventually leading to death
of all steroidogenic cells in which StAR is normally expressed. This
occurs prenatally in the adrenals and testes. The ovaries do not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3470 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
normally synthesize steroids until puberty, so cholesterol does not
accumulate, and the ovaries can retain the capacity to synthesize
estrogens until adolescence.
Although estrogens synthesized by the placenta are required to
maintain pregnancy, the placenta does not require StAR for steroid
biosynthesis. Variants of StAR are not prenatally lethal.

syndrome. These include craniosynostosis; brachycephaly; frontal
bossing; severe midface hypoplasia with proptosis and choanal stenosis or atresia; humeroradial synostosis; medial bowing of ulnas;
long, slender fingers with camptodactyly; narrow iliac wings; anterior bowing of femurs; and malformations of the heart and kidneys.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

More than 130 cases of POR deficiency have been reported.
Although the prevalence is not known with certainty, it might be
the second most common cause of CAH in some populations such
as Korea and Japan.

Patients with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia are usually unable to synthesize
any adrenal steroids. Thus affected infants are likely to be confused with
those with adrenal hypoplasia congenita. Salt-­losing manifestations are
typical, and many infants die in early infancy. Genetic males are unable
to synthesize androgens and thus are phenotypically female but with
gonads palpable in the labia majora or inguinal areas. Genetic females
appear normal at birth and may undergo feminization at puberty with
menstrual bleeding. They, too, progress to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism when accumulated cholesterol damages granulosa (i.e., steroid
synthesizing) cells in the ovary.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Adrenal and gonadal steroid hormone levels are low in lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, with a decreased or absent response to stimulation
(ACTH, human chorionic gonadotropin). Plasma renin levels are
increased.
Imaging studies of the adrenal gland demonstrating massive adrenal
enlargement in the newborn help to establish the diagnosis of lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia.

TREATMENT

Patients require glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement.
Genetic males are usually assigned a female sex of rearing; thus both
genetic males and females require estrogen replacement at the expected
age of puberty.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.6 Deficiency of P450 Oxidoreductase
(Antley-­Bixler Syndrome)
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
P450 oxidoreductase (POR; gene located on chromosome 7q11.3)
is required for the activity of all microsomal cytochrome P450
enzymes (see Chapter 614), including the adrenal enzymes CYP17
and CYP21. Complete POR deficiency abolishes all microsomal
P450 activity. This is embryonically lethal in mice and presumably also in humans. Patients with pathogenic variants that
decrease but do not abolish POR activity have partial deficiencies
of 17-­hydroxylase and 21-­hydroxylase activities in the adrenals. A
single recurrent variant A287P (alanine-­287 to proline) is found on
approximately 40% of alleles.
Deficiency of 17-­hydroxylase leads to incomplete masculinization in
males; 21-­hydroxylase deficiency may lead to virilization in females.
In addition, aromatase (CYP19) activity in the placenta is decreased,
leading to unopposed action of androgens produced by the fetal adrenal. This exacerbates virilization of female fetuses and may virilize the
mother of an affected fetus as well. Although it is puzzling that affected
females could be virilized despite a partial deficiency in CYP17 (which
is required for androgen biosynthesis), an alternative (backdoor) biosynthetic pathway is used in which 17-­hydroxyprogesterone is converted to 5α-­pregnane-­3α,17α-­diol-­20-­one, a metabolite that is a much
better substrate for the 17,20-­lyase activity of CYP17 than the usual
substrate, 17-­hydroxypregnenolone (see Chapter 614). The metabolite
is then converted in several enzymatic steps to dihydrotestosterone, a
potent androgen.
Because many other P450 enzymes are affected, patients may have
other congenital anomalies collectively referred to as Antley-­Bixler

EPIDEMIOLOGY

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Serum steroids that are not 17-­or 21-­
hydroxylated are
most increased, including pregnenolone and progesterone.
17-­
Hydroxy and 21-­
deoxysteroids are also increased, including 17-­
hydroxypregnenolone, 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone, and
21-­
deoxycortisol. Urinary steroid metabolites may be determined by quantitative mass spectrometry. Metabolites excreted at
increased levels include pregnanediol, pregnanetriol, pregnanetriolone, and corticosterone metabolites. Urinary cortisol metabolites
are decreased. Genetic analysis demonstrates pathogenic variants
in POR.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

This disorder must be distinguished from other forms of CAH, particularly 21-­hydroxylase deficiency in females, which is far more
common and has similar laboratory findings. Suspicion for POR deficiency may be raised if the mother is virilized or if the associated
abnormalities of Antley-­Bixler syndrome are present. Conversely,
virilization of both the mother and her daughter can result from a
luteoma of pregnancy, but in this case postnatal abnormalities of
corticosteroid biosynthesis should not be observed. Antley-­Bixler
syndrome may also occur without abnormalities of steroid hormone
biosynthesis, resulting from pathogenic variants in the fibroblast
growth factor receptor FGFR2.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.7 Aldosterone Synthase Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
This is an autosomal recessive disorder in which conversion of corticosterone to aldosterone is impaired; a group of Iranian Jewish
patients has been the most thoroughly studied. Most cases result
from pathogenic variants in CYP11B2 coding for aldosterone synthase; however, linkage to CYP11B2 has been excluded in other
kindreds. When not caused by CYP11B2 variants, the disorder has
been termed familial hyperreninemic hypoaldosteronism type 2;
the causative gene or genes have not yet been identified.
Aldosterone synthase mediates the three final steps in the synthesis of aldosterone from deoxycorticosterone (11β-­hydroxylation,
18-­hydroxylation, and 18-­oxidation). Although 11β-­hydroxylation
is required to convert deoxycorticosterone to corticosterone, this
conversion can also be catalyzed by the related enzyme, CYP11B1,
located in the fasciculata, which is unaffected in this disorder. For
the same reason, these patients have normal cortisol biosynthesis.
The disease has been classified into two types, termed corticosterone methyloxidase deficiency types I and II. They differ only in levels of the immediate precursor of aldosterone,
18-­hydroxycorticosterone; levels are low in type I deficiency and
elevated in type II deficiency.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants with aldosterone synthase deficiency may have severe
electrolyte abnormalities with hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders
metabolic acidosis. Because cortisol synthesis is unaffected, infants
rarely become as ill as untreated infants with salt-­losing forms of
CAH such as 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. Thus some infants escape
diagnosis. Later in infancy or in early childhood they may exhibit
failure to thrive and poor growth. Adults often are asymptomatic,
although they may develop electrolyte abnormalities when depleted
of sodium through procedures such as bowel preparation for a barium enema.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Infants have elevated plasma renin activity. Aldosterone levels are
decreased; they may be at the lower end of the normal range but are
always inappropriately low for the degree of hyperkalemia or hyperreninemia. Corticosterone levels are often elevated.
Some, but not all, patients have marked elevation of
18-­
hydroxycorticosterone; however, low levels of this steroid do not exclude the diagnosis. In those kindreds in which
18-­hydroxycorticosterone levels are elevated in affected individuals,
this biochemical abnormality persists in adults even when they have
no electrolyte abnormalities.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It is important to distinguish aldosterone synthase deficiency from
primary adrenal insufficiency in which both cortisol and aldosterone
are affected (including salt-­wasting forms of CAH), because the latter condition is usually associated with a much greater risk of shock
and hyponatremia. This becomes apparent after the appropriate laboratory studies. Adrenal hypoplasia congenita may initially present
with aldosterone deficiency; all male infants with apparently isolated
aldosterone deficiency should be carefully monitored for subsequent
development of cortisol deficiency. Pseudohypoaldosteronism (see
Chapter 615.4) may have similar electrolyte abnormalities and hyperreninemia, but aldosterone levels are high, and this condition usually
does not respond to fludrocortisone treatment.

TREATMENT

Treatment consists of giving enough fludrocortisone (0.05-­0.2 mg
daily) or sodium chloride, or both, to return plasma renin levels to normal. With increasing age, salt-­losing signs usually improve, and drug
therapy can often be discontinued.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.8 Glucocorticoid-­Remediable
Aldosteronism
Perrin C. White
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism (glucocorticoid-­suppressible
hyperaldosteronism, familial hyperaldosteronism type I) is an autosomal dominant form of low-­renin hypertension in which hyperaldosteronism is rapidly suppressed by glucocorticoid administration.
This unusual effect of glucocorticoids suggests that aldosterone secretion in this disorder is regulated by ACTH instead of by the renin-­
angiotensin system. In addition to abnormally regulated secretion of
aldosterone, there is marked overproduction of 18-­hydroxycortisol
and 18-­
oxocortisol. The synthesis of these steroids requires both
17-­hydroxylase (CYP17A1) activity, which is expressed only in the
zona fasciculata, and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) activity, which

3471

is normally expressed only in the zona glomerulosa. These features
imply that aldosterone synthase is being expressed in a manner similar to the closely related enzyme steroid 11-­hydroxylase (CYP11B1).
The disorder is caused by unequal meiotic crossing-­
over events
between the CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 genes, which are closely linked
on chromosome 8q24. An additional “chimeric” gene is produced,
having regulatory sequences of CYP11B1 juxtaposed with coding
sequences of CYP11B2. This results in the inappropriate expression of
a CYP11B2-­like enzyme with aldosterone synthase activity in the adrenal fasciculata.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Some affected children have no symptoms, the diagnosis being
established after incidental discovery of moderate hypertension,
typically approximately 30 mm Hg higher than unaffected family
members of the same age. Others have more symptomatic hypertension with headache, dizziness, and visual disturbances. A strong
family history of early-­onset hypertension or early strokes may alert
the clinician to the diagnosis. Some patients have chronic hypokalemia, but this is not a consistent finding and is usually mild.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Patients have elevated plasma and urine levels of aldosterone
and suppressed plasma renin activity. Hypokalemia is not consistently present. Urinary and plasma levels of 18-­oxocortisol and
18-­hydroxycortisol are markedly increased. The hybrid CYP11B1/
CYP11B2 gene can be readily detected by molecular genetic
methods.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

This condition should be distinguished from primary aldosteronism based on bilateral hyperplasia or an aldosterone-­
producing
adenoma (see Chapter 620). Most cases of primary aldosteronism
are sporadic, although several affected kindreds have been reported.
Patients with primary aldosteronism may also have elevated levels of
18-­hydroxycortisol and 18-­oxocortisol, and these biochemical tests
should be used cautiously when attempting to distinguish primary and
glucocorticoid-­suppressible aldosteronism. By definition, a therapeutic
trial of dexamethasone should suppress aldosterone secretion only in
glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, and genetic testing should
identify the hybrid gene if it is present.

TREATMENT

Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism is managed by daily administration of a glucocorticoid, usually dexamethasone 25 μg/kg/day in
divided doses. If necessary, effects of aldosterone can be blocked with
a potassium-­sparing diuretic such as spironolactone, eplerenone, or
amiloride. Hypertension resolves in patients in whom the hypertension is not severe or of long standing. If hypertension is long standing,
additional antihypertensive medication may be required, such as a calcium channel blocker.

GENETIC COUNSELING

Because of the autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, at-­risk family members should be investigated for this easily treated cause of
hypertension.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3472 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 617

Adrenocortical Tumors
and Masses
Perrin C. White
Adrenocortical tumors are rare in childhood, with an incidence of
0.3-­0.5 cases per 1 million child-­years. They occur in all age-­groups
but most commonly in children younger than 6 years of age and
are slightly more frequent (1.6-­fold) in females. In 2–10% of cases,
the tumors are bilateral. Almost half of childhood adrenocortical
tumors are carcinomas. Pathogenic variants in many genes can
influence the risk of developing adrenal tumors (Table 617.1).
Tumors may be associated with hemihypertrophy, usually occurring during the first few years of life. They are also associated with
other congenital defects, particularly genitourinary tract and central nervous system abnormalities and hamartomatous defects.
Many adrenocortical tumors secrete sex hormones, cortisol, or
aldosterone; these are discussed in Chapters 618, 619, and 620,
respectively.

617.1 Adrenocortical Carcinoma
Perrin C. White

ETIOLOGY

The incidence of adrenocortical carcinoma is increased in several
familial cancer syndromes resulting from abnormalities in genes that
encode transcription factors implicated in cell proliferation, differentiation, senescence, apoptosis, and genomic instability. These include
tumor protein 53 (TP53), menin (the MEN1 gene involved in multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1; 1–2% of MEN1 patients develop adrenocortical carcinoma), the APC gene involved in familial adenomatous
polyposis coli, and the PRKAR1A gene encoding a cyclic adenosine
monophosphate–dependent protein kinase regulatory subunit (also
see Chapter 619).
Germline pathogenic variants in TP53 (on chromosome 17p13.1)
occur in 50–80% of children with adrenocortical carcinoma. They
have been found in patients with isolated adrenal carcinoma and in
patients with familial clustering of unusual malignancies (choroid
plexus tumors, sarcomas, early-­onset breast cancers, brain cancers,
and leukemias); this latter condition is termed Li-­Fraumeni syndrome. A 15-­fold increased incidence of childhood adrenocortical
tumors is found in southern Brazil, associated with an R337H variant in TP53.
Overexpression of insulin-­
like growth factor (IGF) 2 (encoded
by IGF2, on chromosome 11p15.5) occurs in 80% of sporadic childhood adrenocortical tumors and in those associated with Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome, in which there is loss of the normal imprinting
of genes in this chromosomal region, including H19, CDKN1C,
KCNQ1, and KCNQ1OT1. However, whereas 5–10% of patients with
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome develop tumors, <1% develop an
adrenocortical carcinoma. Further implicating IGFs in pathogenesis,
many pediatric adrenocortical tumors overexpress the IGF receptor,
IGF1R.

Pathogenic variants in the MENIN gene on chromosome 11q13
cause multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Approximately 10%
of MEN1 patients have adrenocortical tumors, of which ∼14% are
malignant. Adrenocortical carcinomas also occur in patients with
Lynch syndrome, a hereditary cancer syndrome (mainly colorectal and endometrial cancer) caused by pathogenic variants in genes
involved in DNA mismatch repair, including MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,
and PMS2, or loss of expression of MSH2 caused by deletion in
the EPCAM gene. Occasional adrenocortical carcinomas occur in
patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, neurofibromatosis
type 1, Werner syndrome, and Carney complex.
In adult adrenocortical carcinoma samples, somatic pathogenic
variants are detected in nine genes (ZNRF3, CTNNB1, TP53,
CDKN2A, RB1, MEN1, DAXX, MED12, and TERT), most frequently
(21%) in ZNRF3. This gene encodes a cell surface transmembrane
E3 ubiquitin ligase that acts as a negative feedback regulator of
Wnt/β-­catenin signaling. There are also tumor-­specific differences
in DNA methylation and in micro-­RNA (miRNA) expression that
have prognostic significance in adults, but there are no corresponding data in children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of endocrine hyperfunction are present in 80–90% of
children with adrenal tumors. Tumors that secrete cortisol and
aldosterone are discussed in Chapters 619 and 621. Other tumors
are detected because of symptoms related to local tumor growth,
such as abdominal pain, or as incidental findings on abdominal
imaging.
Tumors can usually be detected by ultrasonography, CT, or MRI.
Preoperatively, the presence of metastatic disease should be determined by MRI or CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Because
these tumors are metabolically active, 18F-­f luorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET)/CT has very good sensitivity and
specificity in distinguishing benign from malignant lesions, but it
cannot distinguish adrenocortical carcinomas from other metabolically active tumors such as metastases, lymphoma, or pheochromocytoma. Radiochemical imaging of these tumors by PET may be
improved with 11C-­metomidate or single photon emission CT or
MRI with 123I-­iodometomidate.

PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS

Most pediatric adrenocortical tumors would be classified as malignant by the criteria used to classify adult tumors. Size is a useful
prognostic factor, with tumors weighing less than 200 g, 200-­400 g,
and >400 g being classified, respectively, as low, intermediate, and
high risk (>10 cm diameter has also been suggested as a high-­risk
category). Incomplete resection and gross local invasion or metastasis are also associated with a poor prognosis. However, most tumors
occurring in children younger than 4 years of age have a favorable
prognosis. Tumors associated with Cushing syndrome may have a
poor prognosis, whereas the presence of germline TP53 variants
may be more favorable.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

For functioning tumors, the differential diagnoses are those of the
main presenting signs and symptoms. The differential diagnosis for
Cushing syndrome is discussed in Chapter 619. For virilizing signs,
the differential includes virilizing forms of adrenal hyperplasia (see
Chapter 616) and factitious exposure to androgens, such as topical
testosterone preparations. The differential diagnosis for hormonally

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 617 u Adrenocortical Tumors and Masses

3473

Table 617.1  Genes Involved in Adrenal Neoplasia
SYNDROME

ADRENAL NEOPLASIA TYPE

GENE

OTHER PHENOTYPE

Li-­Fraumeni
syndrome

Adrenocortical carcinoma

TP53

Sarcoma, choroid plexus tumor, brain cancer, early breast
cancer, leukemia, lymphoma

Multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1

Diffuse hyperplasia, nodular
hyperplasia, adrenal
adenoma, adrenocortical
carcinoma

MENIN

Foregut neuroendocrine tumors, pituitary tumors,
parathyroid hyperplasia or tumors, collagenoma,
angiofibroma

Lynch syndrome

Adrenocortical carcinoma

MSH2, MSH6, MLH1,
PMS2

Colorectal cancer, endometrial cancer, sebaceous
neoplasms, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, brain
cancer

Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome

Adrenal adenoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma

IGF2, CDKN1C, H19
methylation changes on
11p15

Macrosomia, hemihypertrophy, macroglossia,
omphalocele, ear pits; Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma

Familial adenomatous
polyposis coli

Bilateral macronodular adrenal
hyperplasia, aldosterone-­
producing adenoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma

APC

Intestinal polyps, colon cancer, duodenal carcinoma,
thyroid cancer, desmoid tumor, supernumerary teeth,
congenital hypertrophy of the retina, osteoma,
epidermoid cysts

Neurofibromatosis
type 1

Adrenocortical carcinoma,
pheochromocytoma

NF1

Malignant peripheral nerve sheet tumor, café-­au-­lait
spots, neurofibroma, optic glioma, Lisch nodule,
skeletal abnormalities

PRKAR1A

Large-­cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors, thyroid adenoma,
myxoma, somatotroph pituitary adenoma, lentigines

ADRENAL ADENOMA AND CARCINOMA
Carney complex
Primary pigmented
nodular adrenal disease,
adrenocortical carcinoma
Primary pigmented nodular
adrenal disease

PDE8B or PDE11A

Overexpression
of steroidogenic
factor-­1

Adrenal adenoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma

Somatic amplification of
NR5A1

McCune-­Albright
syndrome

Nodular hyperplasia, cortisol-­
secreting adenoma
Cortisol-­secreting adenomas

Activating somatic mosaic
variant of GNAS
Activating somatic variant
in PRKACA

Somatic pathogenic
variants

Adrenocortical carcinoma

CDKN2A, CTNNB1,
DAXX, MED12, MEN1,
RB1,TERT, or TP53

PRIMARY ALDOSTERONISM
Genetic causes of
Hypertrophy of zona
excess cortisol
glomerulosa, aldosterone-­
and aldosterone
producing adenoma
secretion
Aldosterone-­producing
adenoma
Aldosterone-­producing
adenoma
Aldosterone-­producing
adenoma

Hyperfunction of bone (producing fibrous dysplasia),
gonads, thyroid, and pituitary

Germline or somatic
activating variant in
KCNJ5
Germline variants in
CYP11B2, CLCN2, or
CACNA1H
Germline and somatic
activating variants in
CACNA1D
Somatic variants in
ATP1A1, ATP2B3,
CTNNB1, or APC

Pheochromocytoma
von Hippel-­Landau
syndrome

Pheochromocytoma

VHL

Retinal and central nervous system hemangioblastomas,
renal clear cell carcinomas

Multiple endocrine
neoplasia
syndromes MEN2A
and MEN2B

Pheochromocytoma

RET

Pheochromocytoma, often
malignant

SDHB, SDHD, SDHC,
SDHA, SDHAF2, MAX,
TMEM127

Medullary thyroid carcinoma and parathyroid tumors;
type 2B also may include multiple mucosal neuromas
and intestinal ganglioneuromas, a marfanoid habitus,
and other skeletal abnormalities
Paragangliomas, sometimes associated with
gastrointestinal stromal tumors and/or pulmonary
chondromas (Carney-­Stratakis dyad or triad)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3474 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
inactive adrenocortical adenomas includes pheochromocytomas
(see Chapter 621), adrenocortical carcinoma, and metastasis from
an extraadrenal primary carcinoma (very rare in children). Careful history, physical examination, and endocrine evaluation must
be performed to seek evidence of autonomous cortisol, androgen,
mineralocorticoid, or catecholamine secretion. Not infrequently, a
low level of autonomous cortisol secretion is detected that does not
cause clinically apparent symptoms; this condition is sometimes
referred to as subclinical Cushing syndrome.

TREATMENT

Functioning adrenocortical tumors should be removed surgically.
There are no data on which to base a recommendation regarding
nonfunctioning childhood incidentalomas; in adults, such tumors
may be closely observed with imaging and repeat biochemical studies if smaller than 4 cm in diameter, but it is not certain that this
is prudent in children. Adrenalectomy should be performed transperitoneally to minimize the risk of surgical rupture of the capsule
and consequent dissemination of malignant cells. Some adrenocortical neoplasms are highly malignant and metastasize widely, but
less malignant, encapsulated tumors (stage I-­II) are often curable
if they can be resected without tumor spillage. Postoperatively,
patients should be closely monitored biochemically, with frequent
determinations of adrenal androgen levels and imaging studies.
Recurrent symptoms or biochemical abnormalities should prompt
a careful search for metastatic disease. Metastases primarily involve
liver, lung, and regional lymph nodes. Most metastatic recurrences
appear within 1 year of tumor resection. Repeat surgical resection
of metastatic lesions should be performed if possible and adjuvant therapy instituted. Radiation therapy has not been generally
helpful. Antineoplastic agents such as cisplatin, doxorubicin and
etoposide, ifosfamide and carboplatin, and 5-­f luorouracil and leucovorin have had limited use in children, toxicity is high, and in
adults with metastatic disease, progression-­free survival is only a
few months. Therapy with o,p′-­DDD (mitotane), an adrenolytic
agent, may relieve the symptoms of hypercortisolism or virilization in recurrent disease. In adults, treatment with mitotane plus
local or regional treatment (surgery or radiotherapy) is associated
with improved survival. Other agents that interfere with adrenal
steroid synthesis, such as ketoconazole, aminoglutethimide, and
metyrapone, may also relieve symptoms of steroid excess but do not
improve survival.
A neoplasm of one adrenal gland may produce atrophy of the
other because excessive production of cortisol by the tumor suppresses adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation of the normal
gland. Consequently, adrenal insufficiency may follow surgical
removal of the tumor. This situation can be avoided by giving 10-­25
mg of hydrocortisone every 6 hours, starting on the day of operation and gradually decreased postoperatively. Adequate quantities
of water, sodium chloride, and glucose also must be provided.

617.2 Adrenal Incidentaloma
Perrin C. White
Adrenal masses are discovered with increasing frequency in patients
undergoing abdominal imaging for reasons unrelated to the adrenal

gland. There are no published data on the frequency of the occurrence of such tumors in childhood. They are likely to be infrequent,
being found in approximately 7% of autopsies of persons older than
age 70 years but in <1% of those younger than age 30 years. They are
detected in 1–4% of abdominal CT examinations in adults.
The unexpected discovery of such a mass presents the clinician
with a dilemma in terms of diagnostic steps to undertake and treatment interventions to recommend. The differential diagnosis of
adrenal incidentaloma includes benign lesions such as cysts, hemorrhagic cysts, hematomas, and myelolipomas. These lesions can
usually be identified on CT or MRI. If the nature of the lesion is
not readily apparent, additional evaluation is required. Included in
the differential diagnosis of lesions requiring additional evaluation
are benign adenomas, pheochromocytomas, adrenocortical carcinoma, and metastasis from an extraadrenal primary carcinoma.
Benign, hormonally inactive adrenocortical adenomas make up the
majority of incidentalomas. Careful history, physical examination,
and endocrine evaluation must be performed to seek evidence of
autonomous cortisol, androgen, mineralocorticoid, or catecholamine secretion. Functional tumors require removal. If the adrenal
mass is nonfunctional but is larger than 4-­6 cm, recommendations
are to proceed with surgical resection of the mass. Lesions of 3
cm or less should be followed clinically with periodic reimaging.
Treatment must be individualized; nonsecreting adrenal incidentalomas may enlarge and become hyperfunctioning. Nuclear scan,
and occasionally fine-­needle aspiration, may be helpful in defining
the mass.

617.3 Adrenal Calcification
Perrin C. White
Calcification within the adrenal glands may occur in a wide variety
of situations, some serious and others of no obvious consequence.
Adrenal calcifications are often detected as incidental findings in
radiographic studies of the abdomen in infants and children. The
physician may elicit a history of anoxia or trauma at birth. Hemorrhage into the adrenal gland at or immediately after birth is
probably the most common factor that leads to subsequent calcification (see Fig. 615.1). Although it is advisable to assess the adrenocortical reserve of such patients, there is rarely any functional
disorder.
Neuroblastomas, ganglioneuromas, adrenocortical carcinomas,
pheochromocytomas, and cysts of the adrenal gland may be responsible for calcifications, particularly if hemorrhage has occurred
within the tumor. Calcification in such lesions is almost always
unilateral.
In the past, tuberculosis was a common cause of both calcification within the adrenals and Addison disease. Calcifications may
also develop in the adrenal glands of children who recover from
Waterhouse-­
Friderichsen syndrome; such patients are usually
asymptomatic. Infants with Wolman disease, a rare lipid disorder
caused by a deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase, have extensive bilateral calcifications of the adrenal glands (see Chapter 106.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 618 u Cushing Syndrome 3475

Chapter 618

Virilizing and Feminizing
Adrenal Tumors
Perrin C. White
Virilization is the most common presenting symptom in children with
adrenocortical tumors (see Chapter 617), occurring in 50–80%. In males,
the clinical picture is similar to that of simple virilizing congenital adrenal
hyperplasia: accelerated growth velocity and muscle development, acne,
penile enlargement, and the precocious development of pubic and axillary
hair. In females, virilizing tumors of the adrenal gland cause masculinization of a previously normal female with clitoral enlargement, growth acceleration, acne, deepening of the voice, and premature pubic and axillary
hair development.
Conversely, adrenal tumors can occasionally (<10%) secrete high
levels of estrogens because of overexpression of CYP19 (aromatase).
Gynecomastia in males or premature thelarche in females is often the
initial manifestation. Growth and development may be otherwise normal, or concomitant virilization may occur.
In addition to virilization, 15–40% of children with adrenocortical tumors also have Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 619). Whereas
isolated virilization occurs relatively frequently, children with adrenal
tumors usually do not have Cushing syndrome alone.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate,
and androstenedione are usually elevated, often markedly. Serum levels of
testosterone are often increased, usually because of peripheral conversion
of androstenedione, but infants with predominantly testosterone-­secreting
adenomas have been reported. Levels of estrone and estradiol are elevated
in tumors from patients with feminizing signs. Urinary 17-­ketosteroids
(sex steroid metabolites) are also increased but are no longer routinely
measured. Many adrenocortical tumors have a relative deficiency of 11β-­
hydroxylase activity and secrete increased amounts of deoxycorticosterone; these patients are hypertensive, and their tumors are often malignant.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

For virilizing signs, the differential includes virilizing forms of adrenal
hyperplasia (see Chapter 616) and factitious exposure to androgens,
such as topical testosterone preparations. The differential diagnosis for
adrenal tumors is discussed in Chapter 617.

TREATMENT

Functioning adrenocortical tumors should be removed surgically (see
Chapter 617).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 619

Cushing Syndrome
Perrin C. White
Cushing syndrome is the result of abnormally high blood levels of cortisol or other glucocorticoids. This can be iatrogenic or the result of
endogenous cortisol secretion, a result of either an adrenal tumor or of
hypersecretion of corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH])
by the pituitary (Cushing disease), or by a tumor (Table 619.1).

Table 619.1  Etiologic Classification of Adrenocortical
Hyperfunction
EXCESS ANDROGEN
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
21-­Hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency
11β-­Hydroxylase (CYP11B1) deficiency
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B2) defect (deficiency or
dysregulation)
Tumor
EXCESS CORTISOL (CUSHING SYNDROME)
Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
Adenoma
Hypersecretion of corticotropin (Cushing disease)
Ectopic secretion of corticotropin
Exogenous corticotropin
Adrenocortical nodular dysplasia
Pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (Carney complex)
Tumor
McCune-­Albright syndrome
EXCESS MINERALOCORTICOID
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Aldosterone-­secreting adenoma
Bilateral micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia
Glucocorticoid-­suppressible aldosteronism
Tumor
Deoxycorticosterone excess
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
• 11β-­Hydroxylase (CYP11B1)
• 17α-­Hydroxylase (CYP17A1)
Tumor
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess (deficiency of 11β-­hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 2 [HSD11B2])
EXCESS ESTROGEN
Tumor

ETIOLOGY

The most common cause of Cushing syndrome is prolonged exogenous administration of glucocorticoid hormones, especially at the
high doses used to treat lymphoproliferative disorders. This rarely
represents a diagnostic challenge, but management of hyperglycemia,
hypertension, weight gain, linear growth retardation, and osteoporosis
often complicates therapy with corticosteroids.
Endogenous Cushing syndrome is most often caused in infants by
a functioning adrenocortical tumor (see Chapter 617). Patients with
these tumors often exhibit signs of hypercortisolism along with signs
of hypersecretion of other steroids such as androgens, estrogens, and
aldosterone.
Although extremely rare in infants, the most common etiology of
endogenous Cushing syndrome in children older than 7 years of age
is Cushing disease, in which excessive ACTH secreted by a pituitary adenoma causes bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Such adenomas
are often too small to detect by imaging techniques and are termed
microadenomas. They consist principally of chromophobe cells and
frequently show positive immunostaining for ACTH and its precursor, proopiomelanocortin. Although most such tumors are sporadic, a
small number occur in kindreds with familial isolated pituitary adenoma syndrome. This syndrome, which is caused by pathogenic variants in the AIP gene, accounts for perhaps 2% of pituitary adenomas;
more commonly tumors with AIP variants secrete growth hormone or
prolactin, and only rarely do they secrete ACTH. Similarly, multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) patients who have pathogenic
variants in the MEN1 gene may develop pituitary tumors, but these are
typically prolactinomas. Other genes have also been implicated (Fig.
619.1).
ACTH-­dependent Cushing syndrome may also result from ectopic
production of ACTH, although this is uncommon in children. Ectopic
ACTH secretion in children is associated with islet cell carcinoma of
the pancreas, neuroblastoma or ganglioneuroblastoma, hemangiopericytoma, Wilms tumor, and thymic carcinoid. Hypertension is more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3476 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Cushing disease:
• Gene variants
USP8, MEN1, CDKIs, CDKN1B/p27Kip1,
AIP, SDHx(?), DICER1, others
• Abnormal protein expression
Brg1, HDAC2, TR4, PTTG, EGFR, others

Fig. 619.1 Summary of genetic and molecular mecha-

nisms implicated in Cushing syndrome. For each cause,
the various pathogenic variants or abnormal protein expression believed to play a part in the pathophysiology
is shown. The most frequent mechanisms are highlighted
in red; the well-­characterized mechanisms are highlighted in bold characters, and other potential mechanisms
are in normal characters; a question mark shows an unconfirmed association or genetic predisposition. Please
refer to the text for explanation of the various genetic
defects under each diagnostic category. AC, Adenylate
cyclase; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; BMAH,
bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia; Cα, catalytic
subunit of PKA; GEP-NETs, gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors; GPCR, G protein–coupled receptor;
PDEs, phosphodiesterases; PKA, protein kinase A; PPNAD, primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease;
R1α, type 1α regulatory subunit of PKA. (From Lacroix A,
Feelders RA, Stratakis CA, et al. Cushing’s syndrome.
Lancet. 2015;386:913–927. Fig. 1.)

common in ectopic ACTH syndrome than in other forms of Cushing syndrome, because very high cortisol levels may overwhelm type
2 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the kidney (see Chapter 615)
and thus have an enhanced mineralocorticoid (salt-­retaining) effect.
Several syndromes are associated with the development of multiple
autonomously hyperfunctioning nodules of adrenocortical tissue,
rather than single adenomas or carcinomas (see Chapter 617). In many
cases they are caused by pathogenic variants in genes in the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)–mediated signaling pathway by which
ACTH normally regulates cortisol secretion. Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) is a distinctive form of ACTH-­
independent Cushing syndrome. It may occur as an isolated event or,
more commonly, as a familial disorder with other manifestations. The
adrenal glands are small and have characteristic multiple small (<4
mm in diameter), pigmented (black) nodules containing large cells
with cytoplasm and lipofuscin; there is cortical atrophy between the
nodules. This adrenal disorder occurs as a component of Carney complex, an autosomal dominant disorder also consisting of centrofacial
lentigines and blue nevi; cardiac and cutaneous myxomas; pituitary,
thyroid, and testicular tumors; and pigmented melanotic schwannomas. Carney complex is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner,
although sporadic cases occur. Genetic loci for Carney complex have
been mapped to the gene for the type 1α regulatory subunit of protein
kinase A (PRKAR1A) on chromosome 17q22-­24 and less frequently to
chromosome 2p16. Patients with Carney complex and PRKAR1A variants generally develop PPNAD as adults, and those with the disorder
mapping to chromosome 2 (and most sporadic cases) develop PPNAD
less frequently and later. Conversely, children presenting with PPNAD
as an isolated finding rarely have pathogenic variants in PRKAR1A, or
subsequently develop other manifestations of Carney complex. Some
patients with isolated PPNAD have pathogenic variants in PDE8B or
PDE11A encoding different phosphodiesterase isozymes. In contrast,
activating somatic variants have been documented in the PRKACA
catalytic subunit of protein kinase A in cortisol-­secreting adenomas.
ACTH-­independent Cushing syndrome with nodular hyperplasia
and adenoma formation occurs rarely in cases of McCune-­Albright
syndrome, with symptoms beginning in infancy or childhood.
McCune-­Albright syndrome is caused by somatic variants of GNAS
encoding the G protein, Gsα, through which the ACTH receptor
(MCR2) normally signals. When the variant is present in adrenal tissue, cortisol and cell division are stimulated independently of ACTH.
Other tissues in which activating mutations may occur are bone (producing fibrous dysplasia), gonads, thyroid, and pituitary. Clinical manifestations depend on which tissues are affected.

Ectopic ACTH secretion:
• Gene variants
RET, MEN1, others

Adrenal Cushing syndrome:
AC

GPCR

Gs

ATP

cAMP

PDEs
PDE11A
PDE8B

GEP-NETs

BMAH:
Adrenal adenoma:
• Gene variants
• Gene variants
PRKACA, CTNNB1,
ARMC5, MEN1, FH, GNAS1,
PDE11A, PDE8B, MC2R, PRKACA, GNAS1, PRKAR1A
DOTL1(?), HDAC9(?), PRUNE2(?)

PPNAD:
• Gene variants
PRKAR1A, PDE11A,
PDE8B, PRKACA

• Protein expression
GPCR, PRKAR1A,
others

• Protein expression
PRKACA,
glucocorticoid receptor

• Protein expression
GPCR, POMC/ACTH, PRKAR1A,
others

The genes causing nodular adrenocortical hyperplasia that have
been identified mainly produce overactivity of the ACTH signaling
pathway either by constitutively activating Gsα (McCune-­Albright
syndrome), by reducing the breakdown of cAMP and thus increasing its intracellular levels (variants of PDE8B or PDE11A), by disrupting the regulation of the cAMP-­dependent enzyme protein
kinase A (PRKAR1A mutations), or via microduplications encompassing PRKACA. Additionally, ARMC5, a tumor-suppressor gene,
is abnormal in approximately 40% of cases of primary bilateral
macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia. Adrenocortical lesions,
including diffuse hyperplasia, nodular hyperplasia, adenoma, and
rarely carcinoma, may occur as part of MEN1 syndrome (see Chapter 617), an autosomal dominant disorder in which there is homozygous inactivation of the menin (MEN1) tumor-­suppressor gene
on chromosome 11q13.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Signs of Cushing syndrome have been recognized in infants younger
than 1 year of age. The disorder appears to be more severe and the clinical findings more dramatic in infants than in older children. The face
is rounded, with prominent cheeks and a flushed appearance (moon
facies). Generalized obesity is common in younger children. In children with adrenal tumors, signs of abnormal masculinization occur
frequently; accordingly, there may be hirsutism on the face and trunk,
pubic hair, acne, deepening of the voice, and enlargement of the clitoris
in females. Growth is impaired, with length falling below the third percentile, except when significant virilization produces normal or even
accelerated growth. Hypertension is common and may occasionally
lead to heart failure. An increased susceptibility to infection may also
lead to sepsis.
In older children, in addition to obesity, short stature is a common
presenting feature (Table 619.2). Gradual onset of obesity and deceleration or cessation of growth may be the only early manifestations.
Older children most often have more severe obesity of the face and
trunk compared with the extremities. However, obesity of the neck
and upper back (“buffalo hump”) is a nonspecific finding to which
excessive importance should not be attached. Purplish striae on the
hips, abdomen, and thighs are common. Pubertal development may
be delayed, or amenorrhea may occur in females past menarche.
Weakness, headache, and emotional lability may be prominent.
Hypertension and hyperglycemia usually occur; hyperglycemia may
progress to frank diabetes. Osteoporosis is common and may cause
pathologic fractures.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 619 u Cushing Syndrome 3477
Table 619.2  Presenting Signs and Symptoms of Cushing
Syndrome in Children
Dermatologic

Facial plethora, acne, acanthosis
nigricans, easy bruising, supratemporal
and supraclavicular fat pads, moon
facies, fungal infection, hirsutism, fine
downy hair, violaceous striae (unusual
in children <7 yr age)

Neurologic

Headaches

Cardiovascular

Hypertension, coagulopathy

Growth

Growth deceleration with concomitant
weight gain, central obesity

Gonadal

Amenorrhea, virilization, gynecomastia

Other

Nephrolithiasis, bone fractures, impaired
glucose tolerance, type 2 diabetes

Psychologic

Depression, anxiety, mood swings,
irritability, fatigue

From Lodish MB, Keil MF, Stratakis CA. Cushing’s syndrome in pediatrics: an update.
Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am. 2018;47:451–462. Table 1.

the sensitivity of detection. Bilateral inferior petrosal blood sampling
to measure concentrations of ACTH before and after corticotropin-­
releasing hormone administration may be required to localize the
tumor when a pituitary adenoma is not visualized; this is not routinely
available in many centers, and moreover may be of decreased specificity in children.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Cushing syndrome is frequently suspected in children with obesity,
particularly when striae and hypertension are present. Children with
simple obesity are usually tall, whereas those with Cushing syndrome
are short or have a decelerating growth rate. Although urinary excretion of cortisol is often elevated in simple obesity, salivary nighttime
levels of cortisol are usually normal, and cortisol secretion is normally
suppressed by oral administration of low doses of dexamethasone.
Elevated levels of cortisol and ACTH without clinical evidence of
Cushing syndrome occur in patients with generalized glucocorticoid
resistance (see Chapter 615.4). Affected patients may be asymptomatic or exhibit hypertension, hypokalemia, and precocious pseudopuberty; these manifestations are caused by increased mineralocorticoid
and adrenal androgen secretion in response to elevated ACTH levels.
Mutations in the glucocorticoid receptor have been identified.

TREATMENT
LABORATORY FINDINGS

Cortisol levels in blood are normally highest at 8 am and decrease to
less than 50% of peak levels by midnight, except in infants and young
children, in whom a diurnal rhythm is not always established. In
patients with Cushing syndrome, this circadian rhythm is lost; midnight cortisol levels >4.4 μg/dL strongly suggest the diagnosis. It is difficult to obtain diurnal blood samples as part of an outpatient evaluation,
but cortisol can be measured in saliva samples, which can be obtained
at home at the appropriate times of day. Elevated nighttime salivary
cortisol levels raise suspicion for Cushing syndrome.
Urinary excretion of free cortisol is increased. This is best measured
in a 24-­hour urine sample and is expressed as a ratio of micrograms of
cortisol excreted per gram of creatinine. This ratio is independent of
body size and completeness of the urine collection.
A single-­
dose dexamethasone suppression test is often helpful;
a dose of 25-­30 μg/kg (maximum: 2 mg) given at 11 pm results in a
plasma cortisol level of less than 5 μg/dL at 8 am the next morning in
normal individuals but not in patients with Cushing syndrome. It is
prudent to measure the dexamethasone level in the same blood sample
to ensure the adequacy of dosing.
A glucose tolerance test is often abnormal but is of no diagnostic
utility. Levels of serum electrolytes are usually normal, but potassium may be decreased, especially in patients with tumors that secrete
ACTH ectopically.
After the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome has been established, it is
necessary to determine whether it is caused by a pituitary adenoma,
an ectopic ACTH-­
secreting tumor, or a cortisol-­
secreting adrenal
tumor (Fig. 619.2). ACTH concentrations are usually suppressed in
patients with cortisol-­secreting tumors and are very high in patients
with ectopic ACTH-­secreting tumors, but may be normal in patients
with ACTH-­secreting pituitary adenomas. After an intravenous bolus
of corticotropin-­releasing hormone, patients with ACTH-­dependent
Cushing syndrome have an exaggerated ACTH and cortisol response,
whereas those with adrenal tumors show no increase in ACTH and
cortisol. The two-­
step dexamethasone suppression test consists of
administration of dexamethasone, 30 and 120 μg/kg/24 hr in four
divided doses, on consecutive days. In children with pituitary Cushing
syndrome, the larger dose, but not the smaller dose, suppresses serum
levels of cortisol. Typically, patients with ACTH-­independent Cushing
syndrome do not show suppressed cortisol levels with dexamethasone.
CT detects virtually all adrenal tumors larger than 1.5 cm in diameter. MRI may detect ACTH-­secreting pituitary adenomas, but many
are too small to be seen; the addition of gadolinium contrast increases

Transsphenoidal pituitary microsurgery is the treatment of choice in
pituitary Cushing disease in children. The overall success rate with
follow-­up of less than 10 years is 60–80%. Low postoperative serum or
urinary cortisol concentrations predict long-­term remission in most
cases. Relapses are treated with reoperation or pituitary irradiation.
Cyproheptadine, a centrally acting serotonin antagonist that blocks
ACTH release, has been used to treat Cushing disease in adults; remissions are usually not sustained after discontinuation of therapy. This
agent is rarely used in children. Inhibitors of adrenal steroidogenesis
(metyrapone, ketoconazole, aminoglutethimide, etomidate) have been
used preoperatively to normalize circulating cortisol levels and reduce
perioperative morbidity and mortality. Mifepristone, a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist, has been used in a limited number of cases.
Pasireotide, a somatostatin analog, can inhibit ACTH secretion and is
approved for use in adults with persistent disease after surgery or in
whom surgery is contraindicated.
If a pituitary adenoma does not respond to treatment or if ACTH is
secreted by an ectopic metastatic tumor, the adrenal glands may need
to be removed. This can often be accomplished laparoscopically. Adrenalectomy may lead to increased ACTH secretion by an unresected
pituitary adenoma, evidenced mainly by marked hyperpigmentation;
this condition is termed Nelson syndrome, which occurs in ∼25% of
adults who have undergone adrenalectomy for Cushing syndrome.
Several drugs that inhibit adrenocortical function may be an alternative to adrenalectomy. FDA-­
approved agents include mitotane
(which is toxic to adrenocortical cells) and osilodrostat (a cortisol
synthesis inhibitor); levoketoconazole, a stereoisomer of ketoconazole,
inhibits several steroidogenic enzymes and is in an advanced stage of
development.
Management of patients undergoing adrenalectomy requires adequate preoperative and postoperative replacement therapy with a
corticosteroid. Tumors that produce corticosteroids usually lead to
atrophy of the normal adrenal tissue, and replacement with cortisol
(10 mg/m2/24 hr in three divided doses after the immediate postoperative period) is required until there is recovery of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­adrenal axis. Postoperative complications may include sepsis,
pancreatitis, thrombosis, poor wound healing, and sudden collapse,
particularly in infants with Cushing syndrome. Substantial catch-­up
growth, pubertal progress, and increased bone density occur, but bone
density remains abnormal and adult height is often compromised. The
management of adrenocortical tumors is discussed in Chapter 617.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3478 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Confirmed Cushing syndrome
ACTH (two measurements)

<10 pg/mL (<2·2 pmol/L)
ACTH independent

>20 pg/mL (>4·4 pmol/L)
ACTH dependent

10–20 pg/mL (2·2–4·4 pmol/L)
CRH test to differentiate the
two forms

CT or MRI of adrenals
MRI
pituitary

HDDSST

CRH test
(desmopressin test)

Primary adrenal disorders:
unilateral mass–adrenal adenoma or carcinoma;
bilateral abnormalities–macronodular
or micronodular hyperplasia
Adenoma
<6 mm

Negative

Positive

Adenoma >6 mm
and concordant
tests

BIPSS

CT or MRI
(neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis)

Ectopic ACTH
tumour

Discordant
tests

Complementary imaging
octreo scan, PET or PET-CT

Negative

Positive

Cushing disease
confirmed

Follow-up
re-imaging

Surgery

Fig. 619.2 Clinical decision-­making algorithm for the differential diagnosis of confirmed Cushing syndrome of different causes. ACTH, Adreno-

corticotropic hormone; BIPSS, bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; HDDSST, high-­dose dexamethasone
suppression test. (From Lacroix A, Feelders RA, Stratakis CA, et al. Cushing’s syndrome. Lancet. 2015;386:913–927. Fig. 3.)

Chapter 620

Primary Aldosteronism
Perrin C. White
Primary aldosteronism encompasses disorders caused by excessive
aldosterone secretion independent of the renin-­angiotensin system.
These disorders are characterized by hypertension, hypokalemia, and
suppression of the renin-­angiotensin system.
Aldosterone-­
secreting adenomas are unilateral and have been
reported in children as young as 3.5 years of age. They are rarely malignant. Bilateral micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia tends to occur
in older ages. Primary aldosteronism caused by unilateral adrenal
hyperplasia may also occur. Glucocorticoid-­suppressible hyperaldosteronism is discussed in Chapter 616.8.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

These conditions are thought to be rare in children, but they may
account for 5–10% of cases of hypertension in adults. Although
usually sporadic, kindreds with several affected members have been
reported. Genetic linkage to chromosome 7p22 was reported in
some kindreds, but the involved gene has not yet been identified.

Pathogenic variants in KCNJ5 on chromosome 11q24 (encoding
G protein–gated inward rectifier potassium channel 4) have been
identified in several kindreds; these variants (G151R and G151E)
altered channel selectivity, producing increased Na+ conductance
and membrane depolarization, which increase aldosterone production and proliferation of adrenal glomerulosa cells. Such variants
have been identified in a subset of sporadic aldosterone-­producing
adenomas. Germline variants have also been reported in CYP11B2
(encoding aldosterone synthase), CLCN2 (encoding voltage-­gated
chloride channel ClC-­2), and CACNA1H (encoding a subunit of
the T-­type voltage-­gated calcium channel CaV3.2). Germline and
somatic variants have also been reported in CACNA1D encoding a
voltage-­sensitive calcium channel and somatic variants in ATP1A1
and ATP2B3, respectively, encoding sodium-­potassium and calcium
ATPases. Most aldosterone-­producing adenomas have pathogenic
variants that activate the Wnt/β-­catenin signaling pathway, either in
β-­catenin (CTNNB1) itself, or in APC, which regulates this pathway.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Some affected children have no symptoms, the diagnosis being established after incidental discovery of moderate hypertension. Others
have severe hypertension (up to 240/150 mm Hg), with headache, dizziness, and visual disturbances. If present, chronic hypokalemia may
lead to polyuria, nocturia, enuresis, and polydipsia. Muscle weakness
and discomfort, tetany, intermittent paralysis, fatigue, and growth failure affect children with severe hypokalemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 621 u Pheochromocytoma 3479
LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hypokalemia occurs frequently. Serum pH and carbon dioxide and
sodium concentrations may be elevated and serum chloride and magnesium levels decreased. Serum levels of calcium are normal, even in
children who manifest tetany. The urine is neutral or alkaline, and urinary potassium excretion is high. Plasma levels of aldosterone may be
normal or elevated. Aldosterone concentrations in 24-­hour urine collections are always increased. Plasma levels of renin are persistently
low.
The diagnostic test of choice for primary aldosteronism is controversial. Both renin and aldosterone levels may vary by time of
day, posture, and sodium intake, making it difficult to establish
consistent reference ranges. It is desirable to establish a consistent
sampling protocol, for example, at midmorning after the patient
has been sitting for 15 minutes. If possible, antihypertensive drugs
or other medications that can affect aldosterone or renin secretion should be avoided for several weeks before testing, including
diuretics, β blockers, angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers, clonidine, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents. Patients taking these agents may need to
be changed to α-­adrenergic blockers or calcium channel blockers
that have smaller effects on the biochemical measurements. The
ratio of plasma aldosterone concentration to renin activity is
always high, and this represents a cost-­effective screening test for
primary aldosteronism. Aldosterone does not decrease with administration of saline solution or fludrocortisone, and renin does
not respond to salt and fluid restriction. Urinary and plasma levels of
18-­oxocortisol and 18-­hydroxycortisol may be increased but not to
the extent seen in glucocorticoid-­suppressible hyperaldosteronism.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Primary aldosteronism should be distinguished from glucocorticoid-­
remediable aldosteronism (also termed glucocorticoid-­suppressible
hyperaldosteronism, see Chapter 616.8), which is specifically treated
with glucocorticoids. An autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance should raise suspicion for the latter disorder. Glucocorticoid-­
remediable aldosteronism is diagnosed by dexamethasone suppression
tests or by specific genetic testing.
Patients with primary aldosteronism should be evaluated by computed tomography (CT). It does not reliably distinguish aldosterone-­
producing adenomas, which tend to be small, from bilateral hyperplasia,
but it can exclude the presence of large tumors that might otherwise
raise concern for adrenocortical carcinomas. Adrenal venous sampling
can accurately determine if excess aldosterone secretion is originating
in one gland or both, but it is invasive and may not be available in all
centers. Positron emission tomography with 11C-­metomidate is a noninvasive alternative.

TREATMENT

The treatment of an aldosterone-­producing adenoma is laparoscopic
adrenalectomy; successful enucleation of aldosterone-­
producing
adenomas has also been reported. Hyperaldosteronism caused by
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia is treated with the mineralocorticoid
antagonist spironolactone (1-­3 mg/kg/day to a maximum of 100
mg/day) or eplerenone (25-­100 mg/day in 2 divided doses), often
normalizing blood pressure and serum potassium levels. There is
greater experience with spironolactone, but this agent has antiandrogenic properties that may be unacceptable in pubertal males.
Eplerenone is a more specific antimineralocorticoid that is safe in
children, but there is little specific experience with primary aldosteronism in the pediatric age-­group. As an alternative, an epithelial sodium channel blocker, such as amiloride, may be used, with
other antihypertensive agents added as necessary. In patients whose
condition cannot be controlled medically, unilateral adrenalectomy
may be considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 621

Pheochromocytoma
Perrin C. White
See also Chapter 555.4.
Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-­secreting tumors arising
from chromaffin cells. The most common site of origin (approximately
90%) is the adrenal medulla; however, tumors may develop anywhere
along the abdominal sympathetic chain and are likely to be located
near the aorta at the level of the inferior mesenteric artery or at its
bifurcation. They also appear in the periadrenal area, urinary bladder
or ureteral walls, thoracic cavity, and cervical region. Ten percent occur
in children, presenting most frequently between 6 and 14 years of age.
Tumors vary from 1 to 10 cm in diameter; they are found more often
on the right side than on the left. In more than 20% of affected children,
the adrenal tumors are bilateral; in 30–40% of children, tumors are
found in both adrenal and extraadrenal areas or only in an extraadrenal area.
Most pheochromocytomas are associated with germline pathogenic
variants (see Table 555.2 in Chapter 555.4). They may be associated
with genetic syndromes such as von Hippel-­Lindau disease, multiple
endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes MEN2A and MEN2B, and
less often, in association with neurofibromatosis (type 1) or tuberous
sclerosis. The classic features of von Hippel-­Landau syndrome, which
occurs in 1 in 36,000 individuals, include retinal and central nervous
system hemangioblastomas, renal clear cell carcinomas, and pheochromocytomas, but kindreds differ in their propensity to develop pheochromocytoma; in some kindreds, pheochromocytoma is the only
tumor to develop. Germline variants in the VHL tumor-suppressor
gene on chromosome 3p25-­26 have been identified in patients with
this syndrome. Variants of the RET protooncogene on chromosome
10q11.2 have been found in families with MEN2A and MEN2B.
Patients with MEN2 are at risk of developing medullary thyroid carcinoma and parathyroid tumors; approximately 50% develop pheochromocytoma, with patients carrying variants at codon 634 of the RET
gene being at particularly high risk. Variants are present in the NF1
gene on chromosome 17q11.2 in neurofibromatosis type 1 patients (see
Table 555.2 in Chapter 555.4).
Pheochromocytomas may occur in kindreds along with paragangliomas, particularly at sites in the head and neck. Such families typically carry pathogenic variants in SDHB, SDHD, and rarely the SDHC
encoding subunits of the mitochondrial enzyme succinate dehydrogenase. Approximately 50% of tumors with SDHB variants are malignant.
The VHL and the various SDH gene products participate in the pseudohypoxia signaling pathway (pseudohypoxia is a decrease in the ratio of
the cytosolic oxidized to reduced forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NAD (+)/NADH]) and thus represent a common pathogenetic pathway. In rare cases, individuals with germline variants in SDH
genes develop pheochromocytomas and/or paragangliomas along with
pituitary adenomas, which is termed the 3P association (3Pas).
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas can occur in association with gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs; the association is
termed the Carney-­Stratakis dyad) and/or pulmonary chondromas
(Carney-­Stratakis triad) and adrenocortical tumors. These associations
have heterogenous genetic etiologies but often involve variants in SDH
genes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pheochromocytomas detected by surveillance of patients who are
known carriers of variants in tumor-suppressor genes may be asymptomatic. Particularly in adults, some are diagnosed on abdominal CT
or MRI performed for another purpose (see Chapter 617). Otherwise,
patients are detected owing to hypertension, which results from excessive secretion of metanephrines, epinephrine and norepinephrine. All

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3480 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
patients have hypertension at some point. Paroxysmal hypertension
should particularly suggest pheochromocytoma as a diagnostic possibility, but in contrast to adults, the hypertension in children is more
often sustained rather than paroxysmal. When there are paroxysms of
hypertension, the attacks are usually infrequent at first, but become
more frequent and eventually give way to a continuous hypertensive
state. Between attacks of hypertension, the patient may be free of symptoms. During attacks, the patient complains of headache, palpitations,
abdominal pain, and dizziness; pallor, vomiting, and sweating also
occur. Seizures and other manifestations of hypertensive encephalopathy may occur. In severe cases, precordial pains radiate into the arms;
pulmonary edema and cardiac and hepatic enlargement may develop.
Symptoms may be exacerbated by exercise or with the use of nonprescription medications containing stimulants such as pseudoephedrine. Patients have a good appetite but because of the hypermetabolic
state may not gain weight, and severe cachexia may develop. Polyuria
and polydipsia can be sufficiently severe to suggest diabetes insipidus.
Growth failure may be striking. The blood pressure may range from
180 to 260 mm Hg systolic and from 120 to 210 mm Hg diastolic, and
the heart may be enlarged. Ophthalmoscopic examination may reveal
papilledema, hemorrhages, exudate, and arterial constriction. The differential diagnosis is noted in Table 555.3.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The urine may contain protein, a few casts, and occasionally glucose.
Gross hematuria suggests that the tumor is in the bladder wall. Polycythemia is occasionally observed.
Pheochromocytomas produce norepinephrine and epinephrine.
Normally, norepinephrine in plasma is derived from both the adrenal
gland and adrenergic nerve endings, whereas epinephrine is derived
primarily from the adrenal gland. In contrast to adults with pheochromocytoma in whom both norepinephrine and epinephrine are
elevated, children with pheochromocytoma predominantly excrete
norepinephrine in the urine (see Fig. 614.3 in Chapter 614). Daily urinary excretion of these compounds by unaffected children increases
with age. Although urinary excretion of vanillylmandelic acid
(3-­methoxy-­4-­hydroxymandelic acid), the major metabolite of epinephrine and norepinephrine, is increased, vanilla-­containing foods
and fruits can produce falsely elevated levels of this compound, which
therefore is no longer routinely measured.
Elevated levels of free catecholamines and metanephrines can
also be detected in plasma. The consensus is to measure plasma free
metanephrines and urinary fractionated metanephrines. The patient
should be instructed to abstain from caffeinated drinks and to avoid
acetaminophen, which can interfere with plasma normetanephrine
immunoassays. If possible, the blood sample should be obtained from
an indwelling intravenous catheter to avoid acute stress associated with
venipuncture.
Most tumors in the area of the adrenal gland are readily localized
by CT or MRI (Fig. 621.1), but extraadrenal tumors may be difficult
to detect. 123I or 131I-­metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is taken up
by chromaffin tissue anywhere in the body and is useful for localizing
small tumors. PET-­CT with 18F-­fluorodeoxyglucose or 68Ga-­DOTA(0)-­
Tyr(3)-­octreotate (a somatostatin receptor ligand) is highly sensitive
and a more favored imaging approach (Fig. 621.2 and Fig. 555.2) for
difficult-­to-­localize tumors. Venous catheterization with sampling of
blood at different levels for catecholamine determinations is now only
rarely necessary for localizing the tumor.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Various causes of hypertension in children must be considered, such
as renal or renovascular disease; coarctation of the aorta; hyperthyroidism; Cushing syndrome; deficiencies of 11β-­hydroxylase, 17α-­
hydroxylase, or 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (type 2 isozyme);
primary aldosteronism; adrenocortical tumors; and, rarely, essential
hypertension (see Chapter 494). A nonfunctioning kidney may result
from compression of a ureter or of a renal artery by a pheochromocytoma. Paroxysmal hypertension may be associated with porphyria
or familial dysautonomia. Cerebral disorders and hyperthyroidism
must also be considered in the differential diagnosis. Hypertension

Fig. 621.1 Bilateral pheochromocytoma in an 11-­yr-­old child with

von Hippel-­
Lindau disease and arterial hypertension. An axial fat-­
suppressed T2 weighted magnetic resonance image shows bilateral
adrenal masses (arrows), larger on the left. The masses are hyperintense
with small cystic change on the right medially. (From Navarro OM,
Daneman A. Acquired conditions. In: Coley B, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013: Fig. 123.9.)

in patients with neurofibromatosis may be caused by renal vascular
involvement or by concurrent pheochromocytoma.
Neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, and ganglioneuroma frequently produce catecholamines, but urinary levels of most catecholamines are higher in patients with pheochromocytoma, although levels
of dopamine and homovanillic acid are usually higher in neuroblastoma. Secreting neuroendocrine tumors often produce hypertension,
excessive sweating, flushing, pallor, rash, polyuria, and polydipsia.
Chronic secretory diarrhea may be associated with these tumors, particularly with ganglioneuroma.

TREATMENT

These tumors must be removed surgically, but careful preoperative,
intraoperative, and postoperative management is essential. Manipulation and excision of these tumors result in marked increases in catecholamine secretion that increase blood pressure and heart rate.
Therefore preoperative α-­ and β-­adrenergic blockade are required.
Whereas phenoxybenzamine has been most often used, it may not be
covered by insurance, and selective α1-­blockers, such as doxazosin, as
well as calcium channel blockers like amlodipine, have also been used.
Because these tumors are often multiple in children, a thorough transabdominal exploration of all the usual sites offers the best opportunity to find them all. Appropriate choice of anesthesia and expansion
of blood volume with appropriate fluids before and during surgery are
critical to avoid a precipitous drop in blood pressure during operation or within 48 hours postoperatively. Surveillance must continue
postoperatively.
Because bilateral and recurrent pheochromocytomas occur frequently, some have advocated for adrenal cortex–sparing surgery
to reduce the probability of causing Addison disease. However, this
approach increases the risk of tumor recurrence.
Although these tumors often appear malignant histologically, the
only accurate indicators of malignancy are the presence of metastatic disease or local invasiveness that precludes complete resection,
or both. Approximately 10% of all adrenal pheochromocytomas are
malignant. Such tumors are rare in childhood; pediatric malignant
pheochromocytomas occur more frequently in extraadrenal sites and
are often associated with pathogenic variants in SDHB encoding a
subunit of succinate dehydrogenase. Prolonged follow-­up is indicated,
particularly in patients with germline mutations in risk loci, because
functioning tumors at other sites may be manifested many years after
the initial operation. Examination of relatives of affected patients may
reveal other individuals harboring unsuspected tumors that may be
asymptomatic.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 622 u Development and Function of the Gonads 3481

A

B

C

Fig. 621.2 Paraganglioma in a 30-­yr-­old woman who presented with refractory hypertension. A, Axial T2-weighted MRI shows homogeneously

T2-­hyperintense left periaortic mass just above the level of the aortic bifurcation (Zuckerkandl organ), illustrating the “light bulb” T2-­bright appearance of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. B, Axial contrast-­enhanced T1-­weighted MRI demonstrates heterogeneous enhancement within
the mass. C, 123I-­MIBG fused SPECT/CT axial image shows diffuse uptake within the tumor, compatible with paraganglioma. (From Ho LM. Adrenal
glands. In: Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 53-­18.)

Section 5

Disorders of the
Gonads
Chapter 622

Development and
Function of the Gonads
Patricia A. Donohoue
GENETIC CONTROL OF EMBRYONIC GONADAL
DIFFERENTIATION

Gonadal differentiation is a complex, multistep process that requires
the sequential action and interaction of multiple gene products. Early
in the first trimester, the undifferentiated, bipotential fetal gonad begins
as a thickening of the urogenital ridge, near the developing kidney and
adrenal cortex. At 6 weeks of gestation, the gonad contains germ cells,
stromal cells that will become Leydig cells in the testes or theca, interstitial, or hilar cells in the ovaries, and supporting cells that will develop
into Sertoli cells in the testes or granulosa cells in the ovaries. In males,
the SRY gene (sex-­determining region on the Y chromosome) is transiently expressed, followed by a sequential upregulation of a number of
testis-­specific genes. In the absence of SRY, the bipotential gonad will
be able to develop into an ovary. Ovarian development is also characterized by expression of ovary-­specific genes during the same period.
One such gene is R-­spondin1. During the gestation period of 6-­9 weeks,
a number of genes are upregulated to the same degree in both the testis
and the ovary, including WNT4 and CTNNB1.
A chromosome complement of 46,XX is necessary for the development of normal ovaries. Both the long and short arms of the X chromosome contain genes for normal ovarian development. The DSS
(dosage sensitive/sex reversal) locus associated with the DAX1 (DSS
adrenal hypoplasia on the X chromosome) gene, which is defective
in 46,XY patients with X-­linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, is a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily and acts as a repressor of male gene expression. The DAX1
gene product acts by binding to a related nuclear receptor SF-­1 (steroidogenic factor-­1, also known as NR5A1). In vitro, the signaling gene

WNT4 stimulates expression of DAX1, resulting in the suppression of
androgen synthesis in XX females. The WNTs are ligands that activate
receptor-­mediated signal transduction pathways and are involved in
modulating gene expression as well as cell behavior, adhesion, and
polarity. Once developed, the ovary requires FAX12 to preserve its differentiation and stability. A key to its role in humans was elucidated by
a loss-­of-­function pathogenic variant of WNT4 that was found in an
18-­year-­old 46,XX woman. She had an absence of müllerian-­derived
structures (uterus and fallopian tubes), unilateral renal agenesis, and
clinical signs of androgen excess.
Pathogenic variants of the Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene may also
affect sex differentiation. WT1 pathogenic variants are associated with
Denys-­Drash syndrome (early-­onset renal failure, abnormal external
genitalia in genetic males, and Wilms tumor). Haploinsufficiency of
a three–amino acid (KTS) form of WT1 has been implicated in the
gonadal dysgenesis of patients with Fraser syndrome (late-­onset progressive glomerulopathy and 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis). Variants in
the FOXL2 and SF-­1 genes are associated with ovarian failure. Pathogenic variants of the R-­spondin1 gene has been described in individuals with 46,XX disorder of sex development (DSD). Other autosomal
genes also play a role in normal ovarian organogenesis and testicular
development. Several conditions of gonadal dysgenesis are associated
with gross abnormalities of both autosomes and sex chromosomes. A
deletion affecting the short arm of the X chromosome produces the
typical somatic anomalies of Turner syndrome.
Development of the testis requires the short arm of the Y chromosome; this contains the SRY gene, which is required for testicular differentiation. During male meiosis, the Y chromosome must segregate
from the X chromosome so that both X and Y chromosomes do not
occur in the same spermatozoa. The major portion of the Y chromosome is composed of Y-­specific sequences that do not pair with the X
chromosome. However, a minor portion of the Y chromosome shares
sequences with the X chromosome, and pairing does occur in this
region. The genes and sequences in this area recombine between the
sex chromosomes, behaving like autosomal genes. Therefore the term
pseudoautosomal region is used to describe this portion of the chromosome, and the term indicates genetic behavior of these genes relative to
pairing and recombinational events. The SRY gene is localized to the
35-­kb portion proximal to the pseudoautosomal region of the Y chromosome. It contains a high-­mobility group (HMG) nonhistone protein (HMG box), supporting SRY’s role as a transcriptional regulator of
other genes involved in sex differentiation. The gonadal ridge forms at
around 33 days of gestation. SRY is detected at 41 days, peaks at 44 days
when testis cords are first visible, and persists into adulthood.
Other genes that are found on autosomes are important in this
process. SOX9, an SRY-­related gene containing a region homologous
with the HMG box 9 of SRY, is located on chromosome 17. Pathogenic variants of this gene result in XY sex reversal and camptomelic dysplasia. SF-­1 (NR5A1) on chromosome 9q33 is important

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3482 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
in adrenal and gonadal development, as well as the development
of gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone–secreting neurons in the
hypothalamus. WTI, especially the KST isoform on chromosome
11p13, is needed for early gonadal, adrenal, and renal development.
Fibroblast growth factor-­9, GATA-­4, XH-­2, and SOY9 are also
important.
When genetic recombination events on sex chromosomes
extend beyond the pseudoautosomal region, X-­and Y-­
specific
DNA may be transferred between the chromosomes. Such aberrant

recombinations result in X chromosomes carrying SRY, resulting in
XX males, or Y chromosomes that have lost SRY, resulting in XY
females. SRY acts as a transcriptional regulator to increase cellular
proliferation, attract interstitial cells from adjacent mesonephros
into the genital ridge, and stimulate testicular Sertoli cell differentiation. Sertoli cells act as an organizer of steroidogenic and germ
cell lines and produce antimüllerian hormone (AMH) that causes
the female duct system to regress. Table 622.1 lists additional genes
involved in sex development that, if abnormal, result in DSD.

Table 622.1  Pathogenic Genes in Disorders of Sex Development

GENE

PROTEIN

OMIM #

LOCUS

INHERITANCE GONAD

MÜLLERIAN EXTERNAL
STRUCTURES GENITALIA

46,XY DSD
DISORDERS OF GONADAL (TESTICULAR) DEVELOPMENT: SINGLE-­GENE DISORDERS
WT1
TF
607102
11p13
AD
Dysgenetic
testis

ASSOCIATED
FEATURES/VARIANT
PHENOTYPES

±

Female or
ambiguous

Wilms tumor, renal
abnormalities, gonadal
tumors (WAGR, Denys-­
Drash, and Frasier
syndromes)
More severe
phenotypes include
primary adrenal failure;
milder phenotypes
have isolated partial
gonadal dysgenesis;
mothers who carry
SF-­1 mutation have
premature ovarian
insufficiency

SF1
(NR5A1)

Nuclear
receptor TF

184757

9q33

AD/AR

Dysgenetic
testis;
ovotestis

±

Female or
ambiguous

SRY

TF

480000

Yp11.3

Y

Dysgenetic
testis or
ovotestis

±

Female or
ambiguous

SOX9

TF

608160

17q24-­25

AD

Dysgenetic
testis or
ovotestis

±

Female or
ambiguous

Camptomelic
dysplasia (17q24
rearrangements milder
phenotype than point
mutations)

DHH

Signaling
molecule

605423

12q13.1

AR

Dysgenetic
testis

±

Female

The severe phenotype
of one patient
included minifascicular
neuropathy; other
patients have isolated
gonadal dysgenesis

ATRX

Helicase
(?chromatin
remodeling)

300032

Xq13.3

X

Dysgenetic
testis

−

Female,
ambiguous
or male

α-­Thalassemia,
intellectual disability

ARX

TF

3003382

Xp22.13

X

Dysgenetic
testis

–

Ambiguous

X-­linked lissencephaly,
epilepsy, temperature
instability

Gata4

TF

615542

8p23.1

AD in XY
subjects

Dysgenetic
testes

_

Ambiguous

Congenital heart
disease

DISORDERS OF GONADAL (TESTICULAR) DEVELOPMENT: CHROMOSOMAL CHANGES INVOLVING KEY CANDIDATE GENES
DMRT1
TF
602424
9p24.3
Monosomic
Dysgenetic
±
Female or
Intellectual disability
deletion
testis
ambiguous
DAX1
(NR0B1)

Nuclear
receptor TF

300018

Xp21.3

dupXp21

Dysgenetic
testis or
ovary

±

Female or
ambiguous

WNT4

Signaling
molecule

603490

1p35

dup1p35

Dysgenetic
testis

+

Ambiguous

Intellectual disability

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 622 u Development and Function of the Gonads 3483
Table 622.1  Pathogenic Genes in Disorders of Sex Development—cont’d

GENE

PROTEIN

OMIM #

LOCUS

INHERITANCE GONAD

MÜLLERIAN EXTERNAL
STRUCTURES GENITALIA

ASSOCIATED
FEATURES/VARIANT
PHENOTYPES

DISORDERS IN HORMONE SYNTHESIS OR ACTION
LHGCR
G-­protein
152790
2p21
receptor

AR

Testis

–

Female,
ambiguous
or
micropenis

Leydig cell hypoplasia

DHCR7

Enzyme

602858

11q12-­13

AR

Testis

–

Variable

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz
syndrome: coarse
facies, 2nd-­3rd toe
syndactyly, failure to
thrive, developmental
delay, cardiac and
visceral abnormalities

StAR

Mitochondrial
membrane
protein

600617

8p11.2

AR

Testis

–

Female

Congenital lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia
(primary adrenal
failure), pubertal failure

CYP11A1

Enzyme

118485

15q23-­24

AR

Testis

–

Female or
ambiguous

Congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (primary
adrenal failure),
pubertal failure

HSD3B2

Enzyme

201810

1p13.1

AR

Testis

–

Ambiguous

CAH, primary adrenal
failure, partial
androgenization
caused by ↑ DHEA

CYP17

Enzyme

202110

10q24.3

AR

Testis

–

Female
ambiguous
or
micropenis

CAH, hypertension caused
by ↑ corticosterone and
11-­deoxycorticosterone
(except in isolated
17,20-­lyase deficiency)

POR (P450
oxido­reductase)

CYP enzyme
electron donor

124015

7q11.2

AR

Testis

–

Male or
ambiguous

Mixed features of
21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, 17α-­
hydroxylase/17,20-­
lyase deficiency, and
aromatase deficiency;
sometimes associated
with Antley-­Bixler
skeletal dysplasia

HSD17B3

Enzyme

605573

9q22

AR

Testis

–

Female or
ambiguous

Partial androgenization
at puberty,
↑ androstenedione:
testosterone ratio

SRD5A2

Enzyme

607306

2p23

AR

Testis

–

Ambiguous
or
micropenis

Partial androgenization
at puberty,
↑ testosterone:DHT ratio

AKR1C4

Enzyme

600451

10p15.1

Unclear

Testis

–

Ambiguous
or
micropenis

DHT deficiency in
patients once thought
to have 17,20 lyase
deficiency; dose effect
with AKR1C2 variant is
possible

AKR1C2

Enzyme

600450

10p15.1

Unclear

Testis

–

Ambiguous
or
micropenis

DHT deficiency in
patients once thought
to have 17,20 lyase
deficiency; dose effect
with AKR1C2 variant is
possible

AMH

Signaling
molecule

600957

19p13.3-­13.2 AR

Testis

+

Normal male

Persistent müllerian duct
syndrome (PMDS);
male

AHM
receptor

Serine-­threonine 600956
kinase
transmembrane
receptor

12q13

Testis

–

Normal male

External genitalia,
bilateral
cryptorchidism

AR

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3484 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 622.1  Pathogenic Genes in Disorders of Sex Development—cont’d

GENE

PROTEIN

OMIM #

LOCUS

INHERITANCE GONAD

Androgen
receptor

Nuclear
receptor TF

3130700

Xq11-­12

X

46,XX DSD
DISORDERS OF GONADAL (OVARIAN) DEVELOPMENT
SRY
TF
480000
Yp11.3
Translocation

MÜLLERIAN EXTERNAL
STRUCTURES GENITALIA

Testis

–

Female,
ambiguous,
micropenis,
or normal
male

Testis or
ovotestis

–

Male or
ambiguous

ASSOCIATED
FEATURES/VARIANT
PHENOTYPES
Phenotypic spectrum
from complete
androgen insensitivity
syndrome (female
external genitalia)
and partial androgen
insensitivity
(ambiguous) to normal
male genitalia/infertility

SOX9

TF

608160

17q24

dup17q24

ND

–

Male or
ambiguous

R-spondin1

TF

610644

1p34.3

AR

Ovotestis

±

Male or
ambiguous

ANDROGEN EXCESS
HSD3B2
Enzyme

201810

1p13

AR

Ovary

+

Clitoromegaly CAH, primary
adrenal failure,
partial androgenization
caused by ↑ DHEA

CYP21A2

Enzyme

201910

6p21-­23

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

CAH, phenotypic
spectrum from severe
salt-­losing forms
associated with adrenal
failure to simple virilizing
forms with compensated
adrenal function,
↑ 17-­hydroxyprogesterone

CYP11B1

Enzyme

20210

8q21-­22

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

CAH, hypertension
caused by
↑ 11-­deoxycortisol and
11-­deoxycorticosterone

POR (P450
oxidoreductase)

CYP enzyme
electron donor

124015

7q11.2

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

Mixed features of
21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, 17α-­
hydroxylase/17,20-­
lyase deficiency, and
aromatase deficiency;
associated with
Antley-­Bixler skeletal
dysplasia

CYP19

Enzyme

107910

15q21

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

Maternal virilization
during pregnancy,
absent breast
development at
puberty, except in
partial cases

Glucocorticoid
receptor

Nuclear
receptor TF

138040

5q31

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

↑ ACTH,
17-­hydroxyprogesterone
and cortisol; failure
of dexamethasone
suppression (patient
heterozygous for a
variant in CYP21)

Palmoplantar
hyperkeratosis and
certain malignancies

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropin; AD, autosomal dominant (often de novo mutation); AR, autosomal recessive; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; ND, not determined; OMIM #, Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man number; TF, transcription factor; WAGR, Wilms, aniridia, genital anomalies, and retardation; X, X-­chromosomal; Y, Y-­chromosomal. Chromosomal
rearrangements likely to include key genes are included.
From Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. International Consensus Conference on Intersex organized by the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society and the European
Society for Paediatric Endocrinology. Consensus statement on management of intersex disorders. International Consensus Conference on Intersex. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–
e500; with additional data from Baxter RM, Arboleda VA, Lee H, et al. Exome sequencing for the diagnosis of 46,XY disorders of sex development. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2015;100:e333–e344; and Lourenco D, Brauner R, Rybczynska M, et al. Loss-­of-­function mutation in GATA4 causes anomalies of human testicular development. PNAS.
2011;108:1597–1602.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 622 u Development and Function of the Gonads 3485

CYPIIAI StAR

3 HSD2

(17 CH activity)
CYP17A1 POR

3 HSD2

(17,20-Lyase activity)
CYP17A1 POR

3 HSD2

ARO

Estrone
HSD17B3

ARO

Estradiol 17

Fig. 622.1 Biosynthesis of sex steroids.
5 RED2

AKRIC2/RoDH
(ox)

Development of the ovary was once thought to be a passive process in
the absence of SRY. Although the morphologic changes in the developing ovary are less marked than in the testis, sequentially expressed genes
and pathways are required for complete ovarian development along
with maintenance of ovarian integrity postnatally. One of these genes
is R-­spondin1, which if abnormal can result in testicular or ovotesticular
development in 46,XX individuals. Some peptides in the Wnt-­signaling
pathway may antagonize testicular development, thus allowing for ovarian differentiation. This effect may be mediated by β-­catenin signaling,

Dashed lines indicate enzymatic defects associated with 46,XY disorders of sex development. 3β-­HSD2, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; 5RED2, 5α-reductase type 2;
AKR1C2/RoDH (Ox), one of the enzymes in the
alternative androgen biosynthetic pathway;
ARO, aromatase; CYP17A1, the enzyme that
catalyzes both 17α-­hydroxylase (17-­OH) and
17,20-­
lyase activities; HSD17B3, the enzyme
that catalyzes the 17-­ketoreductase reaction;
POR, P450 oxidoreductase; StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein.

which is required for suppressing testicular features. Once developed,
the ovary requires FAX12 to preserve its differentiation and stability.

FUNCTION OF THE TESTES

Levels of placental chorionic gonadotropin peak at 8-­12 weeks of gestation and stimulate the fetal Leydig cells to secrete testosterone, the
main hormonal product of the testis (Fig. 622.1). By way of two different biosynthetic pathways, the more potent metabolite of testosterone,
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), is produced. In the originally described

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3486 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
pathway, testosterone is converted by the enzyme 5α-­reductase to
DHT. In another pathway, DHT is produced from androstanediol. The
early fetal period of DHT production and action is critical for normal
and complete virilization of the XY fetus. Defects in this process lead
to different forms of atypical male development (see Chapter 628.2).
After virilization occurs, fetal levels of testosterone decrease but are
maintained at lower levels in the latter half of pregnancy by luteinizing
hormone (LH) secreted by the fetal pituitary; this LH-­mediated testosterone secretion is required for continued penile growth and to some
degree also for testicular descent.
As part of the normal transition from intrauterine to extrauterine
life, perhaps related to the sudden withdrawal of maternal and placental hormones, newborns and young infants experience a transient surge
of gonadotropins and sex steroids. This is the so-­called minipuberty.
In males, LH and testosterone peak at 1-­2 months of age and then
decline to reach prepubertal levels by 4-­6 months of age. Follicle-­
stimulating hormone (FSH), along with inhibin B, peak at 3 months
and decline to prepubertal levels by 9 and 15 months, respectively. The
LH rise is more dominant than that of FSH.
The neonatal surge may be important for postnatal maturation of
the gonads, stabilization of male external genitalia, and perhaps also
for gender identity and sexual behaviors. The postnatal surge in LH
and testosterone is absent or blunted in infants with hypopituitarism,
cryptorchidism, and complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. The
development of nocturnal pulsatile secretion of LH marks the beginning of puberty.
Within specific target cells, 6–8% of testosterone is converted by
5α-­reductase to DHT, the more potent androgen (see Fig. 622.1), and
approximately 0.3% is acted on by aromatase to produce estradiol.
Approximately half of circulating testosterone is bound to sex hormone–binding globulin and half to albumin; only 2% circulates in the
free form. Plasma levels of sex hormone–binding globulin are low at
birth, rise rapidly during the first 10 days of life, and then remain stable
until the onset of puberty. Thyroid hormone may play a role in this
physiologic increase because neonates with athyreosis (absence of the
thyroid gland) have very low levels of sex hormone–binding globulin.
AMH (previously referred to as müllerian inhibitory substance),
inhibin, and activin are members of the transforming growth factor-­β
(TGF-­β) superfamily of growth factors. This group, which has more
than 45 members, also includes bone morphogenetic proteins. Members of the TGF-­
β superfamily are involved in the regulation of
developmental processes and multiple diverse human disease states,
including chondrodysplasias and cancer.
AMH, a homodimeric glycoprotein hormone encoded by a gene
on chromosome 19, is the earliest secreted product of the Sertoli
cells of the fetal testis. Produced as a prohormone, its carboxyterminal fragment is cleaved to make it active. AMH transcription is initiated by SOX9 acting through the HMG box, and its expression is
upregulated by SF-­1 binding to its promoter and further interacting
with SOX9, WT1, and GATA4. AMH binds to two distinct serine/
threonine receptors, each having a single transmembrane domain.
The activated type 1 receptor signals to the SMAD family of intracellular mediators.
The gene for the AMH receptor (on chromosome 12) is expressed
in Sertoli cells. In the female, it is expressed in fetal müllerian duct
cells and in fetal and postnatal granulosa cells. During sex differentiation in males, AMH causes involution of the müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts, which are embryologic precursors of the cervix
and uterus. It works in concert with SF-­1 to cause involution of the
fallopian tubes.
AMH is secreted in males by Sertoli cells during both fetal and postnatal life. In females, it is secreted by granulosa cells from 36 weeks of
gestation to menopause but at lower levels. The serum concentration
of AMH in males is highest at birth, whereas in females it is highest at
puberty. After puberty, both sexes have similar serum concentrations
of AMH. Its role in postnatal life is not yet fully characterized.
Inhibin is another glycoprotein hormone secreted by the Sertoli
cells of the testes and granulosa and theca cells of the ovary. Inhibin
A consists of an α-­
subunit disulfide linked to the β-­A subunit,

whereas inhibin B consists of the same α subunit linked to the β-­B
subunit. Activins are dimers of the B subunits, either homodimers
(BA/BA, BB/BB) or heterodimers (BA/BB). Inhibins selectively
inhibit, whereas activins stimulate pituitary FSH secretion. By means
of immunoassays specific for inhibin A or B, it has been shown that
inhibin A is absent in males and is present mostly in the luteal phase
in women. Inhibin B is the principal form of inhibin in males and
in females during the follicular phase. Inhibin B may be used as a
marker of Sertoli cell function in males. FSH stimulates inhibin B
secretion in females and males, but only in males is there also evidence for gonadotropin-­independent regulation. Levels of inhibin B
are potentially informative in children with various forms of gonadal
and pubertal disorders. In males with delayed puberty, inhibin B
may be a useful screening test to differentiate between constitutional
delay of puberty and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. In hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, the serum inhibin B level is very low to
undetectable.
Like inhibin and activin, follistatin (a single-­
chain glycosylated
protein) is produced by gonads and other tissues such as the hypothalamus, kidney, adrenal gland, and placenta. Follistatin inhibits FSH
secretion principally by binding activins, thereby blocking the effects of
activins at the level of both ovary and pituitary.
Many additional peptides act as mediators of the development and
function of the testis. They include neurohormones such as growth
hormone–releasing hormone, gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone,
corticotropin-­
releasing hormone, oxytocin, arginine vasopressin,
somatostatin, substance P, and neuropeptide Y; growth factors such as
insulin-­like growth factors (IGFs) and IGF-­binding proteins, TGF-­β,
and fibroblast, platelet-­derived, and nerve growth factors; vasoactive
peptides; and immune-­derived cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor
and interleukins 1, 2, 4, and 6.
Clinical patterns of pubertal changes vary widely (see Chapter 599).
In 95% of males, enlargement of the genitals begins between 9.5 and
13.5 years of age, reaching maturity at 13-­17 years of age. In a minority
of normal males, puberty begins after 15 years of age. In some males,
pubertal development is completed in less than 2 years, but in others
it may take longer than 4.5 years. Pubertal development and the adolescent growth spurt occur at an older age in males than in females by
approximately 2 years.
The median age of sperm production (spermarche) is 14 years. This
event occurs in midpuberty as judged by pubic hair, testis size, evidence of growth spurt, and testosterone levels. Nighttime levels of FSH
are in the adult male range at the time of spermarche; the first conscious ejaculation occurs at about the same time.

FUNCTION OF THE OVARIES

In the normal female, the undifferentiated gonad can be identified histologically as an ovary by 10-­11 weeks of gestation, after the upregulation of R-­spondin1. Oocytes are present from the fourth month of
gestation and reach a peak of 7 million by 5 months of gestation. For
normal maintenance, oocytes need granulosa cells to form primordial
follicles. Functional FSH (but not LH) receptors are present in oocytes
of primary follicles during follicular development. Two normal X chromosomes are needed for maintenance of oocytes. In contrast to somatic
cells, in which only one X chromosome is active, both X chromosomes
are active in germ cells. At birth, the ovaries contain approximately
1 million active follicles, which decrease to 0.5 million by menarche.
Thereafter, they decrease at a rate of 1,000/month and at an even higher
rate after the age of 35 years.
The hormones of the fetal ovary are provided for the most part
by the fetoplacental unit. As in males, peak gonadotropin secretion occurs in fetal life and then again at 2-­3 months of life, with
the lowest levels at about 6 years of age. In contrast to males, the
FSH surge predominates over LH in females. FSH peaks around 3-­6
months of age and declines by 12 months, but remains detectable
for 24 months. Under LH influence, estradiol peaks at 2-­6 months
of age. The inhibin B response is variable, peaking between 2 and
12 months and remaining above prepubertal levels until 24 months.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
In both infancy and childhood, gonadotropin levels are higher in
females than in males.
The most important estrogens produced by the ovary are
estradiol-­17β (E2) and estrone (E1); estriol is a metabolic product
of these two, and all three estrogens may be found in the urine of
mature females. Estrogens also arise from androgens produced by
the adrenal gland and both the female and male gonads (see Fig.
622.1). This conversion explains why in certain types of DSD in
males, feminization occurs at puberty. In 17-­ketosteroid reductase deficiency, for example, the enzymatic block results in markedly increased secretion of androstenedione, which is converted in
the peripheral tissues to estradiol and estrone. These estrogens, in
addition to those directly secreted by the testis, result in gynecomastia. Estradiol produced from testosterone in complete androgen
insensitivity syndrome causes complete feminization in these XY
individuals.
Estrogen regulates a host of functionally different activities in multiple tissues. There are at least two distinct estrogen receptors with different expression patterns. The ovary also synthesizes progesterone, the
main progestational steroid; the adrenal cortex and testis also synthesize progesterone, where it is a precursor for other adrenal and testicular hormones.
A host of other hormones with autocrine, paracrine, and intracrine
effects have been identified in the ovary. They include inhibins, activins, relaxin, and the growth factors IGF-­1, TGF-­α and TGF-­β, and
cytokines.
Plasma levels of estradiol increase slowly but steadily with advancing sexual maturation and correlate well with clinical evaluation of
pubertal development, skeletal age, and rising levels of FSH. Levels of
LH do not rise until secondary sexual characteristics are well developed. Estrogens, like androgens, inhibit secretion of both LH and FSH
(negative feedback). In females, estrogens also provoke the surge of LH
secretion that occurs in the midmenstrual cycle and stimulates ovulation. The capacity for this positive feedback is another maturational
milestone of puberty.
The average age at menarche in American females is approximately
12.5-­13 years, but the range of normal is wide, and 1–2% of normal
females have not menstruated by 16 years of age. The age at onset of
pubertal signs varies, with studies suggesting earlier ages than previously thought, especially in the US Black population (see Chapter
599). Menarche generally correlates closely with skeletal age. Maturation and closure of the epiphyses is estrogen-­dependent, as demonstrated by a very tall 28-­year-­old, normally masculinized male with
continued growth as a result of incomplete closure of the epiphyses,
who had complete estrogen insensitivity caused by an estrogen receptor defect.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING

In male infants, measurements of LH, FSH, and testosterone can
detect pituitary and testicular defects. Leydig cell integrity in childhood can be determined by the testosterone response after human
chorionic gonadotropin administration. One protocol is to inject
5,000 IU IM daily for 3 days; other protocols are available. The
integrity and maturity of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis
in males and females can be assessed by measuring serial sex steroid, LH, and FSH levels after the subcutaneous administration of
the gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog leuprolide. An ultrasensitive LH assay has been shown to differentiate between males
with delayed puberty and those with complete, but not partial,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
The normal range for inhibin B levels has been established in
infant males. Inhibin B may be a marker of spermatogenesis and
also of tumors such as granulosa cell tumors. Inhibins may be
involved in tumor suppression. Estrogen receptor assays may be
clinically useful in the management of various ovarian cancers.
AMH measurements are useful in the evaluation of children with
nonpalpable gonads and DSD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3487

Chapter 623

Hypofunction of the
Testes
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Testicular hypofunction during fetal life can be a component of some
types of disorders of sex development (see Chapter 628.2) and may
lead to varying degrees of ambiguous genitalia. After birth, neonates
undergo minipuberty with relatively high levels of gonadotropins and
sex steroids, but this phenomenon is transient, and its absence does
not appear to lead to any obvious clinical findings. Because prepubertal children normally do not produce significant amounts of testosterone and are not yet producing sperm, there are no discernible effects
of testicular hypofunction in this age-­group. Testicular hypofunction
from the age of puberty onward may lead to testosterone deficiency,
infertility, or both. Such hypofunction may be primary in the testes
(primary hypogonadism) or secondary to deficiency of pituitary
gonadotropic hormones (secondary hypogonadism). Insults to the
testes (primary hypogonadism) tend to affect sperm counts more than
testosterone secretion, as the seminiferous tubules take up much more
of the testicular volume than Leydig cells do, so sperm production is
usually affected more than testosterone production. On the other hand,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism tends to affect both testosterone and
sperm production.
Both types of hypogonadism may be caused by inherited genetic
defects or acquired causes, and in some cases the etiology may be
unclear, but the level of the lesion (primary or secondary) is usually
well defined; patients with primary hypogonadism have elevated levels
of gonadotropins (hypergonadotropic); those with secondary hypogonadism have inappropriately low or absent levels (hypogonadotropic).
Table 623.1 details the etiologic classification of male hypogonadism
(see also Fig. 600.6).

623.1 Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism in
the Male (Primary Hypogonadism)
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Complete absence or severe dysfunction of the testes in the first trimester will lead to a lack of male sex differentiation and the fetus will have
a female phenotype or pronounced ambiguous genitalia (see Chapter
628). If testicular function is present, sex differentiation is normally
complete by the 14th week of intrauterine life. Testicular dysfunction
after this stage will lead to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and this
can occur for a variety of reasons; genetic or chromosomal anomalies
may lead to testicular hypofunction that does not become apparent until the time of puberty, when these males may have delayed or
incomplete pubertal development. In other cases, normally developed
testes may be damaged by infarction, trauma, radiation, chemotherapy,
infections, infiltration, or other causes after sexual differentiation has
occurred. In some cases, genetic defects may predispose to atrophy or
maldescent; torsion or infarction may lead to progressive testicular
damage and atrophy after a period of normal development. If testicular
compromise is global, both testosterone secretion and fertility (sperm
production) are likely to be affected. Even when the primary defect is in
testosterone production, low levels of intratesticular testosterone will
frequently lead to infertility. The reverse is not necessarily true. Defects
in sperm production and in the storage and transit of sperm may not
be associated with low testosterone levels; infertility may thus be seen
in patients with normal testosterone levels, normal libido, and normal
secondary sexual characteristics.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3488 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 623.1  Etiologic Classification of Male
Hypogonadism
HYPERGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM (PRIMARY
HYPOGONADISM; TESTES)
Congenital
Follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)
resistance
Pathogenic variants in steroid synthetic pathways
Gonadal dysgenesis
Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY)
Noonan syndrome (RASopathy genes)
Cystic fibrosis (infertility)
Acquired
Cryptorchidism (some cases)
Vanishing testes
Chemotherapy
Testicular radiation
Infection (e.g., mumps)
Infarction (testicular torsion)
Trauma
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM (SECONDARY
HYPOGONADISM; HYPOTHALAMIC-­PITUITARY)
Congenital
Genetic defects causing Kallmann syndrome and/or normosmic
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH)
Other genetic disorders associated with HH: leptin gene, leptin
receptor, DAX1 (dosage-­sensitive/sex-­reversal adrenal hypoplasia
on the X chromosome), SF-­1 (steroidogenic factor-­1)
Inherited syndromes: Prader-­Willi, Bardet-­Biedl, Laurence-­Moon-­
Biedl, Alström
Isolated HH at pituitary level (gonadotropin-­releasing hormone
receptor, FSH and LH β-­subunit)
Multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies: septo-­optic dysplasia
(HESX-­1 in some cases) and other disorders of pituitary
organogenesis (e.g., PROP1, LHX3, LHX4, SOX-­3)
Idiopathic
Acquired
Anorexia nervosa
Drug use
Malnutrition
Chronic illness, especially Crohn disease
Hyperprolactinemia
Pituitary tumors
Pituitary infarction
Infiltrative disorders (e.g., histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
Hemosiderosis and hemochromatosis
Cranial radiation

Various degrees of primary hypogonadism occur in a significant
percentage of patients with chromosomal aberrations, as in Klinefelter
syndrome, males with more than one X chromosome, and XX males.
These chromosomal anomalies are also associated with other characteristic findings. Noonan syndrome is also associated with cryptorchidism and infertility, but other (nongonadal) features dominate its
clinical picture (see Chapters 100 and 101).

CONGENITAL ANORCHIA OR TESTICULAR
REGRESSION SYNDROME

Males in whom the external genitalia have developed normally (or
nearly normally) and paramesonephric (müllerian) duct derivatives
(uterus, fallopian tubes) are absent have had testicular function for at
least some part of gestation. If their testes cannot be palpated at birth,
they are said to have cryptorchidism. In most such cases, the testes are
undescended or retractile, but in some cases no testes are found in any
location, even after extensive investigation. This syndrome of absence
of testes in a phenotypic male with a normal 46,XY karyotype (indicating that there was some period of testicular function in intrauterine life) is known as vanishing testes, congenital anorchia, or testicular
regression syndrome.

Testicular regression syndrome is not uncommon. Cryptorchidism
occurs in 1.5–9% of male births; in 10–20% of these cases, the testes are
impalpable. Of children with impalpable testes, up to 50% may have no
detectable testes after extensive investigation. Most cases appear to be
sporadic and are thought to be the result of torsion or vascular accidents. The incompletely descended testis may be more prone to torsion, and this may be one of the causes of vanishing testes. Most cases
are sporadic, but in a subset of patients, testicular regression syndrome
occurs in monozygotic twins or in families with other affected individuals, suggesting a genetic etiology. Some cases are associated with
micropenis, and in these cases the testicular loss probably occurred
after the 14th week but well before the time of birth, or this may indicate
a preexisting dysfunction of male hormonal development. Low levels
of testosterone (<10 ng/dL) and markedly elevated levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) are found
in the early postnatal months; thereafter levels of gonadotropins tend
to decrease even in agonadal children, rising to very high levels again
as the pubertal years approach. Stimulation with human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) fails to evoke an increase in the level of testosterone. Serum levels of antimüllerian hormone (AMH) are undetectable
or low. All patients with undetectable testes should be tested for AMH
and should undergo an hCG stimulation test. If the results indicate that
no testicular tissue is present (absent AMH and no rise in testosterone after hCG stimulation), then the diagnosis of testicular regression
syndrome is confirmed. If testosterone secretion is demonstrated, then
imaging with abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and/or
surgical exploration is indicated. A small fibrotic nodule may be found
at the end of the spermatic cord in many cases of testicular regression
syndrome. There is no possibility of normal fertility in these patients.
Treatment of male hypogonadism (primary or secondary) is discussed in Chapter 623.2.

Chemotherapy and Radiation-­Induced
Hypogonadism

Testicular damage is a frequent consequence of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy for cancer. The frequency and extent of damage depend
on the agent used, total dose, duration of therapy, and posttherapy
interval of observation. Another important variable is age at therapy;
it has been suggested that prepubertal testes are less prone to damage
than pubertal testes, though the evidence is not conclusive. Chemotherapy is most damaging if more than one agent is used, and alkylating agents and platinum-­containing agents are the ones most likely
to lead to testicular damage. Although many chemotherapeutic agents
produce azoospermia and infertility, Leydig cell damage (leading to
low testosterone levels) is less common. In many cases the damage
is transient and sperm counts recover after 12-­24 months. The use of
alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide in prepubertal children
may not impair pubertal development, even though there may be
biopsy evidence of germ cell damage. Cisplatin causes transient azoospermia or oligospermia at lower doses, whereas higher doses (400-­
600 mg/m2) can cause permanent infertility. Interleukin 2 can depress
Leydig cell function, whereas interferon-­α does not seem to affect
gonadal function. Both chemotherapy and radiotherapy are associated
with an increase in the percentage of abnormal gametes, but data concerning the outcomes of pregnancies after such therapy have not shown
any increase in genetically mediated birth defects, possibly because of
selection bias against abnormal sperm.
Radiation damage is dose dependent. Temporary oligospermia can
be seen with doses as low as 0.1 Gy, with permanent azoospermia seen
with doses greater than 2 Gy. Recovery of spermatogenesis can be seen
5 years (or more) after irradiation, with higher doses leading to slower
recovery. Leydig cells are more resistant to irradiation. Mild damage as
determined by elevated LH levels can be seen with up to 6 Gy; doses
greater than 30 Gy cause hypogonadism in most patients. Whenever
possible, testes should be shielded from irradiation. Testicular function should be carefully evaluated in adolescents after multimodal
treatment for cancer in childhood. Replacement therapy with testosterone and counseling concerning fertility may be indicated. The storage of sperm before chemotherapy or radiation treatment in pubertal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
and postpubertal males is an option. Even in those cases where sperm
counts are abnormal, recovery is possible, though the chances of recovery decline with increasing dose of radiation. If sperm counts remain
low, fertility is still possible in some cases with testicular sperm extraction and intracytoplasmic sperm injection.

Sertoli Cell–Only Syndrome

Small testes and azoospermia are seen in patients with the extremely
rare Sertoli cell–only syndrome (SCO, germ cell aplasia, or Del Castillo syndrome). These patients have no germ cells in the testes but
usually have normal testosterone production and present as adults
with infertility. Typically, patients have small testes and elevated FSH
levels with normal LH and testosterone. They may have gynecomastia
because of FSH stimulation of aromatase activity. Inhibin B levels may
be decreased when compared with individuals with normal spermatogenesis. Most cases are sporadic and idiopathic, but large deletions
involving the azoospermia factor (AZF) region of the Y chromosome
(Yq11) may be found in some cases. Y chromosome microdeletions are
also occasionally identified as a cause of SCO syndrome.

Other Causes of Testicular Hypofunction

Atrophy of the testes may follow damage to the vascular supply because
of manipulation of the testes during surgical procedures for correction
of cryptorchidism or because of bilateral torsion of the testes. Cryptorchidism is a common condition (found in 3% of male children at birth,
decreasing to 1% by age 6 months), and guidelines stress the importance of treatment before age 12 months (or even earlier) to maximize
future fertility. But a small percentage of cases will develop fertility
issues even when surgical treatment is successful and is completed
within the first year of life. These cases may represent intrauterine damage, surgical damage, or genetic defects in testicular development and
are therefore included among the causes of testicular hypofunction.
Acute orchitis is common in pubertal or adult males with mumps
and may lead to subfertility in ∼10% of cases, though infertility is
rare. Testosterone secretion usually remains normal. The incidence
of mumps orchitis in postpubertal males has increased in some areas
because of a decrease in measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination
uptake. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy may be associated with
primary hypogonadism (associated with anti-­P450scc antibodies), but
this appears to be more common in females.

Testicular Dysgenesis Syndrome

The incidence of testicular cancer has increased in many developed
societies, and the incidence of cryptorchidism, hypospadias, low
sperm counts, and sperm abnormalities also appears to have increased
in some, but not all, studies. It has been proposed that all these trends
are linked by prenatal testicular dysgenesis. The hypothesis is that some
degree of testicular dysgenesis develops in intrauterine life from genetic
and environmental factors and is associated with an increased risk of
cryptorchidism, hypospadias, hypofertility, and testicular cancer. The
environmental influences that have been implicated in this syndrome
include environmental chemicals that act as endocrine disruptors, such
as bisphenol A and phthalates (components of many types of plastics),
several pesticides, phytoestrogens or mycoestrogens, and other chemicals. The fact that these lesions can be reproduced in some animal
models by environmental chemicals has led to efforts to remove these
chemicals from products used by infants and pregnant mothers and
from the environment in general. Nonetheless the evidence is only suggestive and not conclusive.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Primary hypogonadism may be suspected at birth if the testes and
penis are abnormally small. Normative data are available for different
populations. The condition is often not noticed until puberty, when
secondary sex characteristics fail to develop. Facial, pubic, and axillary hair are scant or absent; there is neither acne nor regression of
scalp hair; and the voice remains high pitched. The penis and scrotum
remain infantile and may be almost obscured by pubic fat; the testes
are small or not palpable. Fat accumulates in the region of the hips

3489

and buttocks and sometimes in the breasts and on the abdomen. The
epiphyses close later than normal; therefore the extremities are long.
The span may be several inches longer than the height, and the distance
from the symphysis pubis to the soles of the feet (lower segment) is
much greater than that from the symphysis to the vertex (upper segment). The proportions of the body are described as eunuchoid. The
ratio of the upper to lower segment is considerably less than 0.9. Many
individuals with milder degrees of hypogonadism may be detected only
by appropriate studies of the pituitary-­gonadal axis. Examination of the
testes should be performed routinely by the pediatrician; testicular volumes as determined by comparison with standard orchidometers or by
measurement of linear dimensions should be recorded.

DIAGNOSIS

Levels of serum FSH and, to a lesser extent, of LH are elevated to
greater than age-­specific normal values in early infancy (when minipuberty normally occurs and the gonadotropins are normally disinhibited). This is followed by a time when even agonadal children may
not exhibit significant elevation in gonadotropins, indicating that the
gonadotropins are also suppressed at this stage by some mechanism
independent of feedback inhibition by gonadal hormones. In the latter
half of childhood and several years before the onset of puberty, this
inhibition is released and gonadotropin levels again rise above age-­
based normal levels in subjects with primary hypogonadism. These
elevated levels indicate that even in the prepubertal child there is an
active hypothalamic-­gonadal feedback relationship. After the age of
11 years, FSH and LH levels rise significantly, reaching the agonadal
range. Measurements of random plasma testosterone levels in prepubertal males are not helpful because they are low in normal prepubertal
children, rising during puberty to attain adult levels. During puberty,
these levels, when measured in an early morning blood sample, correlate better with testicular size, stage of sexual maturity, and bone age
than with chronological age. In patients with primary hypogonadism,
testosterone levels remain low at all ages. There is an attenuated rise or
no rise at all after administration of hCG, in contrast to normal males
in whom hCG produces a significant rise in plasma testosterone at any
stage of development.
AMH is secreted by the Sertoli cells, and this secretion is suppressed
by testosterone. AMH levels are elevated in prepubertal males and suppressed at the onset of puberty. Males with primary hypogonadism
continue to have elevated AMH levels in puberty. Detection of AMH
may be used in the prepubertal years as an indicator of the presence of
testicular tissue (e.g., in patients with bilateral cryptorchidism). Inhibin
B is also secreted by the Sertoli cells, is present throughout childhood,
and rises at the onset of puberty (more in males than in females). It may
be used as another marker of the presence of testicular tissue in bilateral
cryptorchidism and as a marker of spermatogenesis (e.g., in delayed
puberty, cancer survivors, and patients with Noonan syndrome). Bone
age x-­rays are useful to document delayed bone age in patients with
constitutional growth delay as well as primary hypogonadism.

NOONAN SYNDROME

The term Noonan syndrome has been applied to males and females with
normal karyotypes who have certain phenotypic features that occur
also in females with Turner syndrome (although the genetic causes are
completely distinct) (see Chapter 101). Males with this syndrome frequently have cryptorchidism and small testes. Testosterone secretion
may be low or normal, but spermatogenesis may be affected even in
those with normal testosterone (and normal secondary sexual characteristics). Serum inhibin-­B is a useful marker of Sertoli cell function in
these patients. Puberty is delayed, and adult height is achieved by the
end of the second decade; the syndrome is discussed in detail in Chapter 101. Patients with significant hypogonadism will need treatment as
discussed in Chapter 623.2.

KLINEFELTER SYNDROME

See also Chapter 99.4.
Klinefelter syndrome is the most common sex chromosomal aneuploidy in males, with an incidence of 0.1–0.2% in the general population

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3490 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
(1 in 500-­1,000) and rising to 4% among infertile males and 10–11% in
those with oligospermia or azoospermia. Approximately 80% of them
have a 47,XXY chromosome complement, whereas mosaics and higher
degrees of poly-­X are seen in the remaining 20%. Even with as many
as four X chromosomes, the Y chromosome determines a male phenotype. The chromosomal aberration most often results from meiotic
nondisjunction of an X chromosome during parental gametogenesis;
the extra X chromosome is maternal in origin in 54% and paternal in
origin in 46% of patients. A national study in Denmark revealed a prenatal prevalence of 213 per 100,000 male fetuses, but in adult men the
prevalence was only 40 per 100,000, suggesting that 25% of adult males
with Klinefelter syndrome were diagnosed. The incidence of Klinefelter
syndrome increases with maternal age and possibly also with paternal
age.

Clinical Manifestations

In patients who do not have a prenatal diagnosis, the diagnosis is rarely
made before puberty because of the paucity or subtlety of clinical
manifestations in childhood. Behavioral or psychiatric disorders may
be apparent long before defects in sexual development. These children
tend to have learning disabilities and deficits in executive function
(concept formation, problem solving, task switching, and planning),
and the condition should be considered in males with psychosocial,
learning, or school adjustment problems. Affected children may be
anxious, immature, or excessively shy and tend to have difficulty in
social interactions throughout life. In a prospective study, a group of
children with 47,XXY karyotypes identified at birth exhibited relatively
mild deviations from normal during the first 5 years of life. None had
major physical, intellectual, or emotional disabilities; some were inactive, with poorly organized motor function and mild delay in language
acquisition. Problems often first become apparent after the child begins
school. Full-­scale IQ scores may be normal, with verbal IQ being somewhat decreased. Verbal cognitive defects and underachievement in
reading, spelling, and mathematics are common. By late adolescence,
many males with Klinefelter syndrome have generalized learning disabilities, most of which are language based. Despite these difficulties,
most complete high school.
The patients tend to be tall and slim and have a specific tendency
to have long legs (disproportionate to the arms and longer than those
seen with other causes of hypogonadism), but body habitus can vary
markedly. The testes tend to be small for age, but this sign may become
apparent only after puberty, when normal testicular growth fails to
occur. The phallus tends to be smaller than average, and cryptorchidism is more common than in the general population. Bone mineral
density may be low in adults with Klinefelter syndrome, and this correlates with lower testosterone levels.
Pubertal development may be delayed, although some children
undergo apparently normal or nearly normal virilization. Despite
normal testosterone levels, serum LH and FSH concentrations and
their responses to gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation are elevated starting at around 13 years of age. Approximately
50–80% of adults have gynecomastia; they have sparser facial hair. The
most common testicular lesions are spermatogenic arrest and Sertoli
cell predominance. The sperm have a high incidence of sex chromosomal aneuploidy. Azoospermia and infertility are usual, although rare
instances of fertility are known. It is now clear that germ cell numbers
and sperm counts are higher in early puberty and decline with age. Testicular sperm extraction followed by intracytoplasmic sperm injection
can result in the birth of healthy infants, with success rates declining
with increasing age. In nonmosaic Klinefelter patients, most testicular
sperm (94%) have a normal pattern of sex chromosome segregation,
indicating that meiotic checkpoints can remove most aneuploid cells.
Antisperm antibodies have been detected in 25% of tested specimens.
There is an increased incidence in adulthood of central adiposity,
metabolic syndrome, pulmonary disease, varicose veins, and cancer
of the breast. Among 93 unselected male breast cancer patients, 7.5%
were found to have Klinefelter syndrome. Mediastinal germ cell tumors
have been reported; some of these tumors produce hCG and cause
precocious puberty in young males. They may also be associated with

leukemia, lymphoma, and other types of hematologic neoplasia. The
highest cancer risk (relative risk: 2.7) occurs in the 15-­to 30-­year age-­
group. A large cohort study in Britain demonstrated an overall significantly increased standardized mortality ratio, with increases in deaths
from diabetes, epilepsy, peripheral and intestinal vascular sufficiency,
pulmonary embolism, and renal disease. Mortality from ischemic
heart disease was decreased. In adults, structural brain abnormalities
correlate with cognitive deficits.
Patients with Klinefelter syndrome also have an increased risk of
autoimmune disorders. It seems that the presence of one or more X
chromosomes changes the risk of autoimmune disorders, which are
similar to those seen in XX females. These patients have an increased
incidence of rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren syndrome, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), and other autoimmune disorders.
In adults with XY/XXY mosaicism, the features of Klinefelter syndrome are decreased in severity and frequency. Children with mosaicism have a better prognosis for virilization, fertility, and psychosocial
adjustment.

Klinefelter Variants and Other Poly-­X Syndromes

When the number of X chromosomes exceeds two, the clinical manifestations, including intellectual disability and impairment of virilization, are more severe. Height decreases with increasing number of X
chromosomes. The XXYY variant is the most common variant (1 in
18,000-­40,000 male births). In most, intellectual disability occurs with
IQ scores between 60 and 80, but 10% have IQs greater than 110. The
XXYY male phenotype is not distinctively different from that of the
XXY patient except that XXYY adults tend to be taller than the average XXY patient. The 49,XXXXY variant is sufficiently distinctive to
be detected in childhood. Its incidence is estimated to be 1 in 80,000-­
100,000 male births. The disorder arises from sequential nondisjunction in meiosis. Affected patients are severely cognitively impaired and
have short necks and typical coarse facies. The eyes are wide set, with a
mild upward slant of the fissures as well as epicanthus and strabismus;
the nose is upturned, wide, and flat; also noted is a large open mouth
and large malformed ears. The testes are small and may be undescended,
the scrotum is hypoplastic, and the penis is very small. Defects suggestive of Down syndrome (short, incurved terminal fifth phalanges,
single palmar creases, and hypotonia) and other skeletal abnormalities
(including defects in the carrying angle of the elbows and restricted
supination) are common. The most frequent radiographic abnormalities are radioulnar synostosis or dislocation, elongated radius, pseudoepiphyses, scoliosis or kyphosis, coxa valga, and retarded bone age.
Most patients with such extensive changes have a 49,XXXXY chromosome karyotype; several mosaic patterns have also been observed:
48,XXXY/49,XXXXY;
48,XXXY/49,XXXXY/50,XXXXXY;
and
48,XXXY/49,XXXXY/50,XXXXYY. Prenatal diagnosis of a 49,XXXXY
infant has been reported. The fetus had intrauterine growth restriction,
edema, and cystic hygroma colli.
The 48,XXXY variant is relatively rare. The characteristic features
are generally less severe than those of patients with 49,XXXXY and
more severe than those of 47,XXY patients. Mild intellectual disability,
delayed speech and motor development, and immature but passive and
pleasant behavior are associated with this condition.
Very few patients have been described with 48,XYYY and 49,XXYYY
karyotypes. Dysmorphic features and cognitive impairment are common to both.

Laboratory Findings

Most males with Klinefelter syndrome go through life undiagnosed.
The chromosomes should be examined in all patients suspected of
having Klinefelter syndrome, particularly those attending child guidance, psychiatric, and cognitive disability clinics. In infancy, inhibin
B and AMH levels are normal but testosterone levels are lower than
in controls. Before 10 years of age, males with 47,XXY Klinefelter syndrome have normal basal plasma levels of FSH and LH. Responses to
gonadotropin-­stimulating hormone and to hCG are normal. The testes
show normal growth early in puberty, but by midpuberty the testicular
growth stops, gonadotropins become elevated, and testosterone levels

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
are slightly low. Inhibin B levels are normal in early puberty, decrease
in late puberty, and are low in adults with the syndrome. Elevated levels of estradiol, resulting in a high ratio of estradiol to testosterone,
account for the development of gynecomastia during puberty. Sex
hormone–binding globulin levels are elevated, further decreasing free
testosterone levels. A long androgen receptor polyglutamine (CAG)
repeat length is associated with the more severe phenotype, including
gynecomastia, small testes, and short penile length.
Testicular biopsy before puberty may reveal only deficiency or
absence of germinal cells. After puberty, the seminiferous tubular
membranes are hyalinized and there is adenomatous clumping of Leydig cells. Sertoli cells predominate. Azoospermia is characteristic, and
infertility is the rule.

Management

Males known to have Klinefelter syndrome should be monitored
closely for speech, learning, and behavioral problems; they should be
referred for early evaluation and treatment as needed. Testosterone,
LH, and FSH levels should be checked at 11-­12 years of age; replacement therapy with testosterone is recommended once FSH and LH
begin to rise above normal. Fasting glucose, lipids, and hemoglobin
A1C should also be obtained, as these children are at risk for central
adiposity and metabolic syndrome. A baseline dual-­
energy x-­
ray
absorptiometry scan to assess bone density is also recommended by
some authorities. Although testosterone treatment will normalize
testosterone levels, stimulate the development of secondary sexual
characteristics, increase bone and muscle mass, and improve body
composition, it will not improve fertility (and will, in fact, suppress
spermatogenesis). There is some evidence that it also improves mood
and may have a positive effect on cognition and social functioning,
but the findings are not conclusive at this time. Either long-­acting testosterone injections or a daily application of testosterone gel may be
used (testosterone patches have a high incidence of skin rash and are
not frequently used in pediatrics). Testosterone enanthate or cypionate
ester may be used in a starting dose of 25-­50 mg injected intramuscularly or subcutaneously every 3-­4 weeks, with 50-­mg increments every
6-­12 months until a maintenance dose for adults (200-­250 mg every
3-­4 weeks) is achieved. At that time, testosterone patches or testosterone gel may be substituted for the injections. Depending on patient
and physician preference, transdermal testosterone may also be used
as initial treatment instead of injections. For older males, larger initial
doses and increments can achieve more rapid virilization. The various
transdermal preparations differ somewhat, and standard references
should be consulted for recommendations regarding dosage and mode
of application.
Gynecomastia may be treated with aromatase inhibitors (which will
also increase endogenous testosterone levels), but medical treatment
is not always successful and plastic surgery may be needed. Fertility is
usually not an issue in the pediatric age-­group, but adults can father
children using testicular sperm extraction followed by intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Because sperm counts decrease rapidly after the
onset of puberty in children with Klinefelter syndrome, sperm banking
during early puberty is an option that can be discussed with a fertility
specialist. Sperm counts can be stimulated using hCG treatment before
testicular sperm extraction. Therapy, counseling, and psychiatric services should be provided as needed for learning difficulties and psychosocial disabilities.

XX MALES

This disorder is thought to occur in 1 in 20,000 newborn males.
Affected individuals have a male phenotype, small testes, a small phallus, and no evidence of ovarian or müllerian duct tissue. They therefore appear to be distinct from those with the ovotesticular disorder of
sexual development. Undescended testes and hypospadias occur in a
minority of patients. Infertility occurs in practically all cases, and the
histologic features of the testes are essentially the same as in Klinefelter
syndrome. Patients with the condition usually come to medical attention in adult life because of hypogonadism, gynecomastia, or infertility. Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism occurs secondary to testicular

3491

failure. A few cases have been diagnosed perinatally as a result of discrepancies between prenatal ultrasonography and karyotype findings.
In 90% of XX males with normal male external genitalia, one of
the X chromosomes carries the SRY (sex-­determining region on the
Y chromosome) gene. The exchange from the Y to the X chromosome occurs during paternal meiosis, when the short arms of the Y
and X chromosomes pair. XX males inherit one maternal X chromosome and one paternal X chromosome containing the translocated male-­determining gene. A few cases of 46,XX males with 9P
translocations have also been identified. Most XX males who are
identified before puberty have hypospadias or a micropenis; this
group of patients may lack Y-­specific sequences, suggesting other
mechanisms for virilization. Fluorescent in situ hybridization and
primed in situ labeling have been used to identify small SRY DNA
segments. Yp fragment abnormalities may result in sexually ambiguous phenotypes.

45,X MALES

In a few male patients recognized with a 45,X karyotype, Yp sequences
are translocated to an autosomal chromosome. In one instance, the
terminal short arm of the Y chromosome was translocated onto an
X chromosome. In another, SRY/autosomal translocation was postulated. A male with the 45,X karyotype and Leri-­Weill dyschondrosteosis, SHOX gene loss, and an SRY to Xp translocation has also been
described.

47,XXX MALES

A Japanese male with poor pubic hair development, hypoplastic scrotal testes (4 mL), normal penis and normal height, gynecomastia, and
severe cognitive impairment had 47,XXX karyotype caused by an
abnormal X-­Y interchange during paternal meiosis and X-­X nondisjunction during maternal meiosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

623.2 Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism in
the Male (Secondary Hypogonadism)
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
In hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH), lack of gonadal function is
secondary to deficiency of one or both gonadotropins: FSH or LH. The
primary defect may lie either in the anterior pituitary or in the hypothalamus. Hypothalamic etiologies result in deficiency of GnRH. The
testes are normal but remain in the prepubertal state because stimulation by gonadotropins is lacking. The disorder may be recognized in
infancy but is much more commonly recognized because of marked
pubertal delay. Rarely, patients with a milder inherited form of HH may
go through puberty and may present with hypogonadism as adults.
HH may be genetic or acquired (Table 623.2). Several different genes
can cause inherited forms of HH; the affected genes may be upstream
of GnRH, at the level of GnRH receptors, or at the level of gonadotropin
production. In addition, various genetic defects in transcription factors—such as POUF-­1, LHX-­3, LHX-­4, and HESX-­1—lead to defects
in pituitary development and multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies,
including deficiency of gonadotropins. Acquired pituitary gonadotropin deficiency may develop from various lesions in the hypothalamic-­
pituitary region (e.g., tumors, infiltrative disease, autoimmune disease,
trauma, stroke).

ISOLATED GONADOTROPIN DEFICIENCY

Isolated gonadotropin deficiency in which other pituitary hormone
levels are normal is more likely to be from defects in the secretion of
GnRH from the hypothalamus rather than defects in gonadotropin
synthesis in the pituitary. It affects approximately 1 in 10,000 males and
1 in 50,000 females and encompasses a heterogeneous group of entities. Many cases are associated with anosmia, and this combination of
anosmia and HH defines Kallmann syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3492 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 623.2  Forms of Congenital Hypogonadotropic
Hypogonadism and Differential Diagnosis
FORMS OF CHH
GnRH Deficiency and Defective Sense of Smell
Kallmann syndrome
Isolated GnRH Deficiency (Normal Sense of Smell)
Normosmic CHH
Complex Syndromes Including CHH or KS
Combined pituitary hormone deficiency
Septo-­optic dysplasia
CHARGE syndrome
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita with HH
Waardenburg syndrome
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
Gordon Holmes syndrome
Others
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Functional Causes
Malnutrition and/or malabsorption
Any chronic disease (e.g., IBD or asthma)
Celiac disease
Eating disorders
Excessive exercise
Systemic Causes
Hemochromatosis
Sarcoidosis
Histiocytosis
Thalassemia
Acquired Causes
Hyperprolactinemia
Pituitary adenomas and/or brain tumors
Rathke cleft cyst
Pituitary apoplexy
Radiation (brain or pituitary)
Medication induced (such as by steroids, opiates, or chemotherapy)
CHARGE, Coloboma, heart defects, atresia of choanae, retardation of growth and/
or development, genital and/or urinary defects, ear anomalies or deafness; CHH,
congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone; HH, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease;
KS, Kallmann syndrome.
From Boehm U, Bouloux PM, Dattani MT, et al. European consensus statement on
congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism—pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment.
Nat Rev. 2015;11:547–564. Box 2.

Kallmann syndrome is the most common form of HH and is genetically heterogeneous, with autosomal recessive, X-­linked, and autosomal dominant forms of inheritance. Clinically it is characterized by
its association with anosmia or hyposmia; 85% of cases appear to be
autosomal and 15% are X-­linked, but a specific genetic defect may
not be identified in more than half of the cases of HH. There is a wide
spectrum of severity and associated features in patients with Kallmann
syndrome, and the same genetic pathogenic variants may be associated
with different phenotypes, even within the same family. Some kindreds
contain anosmic individuals with or without hypogonadism; others
contain hypogonadal individuals who are anosmic. Cleft lip and palate,
hypotelorism, median facial clefts, sensorineural hearing loss, unilateral renal aplasia, neurologic deficits, and other findings occur in some
affected patients.
The X-­linked form (ANOS1, formerly known as KAL1) is caused by
variants of ANOS1 at Xp22.3. This leads to failure of olfactory axons
and GnRH-­expressing neurons to migrate from their common origin in the olfactory placode to the brain. The ANOS1 gene product
anosmin-­1, an extracellular 95-­kDa matrix glycoprotein, facilitates
neuronal growth and migration. The ANOS1 gene is also expressed
in various parts of the brain, facial mesenchyme, and mesonephros
and metanephros, thus explaining some of the associated findings in

patients with Kallmann syndrome, such as synkinesia (mirror movements), hearing loss, midfacial defects, and renal agenesis.
When Kallmann syndrome is caused by terminal or interstitial deletions of the Xp22.3 region, it may be associated with other contiguous
gene syndromes, such as steroid sulfatase deficiency, chondrodysplasia
punctata, X-­linked ichthyosis, or ocular albinism.
The autosomal dominant form of Kallmann syndrome (sometimes
referred to as KAL2) occurs in up to 10% of patients and is caused by
a loss-­of-­function pathogenic variant in the fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene. Cleft lip and palate are associated with this
form, but not with the X-­linked form. Oligodontia and hearing loss
may occur with both KAL1 and KAL2.
A variety of other genes—including SOX10, FGF8, PROK2/PROKR2,
NELF, CHD7 (responsible for CHARGE [coloboma of the eye, heart
anomaly, choanal atresia, retardation, and genital and ear anomalies]
syndrome, which includes hypogonadism in its phenotype), HS6ST1,
WDR11, and SEMA3A—are associated with defects in neuronal migration that can result in Kallmann syndrome.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism Without Anosmia

A specific genetic defect is not found in most cases of normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH), but the list of genes
associated with this disorder is growing; pathogenic variants in KISS1/
KISS1R, TAC3/TACR3, and GNRH1/GNRHR lead to abnormalities in
the secretion and action of GnRH and are seen exclusively in patients
with normosmic IHH. Variants in FGFR1, FGF8, PROKR2, CHD7, and
WDR11 more commonly present with anosmia/hyposmia (Kallmann
syndrome) but are also associated with normosmic IHH in some cases.
It appears that kisspeptin (the gene product of the KISS1 gene) and
its G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR54) play an important role in
triggering puberty in humans and act downstream of the leptin receptor in this pathway. Rare cases of leptin deficiency and leptin receptor defects are also associated with HH. In addition, starvation and
anorexia are associated with hypogonadism, most likely acting via the
leptin pathway.
There are no known human variants of the GnRH gene, but several
families with variants in the GnRH receptor have been described. These
variants account for 2–14% of IHH without anosmia. The severity of
the defect is variable, and many patients will respond to high-­dose
GnRH with increased gonadotropin secretion, indicating that the
receptor defect is partial.
Variants in gonadotropin genes are extremely rare. Variants in the
common α-­subunit are not known in humans. Variants in the LH-­β
subunit have been described in a few individuals and may lead to low,
absent, or elevated LH levels, depending on the variant. This leads to
testosterone deficiency (diminished Leydig cell function), but because
intratesticular testosterone is critical for spermatogenesis, this also
leads to diminished sperm counts. Defects in the FSH-­β subunit may
be the cause of azoospermia in a few rare cases. Interestingly these
patients may also have testosterone deficiency, indicating that Sertoli
cells also play a role in supporting normal Leydig cell function.
Children with X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC) have
associated HH because of impaired GnRH secretion. In these patients,
there is a pathogenic variant of DAX1 at Xp21.2-­21.3. This region of the
X chromosome includes genes for glycerol kinase, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and ornithine transcarbamoyltransferase (OTC); these
genes may be affected as part of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome
that includes AHC, glycerol kinase deficiency, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and OTC deficiency. Most males with DAX1 variants
develop HH in adolescence, although a patient with adult-­onset adrenal insufficiency and partial HH and two females with HH and delayed
puberty have also been described, the latter as part of extended families
including males with classic HH. The DAX1 gene defect is, however,
rare in patients with delayed puberty or HH without at least a family
history of adrenal failure (see Chapter 616).
It should be noted that genotype-­phenotype correlations in IHH
appear to be complex, and pedigrees with digenic or oligogenic inheritance have been described. The same genetic defect may be associated
with Kallmann syndrome, normosmic IHH, additional birth defects,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
delayed normal puberty, or an apparently normal phenotype. This variability has been observed more frequently in kindreds with pathogenic
variants in FGF8/FGFR1 and in PROK2/PROKR2 ligand-­receptor pairs
and may result from other interacting genes, epigenetic effects, or environmental factors.

OTHER DISORDERS WITH HYPOGONADOTROPIC
HYPOGONADISM

HH has been observed in a few patients with polyglandular autoimmune syndrome, in some with elevated melatonin levels, and in those
with a variety of other syndromes, such as Bardet-­Biedl, Prader-­Willi,
multiple lentigines, and several ataxia syndromes. In rare cases, HH
is associated with complex chromosomal abnormalities.

HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
ASSOCIATED WITH OTHER PITUITARY HORMONE
DEFICIENCIES

Defects in pituitary transcription factors such as PROP-­1, HESX-­
1, LHX-­4, SOX-­3, and LHX-­3 lead to multiple pituitary deficiencies
including HH. Most of these present with multiple pituitary hormone
deficiency in infancy, but some cases (especially with PROP-­1 pathogenic variants) may present with hypogonadism or hypoadrenalism
in adult life. Growth hormone is almost always affected in multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency, but thyroid-­stimulating hormone and
adrenocorticotropic hormone may be spared in some cases. In patients
with organic lesions in or near the pituitary, the gonadotropin deficiency is usually pituitary in origin.

DIAGNOSIS

Levels of gonadotropins and gonadal steroids are normally elevated
for up to 6 months after birth (minipuberty); if the diagnosis of HH
is suspected in early infancy, these levels will be found to be inappropriately low. By the second half of the first year of life, these normally decline to nearly undetectable levels and remain suppressed
until late childhood. Routine laboratory tests cannot distinguish
HH from normal suppression of gonadotropins in this age-­group.
At the normal age of puberty, these patients fail to show clinical
signs of puberty or a normal increase in LH and FSH levels. Children with constitutional delay of growth and puberty will have the
same clinical picture and similar laboratory findings (these cases are
far more common than true HH, especially in males), and their differentiation from patients with HH is extremely difficult. Dynamic
testing with GnRH or hCG may not be able to distinguish these
groups in a reliable manner. A testosterone level greater than 50 ng/
dL (1.7 nmol/L) generally indicates that normal puberty is likely,
but a lower level does not reliably distinguish these groups. At least
one study showed that an inhibin B level of <35 pg/mL in Tanner
stage 1 and <65 pg/mL in Tanner stage 2 may be able to distinguish
IHH from constitutional delay in males, but no single test will reliably distinguish these conditions in all patients.
Insulin-­
like growth factor-­
1, thyroid-­
stimulating hormone, free
thyroxine, and morning cortisol levels should be checked to assess
the status of other anterior pituitary hormones; dynamic testing for
growth hormone deficiency and adrenal insufficiency may be necessary if these are abnormal or equivocal. HH is very likely if the patient
has evidence of another pituitary deficiency, such as a deficiency of
growth hormone, particularly if it is associated with adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency. Hyperprolactinemia is a known cause of
delayed puberty and should be excluded by determination of serum
prolactin levels in all patients. The presence of anosmia usually indicates permanent gonadotropin deficiency, but occasional instances of
markedly delayed puberty (18-­20 years of age) have been observed in
anosmic individuals. Although anosmia may be present in the family
or in the patient from early childhood, its existence is rarely volunteered, and direct questioning is necessary in all patients with delayed
puberty. Formal olfactometry, such as the University of Pennsylvania
Smell Identification Test, is advisable to determine if partial degrees of
hyposmia are present, because IHH patients display a broad spectrum
of olfactory function.

3493

In the absence of family history, it may not be possible to make the
diagnosis of HH with certainty, but the diagnosis will become more
and more likely as puberty is delayed further beyond the normal age.
If pubertal delay persists beyond age 18 years with low 8 am testosterone levels and inappropriately low gonadotropins (normal values
are inappropriately low in this setting), then the patient can be presumptively diagnosed with HH. An MRI of the brain is indicated to
look for tumors and other anomalies in the hypothalamic-­pituitary
region. Genetic testing for pituitary transcription factors and several of
the genes involved in isolated HH is also available and should be performed when possible. A renal ultrasound is recommended in patients
with Kallmann syndrome because of its association with unilateral
renal agenesis. Some authorities also recommend obtaining a baseline
bone-­density evaluation.

TREATMENT

Constitutional delay of puberty should be ruled out before a diagnosis
of HH is established and treatment is initiated. Testicular volume of less
than 4 mL by 14 years of age occurs in approximately 3% of males, but
most of these are cases of constitutional delay of puberty, and true HH
is a rare condition. Although constitutional delay is a benign condition
that will (by definition) resolve spontaneously, even relatively moderate delays in sexual development and growth may result in significant
psychologic distress and require attention. Initially an explanation of
the variations characteristics of puberty and reassurance suffice for the
majority of males. If by 15 years of age no clinical evidence of puberty
is apparent and the testosterone level is <50 ng/dL, a brief course of
testosterone may be recommended. Various regimens are used, including testosterone enanthate or cypionate 100 mg intramuscularly once
monthly for 4-­6 months or 150 mg once monthly for 3 months. Some
practitioners use oral oxandrolone in a dose of 1.25-­2.5 mg daily for
6-­12 months, which has the theoretical advantage that it is not aromatized and may have less effect on bone age advancement (though definitive evidence of advantage is lacking). Oral oxandrolone may cause
hepatic dysfunction, and liver function tests should be monitored if it is
used. Treatment is not necessary in all cases of constitutional delay, but
if used it is usually followed by normal progression through puberty,
and this may differentiate constitutional delay in puberty from isolated
gonadotropin deficiency. The age of initiation of this treatment must
be individualized.
If puberty fails to progress spontaneously after a short course of testosterone has been attempted, then HH becomes the likely diagnosis
and necessitates continuous use of testosterone for normal pubertal
development. At this point the patient should undergo an MRI scan
and genetic testing to try to make a specific diagnosis. Once a diagnosis of HH has been made, treatment with testosterone will induce
secondary sexual characteristics but will not stimulate testicular
growth or spermatogenesis. Treatment with gonadotropins (either as
a combination of hCG and human menopausal gonadotropins or as
GnRH pulse therapy) will lead to testicular development, including
spermatogenesis, but it is much more complex to manage, so in most
cases testosterone treatment is still the best option. Either long-­acting
testosterone injections or a daily application of testosterone gel may be
used (testosterone patches have a high incidence of skin rash and are
infrequently used in pediatrics). Testosterone enanthate or cypionate
ester may be used in a starting dose of 25-­50 mg injected intramuscularly or subcutaneously every 3-­4 weeks, with 50-­mg increments every
6-­9 months until a maintenance dose for adults (200-­250 mg every 3-­4
weeks) is achieved. At that time, testosterone patches or testosterone
gel may be substituted for the injections. Depending on patient and
physician preference, transdermal testosterone may also be used as initial treatment instead of injections. For older males, larger initial doses
and increments can achieve more rapid virilization.
Treatment with gonadotropins is more physiologic but is expensive
and complex, so it is less commonly used in adolescence. This treatment may be attempted in adult life when fertility is desired. The treatment schedule varies from 1,250 to 5,000 IU hCG in combination
with 12.5-­150 IU human menopausal gonadotropins 3 times per week
intramuscularly. It may require up to 2 years of treatment to achieve

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3494 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
adequate spermatogenesis in adults. Recombinantly produced gonadotropins (LH and FSH) are also able to stimulate gonadal growth and
function but are much more expensive. Treatment with GnRH (when
available) is the most physiologically appropriate, but it requires the
use of a subcutaneous infusion pump to deliver appropriately pulsed
therapy because continuous exposure to GnRH will suppress gonadotropins rather than stimulate them. In some cases, patients with GnRH
defects also have pituitary or testicular dysfunction (a dual defect) and
may fail to respond adequately to GnRH or gonadotropin treatment.
The rare patient with isolated LH deficiency can be treated effectively
using hCG injections.
It has been found that up to 10% of patients diagnosed with HH
(with or without anosmia) may exhibit spontaneous reversal of hypogonadism with sustained normal gonadal function after treatment has
been discontinued; this may even occur in patients with known genetic
variants in various genes, including FGFR1, PROK2, GNRH, CHD7,
and TAC/TACR3. Such recovery is more likely in patients who show an
increase in testicular volume during treatment or when treatment has
been discontinued. A brief trial of interruption of treatment is justified
in patients with idiopathic HH. However, the recovery of gonadal function may not be lifelong.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 624

Pseudoprecocity Resulting
from Tumors of the Testes
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Testicular tumors are relatively rare tumors in childhood, accounting for only 2–4% of all childhood cancers. 35% of prepubertal
tumors are malignant, but in pubertal children most tumors are
malignant (98% of painless testicular masses in pubertal males are
malignant). Testicular tumors are discussed further in Chapter 552.
Tumors that cause masculinization or feminization are rare and are
derived from Leydig cells (producing androgens) or Sertoli cells
(producing feminization). In addition, enlargement of the testes can
be seen in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH, caused by adrenal
rests), in fragile X syndrome, and in cases where one testis is lost
and the other hypertrophies to compensate.
Leydig cell tumors of the testes are rare causes of precocious
pseudopuberty (gonadotropin-­
independent puberty) and cause
asymmetric enlargement of the testes. Leydig cells are sparse before
puberty, and tumors derived from them are more common in
the adult. However, rare cases do occur in children; the youngest
reported case was in a 1-­year-­old male. Although up to 10% of adult
tumors may be malignant, metastasizing malignant tumors have
not been reported in children, and pediatric Leydig cell tumors are
usually unilateral and benign. Some tumors may be the result of
somatic activating pathogenic variants of the luteinizing hormone
receptor.
The clinical manifestations are those of puberty in the male;
onset usually occurs at 5-­
9 years of age. Unilateral pubarche
caused by local hormone action has been described. Gynecomastia
may occur. The tumor of the testis can usually be readily felt; the
contralateral unaffected testis is normal in size for the age of the
patient.

Plasma levels of testosterone are markedly elevated, and
follicle-­stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels are
suppressed. Ultrasonography may aid in the detection of small nonpalpable tumors. Fine-­needle aspiration biopsy may help define the
diagnosis.
Treatment consists of surgical removal of the affected testis. These
tumors are generally resistant to chemotherapy. Progression of virilization ceases after removal of the tumor, and partial reversal of the signs
of precocity may occur.
Testicular adrenal rests may develop into tumors that mimic Leydig
cell tumors. Testicular adrenal rest tumors (TARTs) are usually bilateral and occur in children with inadequately controlled CAH, usually
of the salt-­losing variety, during adolescence or young adult life. The
stimulus for the growth of the adrenal rests is inadequate corticosteroid suppressive therapy causing excess adrenocorticotropic hormone
secretion; treatment with adequate doses may result in their regression
if they have not become quite large. These tumors are histologically
similar to primary Leydig cell tumors, but definite evidence of their
origin may be achieved by demonstrating their 21-­hydroxylase activity.
Misdiagnosis of these tumors as primary Leydig cell tumors may lead
to unnecessary orchiectomy and should be avoided. Treatment is frequently unsatisfactory; improving the control of CAH will lower adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels and prevent further growth
of TARTs but may not shrink existing masses. Surgical removal can
relieve pain (and is indicated if severe pain is present) but will not necessarily restore fertility. Sperm banking is recommended in adults with
TARTs because these treatment modalities may not reverse their effect
on fertility.
Fragile X syndrome (see Chapter 59) is caused by the amplification of a polymorphic CGG repeat in the 5′ untranslated region of
FMRI at Xp17.3. The gene encodes an RNA-­binding protein that is
highly expressed in the brain and the testis. In otherwise normal
individuals, 6-­50 CGG repeats are present in the gene; the presence of 50-­200 repeats is associated with mild intellectual disability
and other abnormalities, and the presence of more than 200 repeats
(fragile X pathogenic variant) is associated with the classic fragile X
syndrome. 50 to 200 repeats are present in 1 in 1,000 White males,
and pathogenic variants are found in 1 in 4,000-­8,000. A cardinal
characteristic of the condition is testicular enlargement (macroorchidism), reaching 40-­50 mL after puberty. Although the condition
has been recognized in a child as young as 5 months of age, affected
males younger than 6 years of age rarely have testicular enlargement; by 8-­10 years of age, most have testicular volumes greater
than 3 mL. The testes are enlarged bilaterally, are not nodular, and
are histologically normal. Results of hormonal studies are normal.
Direct DNA analysis searching for CGG repeat sequences permits
definitive diagnosis.
Large-­cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors of the testes (usually
associated with Carney complex) and sex cord tumors with annular tubules (frequently associated with Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome)
are extremely rare Sertoli cell tumors that may be a cause of breast
development in young males. These tumors often occur bilaterally,
are multifocal, and are detectible by ultrasonography. Excessive
production of aromatase (P450arom), the enzyme that converts testosterone to estradiol, causes feminization of these males. Because
these tumors are usually benign, they may be left in place if they are
not causing pain; the gynecomastia can be treated with aromatase
inhibitors.
Other causes of testicular enlargement are also present. In males
with unilateral cryptorchidism, the contralateral testis is approximately
25% larger than normal for age. Testicular enlargement has also been
noted in males with Henoch-­Schönlein purpura and lymphangiectasia.
Epidermoid and dermoid cysts of the testes have been reported but are
rare.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 625 u Gynecomastia 3495

Chapter 625

Gynecomastia
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Gynecomastia, the proliferation of mammary glandular tissue in the
male, is a common condition. True gynecomastia (the presence of
glandular breast tissue) must be distinguished from pseudogynecomastia, which is the result of accumulation of adipose tissue in the area
of the breast that is commonly seen in overweight males. True gynecomastia is characterized by the presence of a palpable fibroglandular
mass at least 0.5 cm in diameter that is located concentrically beneath
the nipple and areolar region.

PHYSIOLOGIC FORMS OF GYNECOMASTIA

Gynecomastia occurs in many newborn males as a result of normal
stimulation by maternal estrogen; the effect usually disappears in a few
weeks. It is then extremely rare in prepubertal males, in whom it should
always be investigated to identify the cause, but it again becomes common during normal puberty.

Neonatal Gynecomastia

Transient gynecomastia occurs in 60–90% of male newborns secondary to exposure to estrogens during pregnancy. Breast development
may be asymmetric, and galactorrhea is seen in approximately 5%.
Most cases resolve within 4-­8 weeks of birth, but a few can last as long
as 12 months. No treatment is necessary.

Pubertal Gynecomastia

During early to mid-­puberty, up to 70% of males develop various
degrees of subareolar hyperplasia of the breasts. Incidence peaks at
the same time as peak height velocity, which is around 14 years of
age, at Tanner stage 3-­4 and at a testicular volume of 5-­10 mL. Physiologic pubertal gynecomastia may involve only one breast, and it is not
unusual for both breasts to enlarge at disproportionate rates or at different times. Tenderness of the breast is common but transient. Spontaneous regression may occur within a few months; it rarely persists
longer than 2 years. Significant psychosocial distress may be present,
especially in obese males with relatively large breasts.
The cause is thought to be an imbalance between estrogen and
androgen action at the level of breast tissue. Testing usually fails to
reveal any significant difference in circulating estrogen and androgen levels between affected and unaffected males, but minor degrees
of imbalance in free hormone levels may still be present. Other hormones, including leptin, insulin-­like growth factor 1 (IGF-­1), and
luteinizing hormone, may directly stimulate breast development and
may play a role in pubertal gynecomastia. Some cases may be caused
by an increased sensitivity to estrogens and/or relative androgen resistance in the affected tissue. As androgen levels continue to rise in later
puberty, most cases resolve and no specific treatment is needed.

Pathologic Gynecomastia

Monogenic forms of gynecomastia are extremely rare. Familial gynecomastia has occurred in several kindreds as an X-­linked or autosomal
dominant sex-­limited trait. Some of these cases were found to be caused
by constitutive activation of the P450 aromatase enzyme (CYP19A1),
leading to increased peripheral conversion of C-­19 steroids to estrogens (increased aromatization). A report of this syndrome in a father
and his son and daughter suggests autosomal dominant inheritance.
Exogenous sources of estrogens are an important cause of gynecomastia in prepubertal children. Very small amounts of estrogens
can cause gynecomastia in male children, and accidental exposure
may occur by inhalation, percutaneous absorption, or ingestion.
Common sources of estrogens include oral contraceptive pills and
oral and transdermal estrogen preparations. Gynecomastia has

been reported in workers involved in the manufacture of estrogens
and even in the children of such workers. Gynecomastia can also
occur secondary to exposure to medications that decrease the level
of androgens (especially free androgens), increase estradiol, or displace androgens from breast androgen receptors. Spironolactone,
alkylating agents, anabolic steroids, human chorionic gonadotropin, ketoconazole, cimetidine, and androgen inhibitors such as
flutamide are all associated with the occurrence of gynecomastia.
Antipsychotic medications may also cause gynecomastia by inducing hyperprolactinemia and hypogonadism. Weaker associations are
seen with a large number of other medications and drugs, including
opiates, alcohol, and marijuana, although the association with marijuana may not be as strong as previously thought. Lavender, tea tree
oils, and excessive consumption of soy are also implicated as possible causes of prepubertal gynecomastia. An increased incidence of
gynecomastia has also been reported in cancer survivors, in whom
the mechanisms include the antiandrogenic or hypogonadotropic
effects of cytotoxic drugs and radiotherapy.
Klinefelter syndrome and other causes of male hypogonadism are
strongly associated with gynecomastia. Significant gynecomastia is
seen in 50% of adolescents with Klinefelter syndrome; it is also seen
in other conditions characterized by male undervirilization, including
partial androgen insensitivity syndrome and 17-­ketosteroid reductase
deficiency. Gynecomastia has also been observed in children with
congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia caused by 11β-­hydroxylase
deficiency and with Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors of the testis or
with feminizing tumors of the adrenal gland. Patients with Klinefelter syndrome may also develop gynecomastia because of estrogen-­
secreting germ cell tumors of the mediastinum. The finding of such a
tumor should prompt a karyotype; conversely, the finding of elevated
β-­human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) in a patient with Klinefelter
syndrome should lead to imaging of the mediastinum to look for a possible germ cell tumor there. The testes may not be enlarged in patients
with Sertoli or Leydig cell tumors, and the tumor is frequently multifocal and bilateral. Excessive aromatase production and/or excessive
estrogen production accounts for the gynecomastia. Feminizing Sertoli
cell tumors are also a feature of Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome and Carney
complex. When gynecomastia is associated with galactorrhea, a prolactinoma should be considered. Hyperprolactinemia can also cause
gynecomastia indirectly by inducing hypogonadism. Hyperthyroidism
alters the ratio of androgen to estrogen by increasing bound androgen
and decreasing the free testosterone; this may result in gynecomastia in
up to 40% of cases. Gynecomastia is also seen in malnourished patients
after restoration of normal nutrition (refeeding syndrome), in whom
it may result from hepatic dysfunction or abnormal activation of the
gonadotropin axis.

EVALUATION OF GYNECOMASTIA

In pubertal cases a detailed history and physical examination may be
all that is needed to exclude rare pathologic causes. Historical evaluation should include family history of male relatives with gynecomastia,
history of liver or renal disease, use of medications or drugs of abuse,
and exposure to herbal and cosmetic products that may contain phytoestrogens. Physical examination should include special attention to
the breasts (looking for overlying skin changes, fixation, local lymphadenopathy, and nipple discharge) as well as a testicular exam. No laboratory evaluation is indicated in routine cases with no other associated
abnormality; however, all prepubertal cases and pubertal cases with
suspicious features should be investigated. Suspicious features include
diameter >4 cm, rapid progression, persistence for more than 2 years, and
persistence after age 17.
Initial laboratory evaluation should include thyroid function tests
(to rule out hyperthyroidism), testosterone, estradiol, HCG, luteinizing hormone, follicle-­stimulating hormone, and prolactin levels.
Because of circadian variation, these hormone levels should ideally
be obtained in the morning. Liver and kidney function should also
be evaluated. Most cases of hyperprolactinemia are associated with
galactorrhea, but hyperprolactinemia can also cause gynecomastia
without associated galactorrhea by suppressing gonadotropins and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3496 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
inducing some degree of hypogonadism. A karyotype should be
checked in all cases where history, examination, or laboratory tests
suggest the possibility of Klinefelter syndrome. Gonadotropin levels
can be a useful screen for Klinefelter syndrome and will be elevated
in pubertal males with this condition. If they are elevated, a karyotype should be performed.

TREATMENT

Treatment in cases of benign pubertal gynecomastia usually consists
of reassuring the boy and his family of the physiologic and transient
nature of the phenomenon. When the enlargement is striking and
persistent and causes serious emotional disturbance to the patient,
specific treatment may be justified. Unfortunately, medical treatment
is generally ineffective in long-­standing cases. Early cases respond
better to medical treatment, but it is then harder to justify, as most
cases will resolve spontaneously. Agents that have been used for medical treatment include androgens, aromatase inhibitors, and estrogen antagonists. The effectiveness of synthetic androgens is variable
and side effects are a concern, so these are rarely used in pediatrics.
Aromatase inhibitors have a physiologic rationale, but placebo-­
controlled trials have been disappointing. Estrogen antagonists like
tamoxifen and raloxifene are more effective, with raloxifene being the
superior agent in at least one well-­designed trial. If medical treatment
is attempted, it should be in early cases (<12 months standing) using
raloxifene (in a dose of 60 mg/day) or tamoxifen (10-­20 mg/day) for
3-­9 months, with the understanding that success rates are generally
low in severe cases and that mild cases will likely resolve on their own
without treatment.
In those cases where breast development is excessive (Tanner stages
3-­5), causes significant psychologic distress, or fails to regress in 18-­24
months, surgical removal of the enlarged breast tissue may be indicated, particularly in males who have completed or nearly completed
pubertal development. Careful examination and laboratory testing
to exclude nonphysiologic causes are advisable before proceeding to
surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 626

Hypofunction of the
Ovaries
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
Hypofunction of the ovaries can be either primary or central in etiology. It may be caused by congenital failure of development, postnatal injury (primary or hypergonadotropic hypogonadism), or lack of
central stimulation by the pituitary and/or hypothalamus (secondary
or tertiary hypogonadotropic hypogonadism). Primary ovarian insufficiency (hypergonadotropic hypogonadism), also termed premature
ovarian failure (POF), is characterized by the arrest of normal ovarian
function before 40 years of age. Certain genetic pathogenic variants
have been identified that can result in primary ovarian insufficiency.
Hypofunction of the ovaries because of a lack of central stimulation
(hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) can be associated with other
processes, such as multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies and some
chronic diseases. Table 626.1 details the etiologic classification of ovarian hypofunction (see also Fig. 600.7).

626.1 Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism in
the Female (Primary Hypogonadism)
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
A diagnosis of hypergonadotropic hypogonadism before puberty is difficult. Except in the case of Turner syndrome, most affected patients
have no prepubertal clinical manifestations.

TURNER SYNDROME

The term Ullrich-­Turner syndrome is frequently used in Europe but is
infrequently used in the United States, where the condition is called
just Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.4). The syndrome is defined as
the combination of the characteristic phenotypic features accompanied
by a complete or partial absence of the second X chromosome with or
without mosaicism.

Pathogenesis

Half the patients with Turner syndrome have a 45,X chromosomal
complement. Approximately 15% of patients are mosaics for 45,X
and a normal cell line (45,X/46,XX). Other mosaics with isochromosomes, 45,X/46,X,i(Xq); with rings, 45,X/46,X,r(X); or with
fragments, 45,X/46fra, occur less often. Mosaicism is commonly
detected when more than one tissue is examined. The single X chromosome is of maternal origin in nearly 80% of 45,X patients. The
mechanism of chromosome loss is unknown, and the risk for the
syndrome does not increase with maternal age. The genes involved
in the Turner phenotype are X-­linked genes that escape inactivation. A major locus involved in the control of linear growth has been
mapped within the pseudoautosomal region of the X chromosome
(PAR1). SHOX, a homeobox-­containing gene of 170 kb of DNA
within the PAR1, is thought to be important for controlling growth
in children with Turner syndrome, with Leri-­Weill syndrome, and,
rarely, patients with idiopathic short stature. Genes for the control of
normal ovarian function are postulated to be on Xp and perhaps two
supergenes on Xq.
Turner syndrome occurs in approximately 1 in 1,500-­2,500 liveborn
females. The frequency of the 45,X karyotype at conception is approximately 3%. However, 99% of these are spontaneously aborted, accounting for 5–10% of all abortuses. Mosaicism (45,X/46,XX) occurs in a
proportion higher than that seen with any other aneuploid state, but
the mosaic Turner constitution is rare among the abortuses; these findings indicate preferential survival for mosaic forms.
The normal fetal ovary contains approximately 7 million oocytes,
but these begin to disappear rapidly after the fifth month of gestation.
At birth, there are only 2 million (1 million active follicles); by menarche, there are 400,000-­500,000; and at menopause, 10,000 remain.
In the absence of one X chromosome, this process is accelerated, and
nearly all oocytes are gone by 2 years of age. In aborted 45,X fetuses,
the number of primordial germ cells in the gonadal ridge appears to be
normal, suggesting that the normal process of oocyte loss is accelerated
in patients with Turner syndrome. Eventually, the ovaries are described
as streaks and consist only of connective tissue, with very few germ
cells present.

Clinical Manifestations

Many patients with Turner syndrome are recognizable at birth because
of a characteristic edema of the dorsa of the hands and feet and loose
skinfolds at the nape of the neck. Low birthweight and decreased birth
length are common (see Chapter 99.4). Clinical manifestations in
childhood include webbing of the neck, a low posterior hairline, small
mandible, prominent ears, epicanthal folds, high arched palate, a broad
chest presenting the illusion of widely spaced nipples, cubitus valgus,
and hyperconvex fingernails. The diagnosis is often first suspected at
puberty when breast development fails to occur.
Short stature, the cardinal finding in virtually all females with Turner
syndrome, may be present with few other clinical manifestations. The
linear growth deceleration begins in infancy and early childhood, gets
progressively more pronounced in later childhood and adolescence,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 626 u Hypofunction of the Ovaries 3497
Table 626.1  Etiologic Classification of Ovarian
Hypofunction
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Hypothalamic
Genetic defects
• Kallmann syndrome: KAL1, FGFR1, FGF8, PROK2, PROKR2,
CHD7, WDR11, NELF, SEMA3A
• Other gene defects: leptin, leptin receptor, KISS-­1 (deficiency
of kisspeptin), DAX-­1, TAC3 (deficiency of neurokinin B),
TACR3, SEMA7A
• Inherited syndromes: Prader-­Willi, Bardet-­Biedl, and others
• Marked constitutional growth delay
Acquired defects (reversible)
• Anorexia nervosa
• Drug use
• Malnutrition
• Chronic illness, especially Crohn disease
• Hyperprolactinemia
Pituitary
Genetic defects
• Isolated gonadotropin deficiency (GnRH receptor, FSH, and LH
β-­subunit)
• Septo-­optic dysplasia (HESX-­1 defect in some cases)
• Disorders of pituitary organogenesis (PROP1, LHX3, LHX4, SOX-­3)
Acquired defects
• Hyperprolactinemia
• Pituitary tumors
• Pituitary infarction
• Infiltrative disorders (histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
• Hemosiderosis and hemochromatosis
• Radiation
HYPERGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Genetic
• Follicle-­stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone
resistance
• Pathogenic variants in steroidogenic pathways
• 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis
• Turner syndrome and its variants
• Noonan syndrome (RASopathy genes)
• SF-­1 pathogenic variants
• Galactosemia
• Fragile X–associated disorders
• Bloom syndrome
• Werner syndrome
• Ataxia-­telangiectasia
• Fanconi anemia
Acquired
• Chemotherapy
• Radiation
• Autoimmune ovarian failure from autoimmune polyendocrine
syndromes 1 and 2

and results in significant adult short stature. Sexual maturation (breast
development) fails to occur at the expected age; however, signs of adrenarche (pubic hair) are normally present. Among untreated patients
with Turner syndrome, the mean adult height is 143-­144 cm in the
United States and most of Northern Europe, but 140 cm in Argentina
and 147 cm in Scandinavia (Fig. 626.1). The height is well correlated
with the midparental height (average of the parents’ heights adjusted
for child’s sex). Specific growth curves for height have been developed
for females with Turner syndrome.
Associated cardiac defects are common. In females with Turner syndrome, life-­threatening consequences of X chromosome haploinsufficiency involve the cardiovascular system. There is a four-­to fivefold
increase in the rate of premature mortality secondary to congenital heart
disease and premature coronary heart disease in adults with Turner syndrome. Clinically silent cardiac defects, mainly bicuspid aortic valve, are

Fig. 626.1 Turner syndrome in a 15-­yr-­old female exhibiting failure

of sexual maturation, short stature, cubitus valgus, and a goiter. There
is no webbing of the neck. Karyotyping revealed 45,X/46,XX chromosome complement.

present in patients with Turner syndrome. Regardless of age, all patients
with Turner syndrome need comprehensive cardiovascular evaluation
by a cardiologist specializing in congenital heart disease at the time of
diagnosis. Complete cardiologic evaluation, including echocardiography, reveals isolated nonstenotic bicuspid aortic valves in one third to
half of the patients. In later life, bicuspid aortic valve disease can progress to dilation of the aortic root or aortic dissection. Less frequent
defects include aortic coarctation (20%), aortic stenosis, mitral valve
prolapse, and anomalous pulmonary venous drainage. In one study, 38%
of patients with 45,X chromosomes had cardiovascular malformations
compared with 11% of those with mosaic monosomy X; the most common were aortic valve abnormalities and aortic coarctation. Webbed
neck in patients with or without recognized chromosome syndromes
is associated with both flow-­related and non–flow-­related heart defects.
Among patients with Turner syndrome, those with webbed necks have
a much greater chance of having coarctation of the aorta than do those
without webbed necks. Transthoracic echocardiogram in young females
is adequate if cardiac anatomy is clearly seen; otherwise, magnetic resonance angiographic screening studies should be considered in asymptomatic individuals with Turner syndrome. During adolescence, and
certainly before pregnancy (when possible) is contemplated, repeat
cardiac evaluation should be considered even in those without prior
findings of cardiac abnormalities. Blood pressure should be routinely
monitored even in the absence of cardiac or renal lesions, especially in
those with suggestions of aortic root dilation. Cardiac MRI is a valuable
tool to detect and monitor aortic root dilation.
Renal ultrasound should be performed in all females with Turner
syndrome at diagnosis. One fourth to one third of patients have renal
malformations on ultrasonographic examination (50% of those with
45,X karyotypes). The more serious defects include pelvic kidney,
horseshoe kidney, double collecting system, the complete absence of
one kidney, and ureteropelvic junction obstruction. Some of the malformations may increase the risk of hypertension and urinary tract

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3498 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
infection. Idiopathic hypertension is also common. Females with
Turner syndrome who had normal baseline renal ultrasound findings
did not develop the renal disease during a follow-­up period averaging
6 years.
When the ovaries are examined by ultrasonography, there are no
age-­related differences in detecting ovarian tissue; 27–46% of patients
have detectable ovaries at various ages; 76% of those with X mosaicism
and 26% of those with 45,X karyotypes have detectable ovaries.
Sexual maturation usually fails to occur, but 10–20% of females have
spontaneous breast development, and a small percentage may have menstrual periods. Primary gonadal failure is associated with early onset of
adrenarche (elevation in dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate) but delayed
pubarche (pubic hair development). Spontaneous pregnancies have been
reported in menstruating patients with Turner syndrome. Premature
menopause, increased risk of miscarriage, and offspring with increased
risk of trisomy 21 have been reported. A woman with a 45,X/46,X,r(X)
karyotype treated with hormone replacement therapy had three pregnancies, resulting in a normal 46,XY male infant, a spontaneous abortion, and a healthy term female with Turner syndrome 45,X/46,Xr(X).
Antithyroid antibodies (thyroid peroxidase and/or thyroglobulin
antibodies) occur in 30–50% of patients. The prevalence increases with
advancing age. Autoimmune thyroid disease, with or without a goiter,
occurs in 10–30% of patients. Age-­dependent abnormalities in carbohydrate metabolism characterized by abnormal glucose tolerance and
insulin resistance and, only rarely, frank type 2 diabetes occur in older
patients with Turner syndrome. Impaired insulin secretion has been
described in 45,X women. Cholesterol levels are elevated in adolescence, regardless of body mass index or karyotype.
Inflammatory bowel disease (both Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis), gastrointestinal bleeding because of abnormal mesenteric vasculature,
and delayed gastric emptying time have all been reported. Screening for
celiac disease is recommended because the risk of celiac disease is increased
in Turner syndrome, with 4–6% of individuals affected. Although autoimmune diseases have been associated with Turner syndrome, the prevalence
of type 1 diabetes with Turner syndrome is not very high.
Chronic liver disease may develop in adults with Turner syndrome.
Its pathogenesis is poorly defined.
Sternal malformations can be detected by lateral chest radiography.
An increased carrying angle at the elbow is usually not clinically significant. Scoliosis occurs in approximately 10% of adolescent females.
Congenital hip dysplasia occurs more commonly than in the general
population. Reported eye findings include anterior segment dysgenesis
and keratoconus. Pigmented nevi become more prominent with age;
melanocytic nevi are common. Essential hyperhidrosis, torus mandibularis, and alopecia areata occur rarely.
Recurrent bilateral otitis media develops in approximately 75%
of patients. Sensorineural hearing deficits are common, and the frequency increases with age. Problems with gross and fine motor sensory
integration, failure to walk before 15 months of age, and early language
dysfunction often raise questions about developmental delay, but intelligence is normal in most patients. However, cognitive impairment does
occur in patients with 45,X/46,X,r(X); the ring chromosome is unable
to undergo inactivation and leads to two functional X chromosomes.
Special attention should be given to psychosocial development
in females with Turner syndrome. In general, behavior is normal in
females with Turner syndrome, but they are at an increased risk for
social isolation, immaturity, and anxiety. Other conditions, such as
dyslexia, nonverbal learning disability, and attention-­deficit disorder,
have been reported in females with Turner syndrome. In adults, deficits in perceptual spatial skills are more common than they are in the
general population. Some unconfirmed data suggest the existence of an
imprinted X-­linked locus that affects cognitive function such as verbal
and higher-­order executive function skills. These functions are apparently better when the X is paternal in origin.
The prevalence of mosaicism depends in large part on the techniques used for studying chromosomal patterns. The use of fluorescent
in situ hybridization and reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has increased the reported prevalence of mosaic patterns to
as high as 60–74%.

Mosaicism involving the Y chromosome occurs in 5%. A population study using PCR with five different primer sets found Y chromosome material in 12.2%. Gonadoblastoma among Y-­positive patients
occurred in 7–10%. Therefore the recommendation is that prophylactic
gonadectomy be performed even in the absence of MRI or CT evidence
of tumors. The recommended timing of this procedure is at the time of
diagnosis, but this may need to be reevaluated in the future. The gonadoblastoma locus on the Y chromosome (GBY) maps close to the Y centromere. The presence of only the SRY (sex-­determining region on the
Y chromosome) locus is not sufficient to confer increased susceptibility
for the development of gonadoblastoma. Routine PCR for Y chromosome detection for the purpose of assigning gonadoblastoma risk is
not indicated. High-­throughput quantitative genotyping may provide
an effective and inexpensive method for the identification of X chromosome abnormalities and Y chromosome material identification.
In patients with 45,X/46,XX mosaicism, the clinical abnormalities
are attenuated and fewer; short stature is as frequent as it is in the 45,X
patient and may be the only manifestation of the condition other than
ovarian failure (see Fig. 626.1).

Laboratory Findings

Chromosomal analysis must be considered routinely in females who
have unexpected short stature based on parental heights. Turner syndrome is detected in ∼5% of females referred to an endocrinology service because of short stature. Patients with a marker chromosome in
some or all cells should be tested for DNA sequences at or near the
centromere of the Y chromosome for GBY.
Ultrasonography of the heart, kidneys, and ovaries is indicated
after the diagnosis is established. The most common skeletal abnormalities are shortening of the fourth metatarsal and metacarpal bones,
epiphyseal dysgenesis in the joints of the knees and elbows, Madelung deformity, scoliosis, and, in older patients, inadequate osseous
mineralization.
Plasma levels of gonadotropins, particularly follicle-­
stimulating
hormone (FSH), are markedly elevated to greater than those of age-­
matched controls during infancy; at 2-­3 years of age, a progressive
decrease in levels occurs until they reach a nadir at 6-­8 years of age,
and by 10-­11 years of age, they rise to adult agonadal levels.
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies should be checked to detect autoimmune thyroiditis if the thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH) level is
abnormal. Annual or biannual TSH levels are recommended. Females
with Turner syndrome should be screened for celiac disease by measuring tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A antibodies. Initial
testing should be done around age 4 years and repeated every 2-­5 years.
Extensive studies have failed to establish that growth hormone deficiency plays a primary role in the pathogenesis of the growth disorder.
Defects in normal secretory patterns of growth hormone are seen in
adolescents because of a lack of gonadal steroids, but not in younger
females with Turner syndrome.

Treatment

Treatment with recombinant human growth hormone increases
height velocity and ultimate stature in most, but not all, children with
Turner syndrome. Many females achieve heights of greater than 150
cm with early initiation of treatment. In one clinical trial, 99 patients
with Turner syndrome who started receiving growth hormone at a
mean age of 10.9 years at doses between 0.27 and 0.36 mg/kg/wk
achieved a mean height of 149 cm, with nearly one third reaching
heights greater than 152.4 cm (60 in). In the Netherlands, higher
doses of growth hormone (up to 0.63 mg/kg/wk in the third year of
treatment) resulted in 85% of the subjects reaching adult heights in
the normal range for the Dutch reference population. Growth hormone treatment should be initiated in early childhood and/or when
there is evidence of height velocity attenuation on specific Turner
syndrome growth curves. Growth hormone therapy does not significantly aggravate carbohydrate tolerance and does not result in
marked adverse events in patients with Turner syndrome. Serum levels of insulin-­like growth factor 1 should be monitored if the patient
is receiving high doses of growth hormone. If the insulin-­like growth

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 626 u Hypofunction of the Ovaries 3499
factor 1 levels are significantly elevated, the dose of growth hormone
may need to be reduced. Treatment with growth hormone can cause
excessive growth of the hands and feet in some females with Turner
syndrome.
Oxandrolone has also been used to treat the short stature associated
with Turner syndrome, either alone or in combination with growth
hormone. This nonaromatizable synthetic anabolic steroid has weak
androgenic effects, and patients should be monitored for signs of
pubarche and hepatotoxicity. The latter is rare.
Replacement therapy with estrogens is indicated, but there is variation among pediatric endocrinologists about the optimal age at which
to initiate treatment. The psychologic preparedness of the patient to
accept therapy must be considered. The improved growth achieved by
females treated with growth hormone in childhood permits initiation
of estrogen replacement at 12-­13 years. Delaying estrogen therapy to
optimize height potential until 15 years of age, as previously recommended, seems unwarranted. This change to starting earlier estrogen
therapy was considered because of the psychologic importance of age-­
appropriate pubertal maturation. In addition, delaying estrogen therapy could be deleterious for bone health and potentially other aspects
of the child’s health. Low-­dose estrogen replacement at 12 years of age
permits a normal pace of puberty without interfering with the positive
effect of growth hormone on the final adult height. Estrogen therapy
improves verbal and nonverbal memory in females with Turner syndrome. In young women with age-­appropriate pubertal development
who achieve normal height, health-­related quality-­of-­life questionnaires have yielded normal results.
Many forms of estrogen are available. Oral estrogens had been
mostly used in the past. Transdermal patches are increasing in
popularity. This is because transdermal patches bypass the first-­pass
hepatic metabolism, requiring only a small amount of estrogen to
attain adequate function. Many treatment protocols have been developed, and several are as follows. For oral preparations, a conjugated
estrogen (Premarin), 0.15-­0.625 mg daily, or micronized estradiol
(Estrace), 0.5 mg given daily for 3-­6 months, is usually effective in
inducing puberty. The recommendations for transdermal patch therapy are 6.25 μg daily, gradually increased over 2 years to the adult
dose of 100-­200 μg daily. The estrogen may be cycled (taken on days
1-­23) or not. A progestin (Provera) is added (taken on days 10-­23) in
a dose of 5-­10 mg daily. In the week after the progestin, withdrawal
bleeding usually occurs. Combination oral contraceptive pills may
also be used for hormone replacement therapy.
Prenatal chromosome analysis for advanced maternal age has
revealed a frequency of 45,X/46,XX that is 10 times higher than when
diagnosed postnatally. Most of these patients have no clinical manifestations of Turner syndrome, and levels of gonadotropins are normal.
Awareness of this mild phenotype is important in counseling patients.
Psychosocial support for these females is an integral component of
treatment. A comprehensive psychologic education evaluation is recommended either at the time of Turner syndrome diagnosis, depending on the patient’s age, when any of the components of behavior or
cognition become obvious, or immediately preceding school entry. In
addition to the healthcare team, the Turner Syndrome Society, which
has local chapters in the United States and similar groups in Canada
and other countries, provides a valuable support system for these
patients and their families.
Successful pregnancies have been carried to term using ovum
donation and in vitro fertilization. Adolescents with few signs of
spontaneous puberty may have ovaries with follicles. There remains
a future possibility of using cryopreserved ovarian tissue with
immature oocytes before the regression of the ovaries for future
pregnancies. In adult women with Turner syndrome, there seems
to be a high prevalence of undiagnosed bone mineral density, lipid,
and thyroid abnormalities. Glucose intolerance diminished first-­
phase insulin response, elevated blood pressure, and lowered fat-­
free mass are common. Glucose tolerance worsens, but fat-­free mass
and blood pressure and general physical fitness improve with sex
hormone replacement. The neurocognitive profile of adult women
is unaffected by estrogen status.

XX GONADAL DYSGENESIS

Some phenotypically and genetically normal females have gonadal
lesions identical to those in 45,X patients but without somatic features
of Turner syndrome; their condition is termed pure gonadal dysgenesis or pure ovarian dysgenesis.
The disorder is rarely recognized in prepubertal children because the
external genitals are normal, no other abnormalities are visible, and
growth is normal. At pubertal age, sexual maturation fails to take place.
Plasma gonadotropin levels are elevated. Delay of epiphyseal fusion
may result in a eunuchoid habitus. Pelvic ultrasonography reveals
streak ovaries.
Affected siblings, parental consanguinity, and failure to uncover
mosaicism suggest female-­
limited autosomal recessive inheritance.
The disorder appears to be especially frequent in Finland (1 in 8,300
liveborn females). In this population, several pathogenic variants in
the FSH receptor gene (on chromosome 2p) are demonstrated as the
cause of the condition. In contrast, FSH receptor gene variants are not
detected in Mexican women with 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis. In some
patients, XX gonadal dysgenesis has been associated with sensorineural deafness (Perrault syndrome). A patient with this condition and
concomitant growth hormone deficiency and virilization has also been
reported. There may be distinct genetic forms of this disorder. Müllerian agenesis, or Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser syndrome,
which is second to gonadal dysgenesis as the most common cause of
primary amenorrhea, occurring in 1 in 4,000-­5,000 females, has been
reported in association with 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis in a 17-­year-­old
adolescent with primary amenorrhea and lack of breast development.
One case of dysgerminoma with syncytiotrophoblastic giant cells was
reported. An 18-­year-­old woman with primary amenorrhea and an
absence of müllerian-­derived structures, unilateral renal agenesis, and
clinical signs of androgen excess—a phenotype resembling Mayer-­
Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser syndrome—was found to have a loss-­of-­
function variant in WNT4. Treatment consists of estrogen replacement
therapy.

45,X/46,XY GONADAL DYSGENESIS

45,X/46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, also called mixed gonadal dysgenesis,
has extreme postnatal phenotypic variability that may extend from a
Turner-­like syndrome to a male phenotype with a penile urethra; it is
possible to delineate three major clinical phenotypes. Short stature is
a major finding in all affected children. Ninety percent of prenatally
diagnosed cases have a normal male phenotype.
Some patients have no evidence of virilization; they have a female
phenotype and often have the somatic signs of Turner syndrome. The
condition is discovered prepubertally when chromosomal studies are
made in short females or later when chromosomal studies are made
because of failure of sexual maturation. Fallopian tubes and uterus
are present. The gonads consist of intraabdominal undifferentiated
streaks; chromosomal study of the streak often reveals an XY cell line.
The streak gonad differs somewhat from that in females with Turner
syndrome; in addition to wavy connective tissue, there are often tubular or cordlike structures, occasional clumps of granulosa cells, and,
frequently, mesonephric or hilar cells.
Some children have mild virilization manifested only by prepubertal
clitoromegaly. Normal müllerian structures are present, but at puberty
virilization occurs. These patients usually have an intraabdominal testis, a contralateral streak gonad, and bilateral fallopian tubes.
Many 45,X/46,XY children present with frank ambiguity of the genitals in infancy (Fig. 626.2). A testis and vas deferens are found on one
side in the labioscrotal fold, and a streak gonad is identified on the contralateral side. Despite the presence of a testis, fallopian tubes are often
present bilaterally. An infantile or rudimentary uterus is often present.
Other genotypes and phenotypes have been described in mixed
gonadal dysgenesis. Approximately 25% of 200 analyzed patients have
a dicentric Y chromosome (45,X/46,X,dic Y). In some patients the Y
chromosome may be represented by only a fragment (45,X/45,X +fra);
application of Y-­specific probes can establish the origin of the fragment. It is unclear why the same genotype (45,X/46,XY) can result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3500 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
phenotypes. However, 45,X/46,XY mosaicism is found in approximately 7% of fetuses, with true chromosome mosaicism encountered
prenatally. Of 76 infants with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism diagnosed prenatally, 72 had a normal male phenotype, 1 had a female phenotype, and
only 3 males had hypospadias. Of 12 males whose gonads were examined, only 3 were abnormal. These data must be considered when counseling a family in which a 45,X/46,XY infant is discovered prenatally.

XXX, XXXX, AND XXXXX FEMALES
XXX Females

Fig. 626.2 A 45,X/46XY neonate with sex chromosome disorder of
sex development was noted at birth to have male-­appearing external genitalia with a phallus measured at 2.5 × 1.2 cm and penoscrotal
hypospadias. The left gonad was palpable in an incompletely fused
scrotum, whereas the right gonad was not palpable. Gonadal biopsy
revealed a testis on the left side and streak gonad on the right. The
diagnosis was mixed gonadal dysgenesis. (From Remeithi SA, Wherret
DK. Disorders of sexual development. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh
MC, eds. Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 98–13)

diverse phenotypes. Pathogenic variants in SRY have been described in
some patients.
Children with a female phenotype present no problem in gender
of rearing. Patients who are only slightly virilized are usually assigned
a female gender of rearing before a diagnosis is established. Patients
with ambiguity of the genitals are often clinically indistinguishable
from patients with various types of 46,XY disorders of sex development (46,XY DSD). In some instances, there may need to be careful
consideration regarding gender of rearing. Factors that may influence this decision include short stature, the need for surgical genital
reconstruction, the presence of müllerian structures, and the need for
gonadectomy because of predisposition of the gonad to the development of malignancy. In some patients followed to adulthood, the putative normal testis proves to be dysgenetic with eventual loss of Leydig
and Sertoli cell function (see Chapter 623). In an analysis of 22 patients
with mixed gonadal dysgenesis, no significant associations or correlations were found between internal and external phenotypes or endocrine function and gonadal morphologic features. The appearance of
the external genitalia determined the gender of rearing. In 11 patients,
basal and human chorionic gonadotropin–stimulated testosterone levels were lower than in control subjects.
Gonadal tumors, usually gonadoblastomas, occur in approximately
25% of these children. A gonadoblastoma locus has been localized to a
region near the centromere of the Y chromosome (GBY). These germ
cell tumors are preceded by the changes of carcinoma in situ. Accordingly, both gonads should be removed in all patients reared as females,
and the undifferentiated gonad should be removed in the patients
reared as males.
There is no correlation among the proportion of 45,X/46,XY cell
lines in either blood or fibroblasts with the phenotype. In the past,
all patients came to clinical attention because of their abnormal

The 47,XXX (trisomy) chromosomal constitution is the most frequent
extra X chromosome abnormality in females, occurring in almost 1
in 1,000 liveborn females. In 68%, this condition is caused by maternal meiotic nondisjunction, but paternal sex chromosome errors cause
most 45,X and half of 47,XXY constitutions. The phenotype is that of a
normal female; affected infants and children are not recognized based
on the genital appearance.
Sexual development and menarche are normal. Most pregnancies
have resulted in normal infants. By 2 years of age, delays in speech and
language become evident, and some see a lack of coordination, poor
academic performance, and immature behavior. These females tend to
be tall, manifest behavior disorders, and often require special education classes. Using high-­resolution MRI, 47,XXX subjects have lower
amygdala volumes than euploid controls; 47,XXY subjects had even
lower amygdala volumes. In a review of 155 females, 62% were physically normal. There is marked variability within the syndrome, and a
small proportion of affected females are well coordinated, socially outgoing, and academically superior.

XXXX and XXXXX Females

The great majority of females with these rare karyotypes have intellectual disabilities. Commonly associated defects are epicanthal folds,
hypertelorism, clinodactyly, transverse palmar creases, radioulnar synostosis, and congenital heart disease. Sexual maturation is often incomplete and may not occur at all. Nevertheless, three women with tetra-­X
syndrome gave birth, but no pregnancies were reported in 49,XXXXX
women. Most 48,XXXX women tend to be tall, with an average height
of 169 cm, whereas short stature is a common feature of the 49,XXXXX
phenotype.

NOONAN SYNDROME

Females with Noonan syndrome show certain anomalies also seen in
females with 45,X Turner syndrome, but they have normal 46,XX chromosomes (see Chapter 101.1). The most common abnormalities are the
same as those described for males with Noonan syndrome (see Chapter
623). Short stature is one of the cardinal signs of this syndrome. The
phenotype differs from Turner syndrome in several respects. Cognitive
impairment is often present, the cardiac defect is most often pulmonary
valvular stenosis or an atrial septal defect rather than an aortic defect,
normal sexual maturation usually occurs but is delayed by 2 years on
average, and POF has been reported. The FDA approves growth hormone therapy for use in Noonan syndrome patients with short stature.

OTHER OVARIAN DEFECTS

Some young women with no chromosomal abnormalities are found
to have streak gonads that may contain only occasional or no germ
cells. Gonadotropins are increased. Cytotoxic drugs, especially alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide and busulfan, procarbazine, etoposide, and exposure of the ovaries to irradiation for the treatment of
malignancy are frequent causes of ovarian failure. Young women with
Hodgkin disease demonstrate that combination chemotherapy and
pelvic irradiation may be more deleterious than either therapy alone.
Teenagers are more likely than older women to retain or recover ovarian function after irradiation or combined chemotherapy; normal pregnancies have occurred after such treatment. Treatment regimens may
result in some ovarian damage in most females treated for cancer. The
median lethal dose for the human oocyte is estimated to be approximately 4 Gy; doses as low as 6 Gy have produced primary amenorrhea. Ovarian transposition before abdominal and pelvic irradiation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 626 u Hypofunction of the Ovaries 3501
in childhood can preserve ovarian function by decreasing the ovarian
exposure to less than 4-­7 Gy.
Autoimmune ovarian failure occurs in 60% of children older than
13 years of age with type I autoimmune polyendocrinopathy (Addison disease, hypoparathyroidism, mucocutaneous candidiasis). This
condition, also known as polyglandular autoimmune disease type 1,
is rare worldwide but not in Finland, where, as a result of a founder
gene effect, it occurs in 1 in 25,000 people. Affected females may not
develop sexually; secondary amenorrhea may occur in young women.
The ovaries may have lymphocytic infiltration or appear simply as
streaks. Most affected patients have circulating steroid cell antibodies
and autoantibodies to 21-­hydroxylase. Among patients with polyglandular autoimmune syndromes, 5% have hypogonadism.
The condition also occurs in young women as an isolated event
or in association with other autoimmune disorders, leading to
secondary amenorrhea (POF). It occurs in 0.2–0.9% of women
younger than 40 years of age. POF is a heterogeneous disorder with
many causes: chromosomal, genetic, enzymatic, infectious, and iatrogenic. When associated with autoimmune adrenal disease, steroid
cell autoantibodies are usually present. These antibodies react with
P450scc, 17α-­OH, or 21-­OH enzymes. Steroid cell autoantibodies
are rarely found when associated with an entire host of endocrine
and nonendocrine autoimmune diseases and not adrenal autoimmunity. A second autoimmune disorder, often subclinical, is found
in 10–39% of adult patients with POF, including autoimmune thyroid disease, type 1 diabetes, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
inflammatory bowel disease, immune thrombocytopenia or hemolytic anemia, celiac disease, myasthenia gravis, and rheumatoid
arthritis. One 17-­year-­old with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and 47,XXX chromosomes had autoimmune POF. Patients
with POF do not have the neurocognitive defects found in Turner
syndrome patients.
Galactosemia, particularly the classical form of the disease, usually
results in ovarian damage, beginning during intrauterine life. Levels of
FSH and luteinizing hormone (LH) are elevated early in life. Ovarian
damage may be caused by deficient uridine diphosphate-­galactose (see
Chapter 107.2). Denys-­Drash syndrome caused by a WT1 pathogenic
variant can result in ovarian dysgenesis.
Ataxia-­telangiectasia may be associated with ovarian hypoplasia
and elevated gonadotropins; the cause is unknown. Gonadoblastomas
and dysgerminomas have occurred in a few females.
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism occurs as a result of resistance of the ovary to both endogenous and exogenous gonadotropins
(Savage syndrome). This condition also occurs in women with POF.
Antiovarian antibodies or FSH receptor abnormalities may cause this
condition. The FSH receptor gene variants have been reported as an
autosomal recessive condition (see Chapter 622). A few females with
46,XX chromosomes presenting in primary amenorrhea with elevated
gonadotropin levels were found to have inactivating variants of the LH
receptor gene. This suggests that LH action is needed for normal follicular development and ovulation. Other genetic defects associated with
ovarian failure include pathogenic variants in SF-­1, FOXL2, GNAS,
CYP17, and CYP19.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

626.2 Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
in the Female (Secondary
Hypogonadism)
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
Hypofunction of the ovaries can result from failure to secrete normal
pulses of the gonadotropins LH and FSH. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) may occur if the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis is
interrupted either at the hypothalamic or pituitary level. The mechanisms that result in HH include failure of the hypothalamic LH–releasing hormone (also known as gonadotropin-­releasing hormone) pulse

generator or inability of the pituitary to respond with secretion of LH
and FSH. It is often difficult to distinguish between marked constitutional delay and HH.

HYPOPITUITARISM

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is most commonly seen with multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies resulting from malformations (e.g.,
septo-­optic dysplasia, other midline defects), pituitary transcription
factor defects such as in PROP-­1, or lesions of the pituitary that are
acquired postnatally. Familial isolated gonadotropin deficiency associated with anosmia (Kallmann syndrome) may occur in females. Many
other genetic causes for HH have been identified. A gene important in
LH-­releasing hormone secretion is named KISS (encoding the protein
kisspeptin), which is suggested to play a significant role in the development of the LH-­releasing hormone–secreting cells. Another set of
genes implicated in HH are the genes for neurokinin B (TAC3) and its
receptor (TAC3R).
In children with idiopathic hypopituitarism, the defect is usually found in the hypothalamus. In these patients, administration
of gonadotropin-­releasing hormone results in increased plasma
levels of FSH and LH, establishing the integrity of the pituitary
gland.
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is less common than hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Ovarian function may be abnormal when
associated with LH excess, a condition known as polycystic ovarian syndrome (polycystic ovary syndrome; see Chapter 589).

Isolated Deficiency of Gonadotropins

This heterogeneous group of disorders is evaluated more fully with
the use of the gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog stimulation
test rather than a single measurement of gonadotropin levels. In most
children the pituitary gland is normal, and the defect causing gonadotropin deficiency resides in the hypothalamus. Patients with hyperprolactinemia, most often caused by a pituitary prolactin-­secreting
adenoma, often have suppression of gonadotropin secretion. If breast
development has occurred, then galactorrhea and amenorrhea are frequently seen.
Several sporadic instances of anosmia with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism have been reported. Anosmic hypogonadal females have
also been reported in kindreds with Kallmann syndrome, but hypogonadism more frequently affects the males in these families. Pathogenic variants in the gene for the β-­subunit of FSH and LH have been
reported.
Some autosomal recessive disorders, such as Laurence-­Moon-­
Biedl, multiple lentigines, and Carpenter syndromes, appear in
some instances to include gonadotropic hormone deficiency.
Patients with Prader-­Willi syndrome usually have some degree
of HH. Females with severe thalassemia may have gonadotropin
deficiency from pituitary damage caused by chronic iron overload
secondary to multiple transfusions. Anorexia nervosa frequently
results in HH. The rare patients described with leptin deficiency or
leptin receptor defects have failure of pubertal maturation because
of gonadotropin deficiency.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis may be apparent in patients with other deficiencies of
pituitary tropic hormones, but, as in males, it is difficult to differentiate isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism from physiologic delay
of puberty. Repeated measurements of FSH and LH, particularly during sleep, may reveal the rising levels that herald the onset of puberty.
Stimulation testing with gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog may
help to establish the diagnosis. Morbidity for both men and women
with hypogonadism includes infertility and an increased risk of
osteoporosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3502 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 627

Pseudoprecocity Resulting
from Lesions of the Ovary
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
Females with signs of early puberty may, in rare circumstances, have
ovarian tumors or cysts that secrete estrogenic, androgenic, or both
types of hormones. In these patients, the sex steroid production is
not mediated by pituitary gonadotropin secretion; they produce
pseudoprecocity.
Ovarian tumors are rare in the pediatric population, occurring at
a rate of fewer than 3 in 100,000. Most ovarian masses are benign,
but 10–30% may be malignant. If they occur before 8 years of age,
they may cause signs of puberty. Ovarian malignancies, the most
common genital neoplasms in adolescence, account for only 1% of
childhood cancers. More than 60% are germ cell tumors, which are
dysgerminomas that can secrete tumor markers and sex hormones
(see Chapter 552). Five to 10% of germ cell tumors occur in phenotypic females, with abnormal gonads associated with the presence of a Y chromosome. The next most common are epithelial cell
tumors (20%), and nearly 10% are sex cord/stromal tumors (granulosa, Sertoli cell, and mesenchymal tumors). Multiple tumor markers can be seen in ovarian tumors, including α-­fetoprotein, human
chorionic gonadotropin, carcinoembryonic antigen, oncoproteins,
p105, p53, KRAS pathogenic variants, cyclin D1, epidermal growth
factor–related proteins and receptors, cathepsin B, and others. Variable levels of inhibin-­activin subunit gene expression have been
detected in ovarian tumors.
Functioning lesions of the ovary consist of benign cysts or malignant tumors. The majority synthesize estrogens; a few synthesize
androgens. The most common estrogen-­producing ovarian tumor
causing precocious puberty is the granulosa cell tumor. Other
tumors that can cause precocious puberty are thecomas, luteomas,
mixed types, theca-­lutein, follicular cysts, and other ovarian tumors
(i.e., teratoma, choriocarcinoma, and dysgerminoma).

ESTROGENIC LESIONS OF THE OVARY

These lesions cause isosexual precocious sexual development but
account for only a small percentage of all cases of precocity. Benign
ovarian follicular cysts are the most common tumors associated
with isosexual precocious puberty in females; they may rarely be
gonadotropin dependent. Gonadotropin-­
independent follicular
cysts that produce estrogen are often associated with McCune-­
Albright syndrome.

Juvenile Granulosa Cell Tumor

In childhood, the most common neoplasm of the ovary with estrogenic manifestations is the granulosa cell tumor, although it makes
up only 1–10% of all ovarian tumors. These tumors have distinctive histologic features that differ from those encountered in older
females (adult granulosa cell tumor). The cells have high mitotic
activity, follicles are often irregular, Call-­Exner bodies are rare, and
luteinization is frequent. The tumor may be solid or cystic or both.
It usually is benign. This tumor has been associated with multiple
enchondromas (Ollier disease) and with multiple subcutaneous
hemangiomas (Maffucci syndrome).

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

The juvenile granulosa cell tumor has been observed in newborns
and may manifest with sexual precocity at 2 years of age or younger;

about half these tumors occurred before 10 years of age. The mean
age at diagnosis is 7.5 years. The tumors are almost always unilateral. The breasts become enlarged, rounded, and firm, and the nipples prominent. The external genitals resemble those of a normal
girl at puberty, and the uterus is enlarged. A white vaginal discharge
is followed by irregular or cyclic menstruation. However, ovulation
does not occur. The presenting manifestation may be abdominal
pain or swelling. Pubic hair is usually absent unless there is mild
virilization.
A mass is readily palpable in the lower portion of the abdomen in
most children by the time sexual precocity is evident. However, the
tumor may be small and escape detection even on careful rectal and
abdominal examination; ultrasonography may detect the tumors, but
CT or MRI scans are most sensitive. Most tumors are diagnosed at very
early stages of malignancy.
Plasma estradiol levels are markedly elevated. Plasma levels of
gonadotropins are suppressed and do not respond to gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone analog stimulation. Levels of antimüllerian hormone, inhibin B, and α-­
fetoprotein may be elevated. Activating
pathogenic variants of GSα are seen in 30%, and GATA-­4 expression
is retained in the more aggressive tumors, whereas antimüllerian
hormone levels are inversely proportional to tumor size. Bone age is
moderately advanced. Several case reports showing the association of
45,X/46,XY karyotype and ambiguous genitalia with ovarian granulosa
tumor have been published.

Treatment and Prognosis

The tumor should be removed as soon as the diagnosis is established. Prognosis is excellent because less than 5% of these tumors
in children are malignant. However, advanced-­stage tumors behave
aggressively and require difficult decisions regarding surgical
approaches and the use of irradiation and chemotherapy. In adults
with granulosa cell tumors, p53 expression is associated with unfavorable prognosis. Vaginal bleeding immediately after removal of
the tumor is common. Signs of precocious puberty abate and may
disappear within a few months after the operation. The secretion of
estrogens returns to normal.
Sex cord tumor with annular tubules is a distinctive tumor,
thought to arise from granulosa cells, that occurs primarily in
patients with Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome. These tumors are multifocal, bilateral, and usually benign. The presence of calcifications
aids ultrasonographic detection. Increased aromatase production
by these tumors results in gonadotropin-­independent precocious
puberty. Inhibin A and B levels are elevated and decrease after tumor
removal. In one study, 9 of 13 sex cord/stromal tumors exhibited
follicle-­stimulating hormone receptor pathogenic variants, suggesting a role for such mutation in the development of these tumors.
Chorioepithelioma has been reported only rarely. This highly
malignant tumor is thought to arise from a preexisting teratoma.
The usually unilateral tumor produces large amounts of human
chorionic gonadotropin, which stimulates the contralateral ovary
to secrete estrogen. Elevated levels of human chorionic gonadotropin are diagnostic.

Follicular Cyst

Small ovarian cysts (<0.7 cm in diameter) are common in prepubertal children. At puberty and in females with true isosexual
precocious puberty, larger cysts (1-­6 cm) are often seen; these are
secondary to stimulation by gonadotropins. Similar larger cysts
occur occasionally in young females with precocious puberty in the
absence of luteinizing hormone and follicle-­stimulating hormone.
Surgical removal or spontaneous involution of these cysts results
in regression of pubertal changes. The mechanism of production of
these autonomously functioning cysts is unknown. Such cysts may
form only once, or they may disappear and recur, resulting in waxing
and waning of the signs of precocious puberty. They may be unilateral or bilateral. The sexual precocity that occurs in young females

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
with McCune-­Albright syndrome is usually associated with autonomous follicular cysts caused by somatic-­
activating pathogenic
variants of the GSα-­protein occurring early in development (see
Chapter 600.6). Gonadotropins are suppressed, and estradiol levels
are often markedly elevated, but they may fluctuate widely and even
temporarily may return to normal. Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog stimulation fails to evoke an increase in gonadotropins. Ultrasonography is the method of choice for the detection and
monitoring of such cysts. Aromatase inhibitors are shown to be the
mainstay of therapy in females with McCune-­Albright syndrome
and persistent estradiol elevation. Estrogen receptor blockers have
also been used. A short period of observation to ascertain the lack
of spontaneous resolution is advisable before cyst aspiration or cystectomy is considered. Cystic neoplasms must be considered in the
differential diagnosis.

ANDROGENIC LESIONS OF THE OVARY

Virilizing ovarian tumors are rare at all ages but particularly so in prepubertal females. Arrhenoblastoma has been reported as early as 14
days of age, but few cases have been reported in females younger than
16 years of age.
The gonadoblastoma occurs exclusively in dysgenetic gonads,
particularly in phenotypic females who have a Y chromosome or a
Y fragment in their genotype (46,XY; 45,X/46,XY; 45,X/46,X-­fra).
There is a gonadoblastoma locus on the Y chromosome (GBY). The
tumors may be bilateral. Virilization occurs with some, but not all,
tumors. The clinical features are the same as those seen in patients
with virilizing adrenal tumors and include accelerated growth,
acne, clitoral enlargement, and growth of sexual hair. A palpable,
abdominal mass is found in about 50% of patients. Plasma levels of
testosterone and androstenedione are elevated, and gonadotropins
are suppressed. Ultrasonography, CT, and MRI usually localize the
lesion. The dysgenetic gonad of phenotypic females with a Y chromosome or fragment of Y chromosome containing GBY should be
removed prophylactically. When a unilateral tumor is removed, the
contralateral dysgenetic gonad should also be removed. Association of
gonadoblastoma and WAGR (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary
anomalies, mental retardation) syndrome is also reported. In an
immunohistochemical study of two gonadoblastomas, expressions
of WT1, p53, and MIS, as well as inhibin, were all demonstrated.
Virilizing manifestations occur occasionally in females with
juvenile granulosa cell tumors. Adrenal rests and hilum cell
tumors rarely lead to virilization. Activating pathogenic variants
of G protein genes have been described in ovarian (and testicular)
tumors. GSα variants, usually seen in gonadal tumors associated
with McCune-­Albright syndrome, were also noted in four of six
Leydig cell tumors (three ovarian, one testicular). Two granulosa
cell tumors and 1 thecoma of 10 ovarian tumors studied were found
to have GIP-­2 variants.
Sertoli-­L eydig cell tumors, rare sex cord/stromal neoplasms,
constitute less than 1% of ovarian tumors. The average age at diagnosis is 25 years; less than 5% of these tumors occur before puberty.
α-­Fetoprotein levels may be mildly elevated. In one 12-­month-­old
with Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumor presenting with isosexual precocity,
the only detectable tumor marker was the serum inhibin level, with
elevations in both A and B subunits. Five-­year survival rates are
70–90%.
Of 102 consecutive patients who underwent surgery because of
ovarian masses over a 15-­year period, the presenting symptoms were
acute abdominal pain in 56% and abdominal or pelvic mass in 22%. Of
nine children whose cause for surgery was presumed malignancy, three
had dysgerminomas, two had teratomas, two had juvenile granulosa
cell tumors, one had a Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumor, and one had a yolk
sac tumor.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3503

Chapter 628

Disorders of Sex
Development
Patricia A. Donohoue
SEX DIFFERENTIATION

See also Chapter 622.
Differentiation and development of the gonads and genitalia are
largely complete in the first half of gestation. In normal differentiation, the final form of all sexual structures is consistent with normal
sex chromosomes (either XX or XY). A 46,XX complement of chromosomes, as well a genetic factors such as DAX1 (dosage-­sensitive/
sex-­reversal adrenal hypoplasia on the X chromosome), the signaling
molecule WNT-­4, and R-­Spondin1, are among the many needed for
the development of normal ovaries. Development of the male phenotype is potentially more complex. It requires a Y chromosome and, specifically, an intact SRY (sex-­determining region on the Y chromosome)
gene, which, in association with genes such as SOX9, SF-­1 (steroidogenic factor-­1), WT1 (Wilms tumor 1), and others (see Chapter 622),
directs the undifferentiated gonad to become a testis. Aberrant recombinations may result in X chromosomes carrying SRY, resulting in XX
males, or Y chromosomes that have lost SRY, resulting in XY females.
Antimüllerian hormone (AMH) causes the müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts to regress; in its absence, they persist as the uterus, fallopian
tubes, cervix, and upper vagina. AMH activation in the testes probably
requires the SF-­1 gene. By about 8 weeks of gestation, the Leydig cells of
the testis begin to produce testosterone. During this critical period of male
differentiation, testosterone secretion is stimulated by placental human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which peaks at 8-­12 weeks. In the latter
half of pregnancy, lower levels of testosterone are maintained by luteinizing hormone (LH) secreted by the fetal pituitary. Testosterone produced
locally initiates development of the ipsilateral wolffian (mesonephric) duct
into the epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicle. Complete development of the external genitalia also requires dihydrotestosterone (DHT),
the more active metabolite of testosterone. DHT is produced largely from
circulating testosterone and is necessary to fuse the genital folds to form
the penis and scrotum. DHT is produced from testosterone via the action
of the enzyme 5α-­reductase. DHT is also produced through an alternative biosynthetic pathway from androstanediol, and this pathway must
be intact for normal and complete prenatal virilization to occur. Figure
628.1 illustrates the production of steroid hormones in various glands and
the integrated pathways to the synthesis of DHT. A functional androgen
receptor, produced by an X-­linked gene, is required for testosterone and
DHT to induce these androgen effects.
In the XX fetus with normal long and short arms of the X chromosome, the bipotential gonad develops into an ovary by about the 10th
to 11th week. This occurs only in the absence of SRY, testosterone, and
AMH and requires a normal gene in the dosage-­sensitive/sex-­reversal
locus DAX1, the WNT-­4 molecule, and R-­Spondin1. A female external
phenotype develops in the absence of fetal gonads. However, the male
phenotype development requires androgen production and action.
Estrogen is unnecessary for normal prenatal sexual differentiation, as
demonstrated by 46,XX patients with aromatase deficiency.
Chromosomal aberrations may result in ambiguity of the external genitalia. Conditions of aberrant sex differentiation may also occur with the
XX or XY genotype. The appropriate term for what was previously called
intersex is disorders of sex development (DSD). This term defines a condition “in which development of chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomic sex
is atypical.” It is increasingly preferable to use the term atypical genitalia
rather than ambiguous genitalia. Tables 628.1 and 628.2 compare previous

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3504 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Sex Steroid Synthesis
Alternative Pathway
To DHT

Adrenal & Sex Steroid Synthesis

Sex Steroid Synthesis
Standard Pathway

Adrenal Steroid Synthesis
Cholesterol

CYP11A1  StAR

Pregnenolone

5DHP
AKR1C2/4

S
R
D
5
A
1

17-OH
allopregnanolone

Progesterone

C
Y
P
1
7
A
1

P
O
R

17-OH pregnenolone
HSD3B2

17-OH progesterone

CYP21A2  POR

DOC

11-Deoxycortisol
CYP11B1

CYP17A1  POR
HSD17B3

Corticosterone

C
Y
P
1
7
A
1

P
O
R

DHEA

A
R
O
HSD17B3 
HSD17B2
P
O
R

Androstenedione

Estrone

Testosterone

Estradiol

SRD5A2

Cortisol

DHT

CYP11B2
Androstanediol
AKR1C2/RoDH (ox)

Aldosterone

DHT

Fig. 628.1 Steroidogenic pathways enzyme names and activities. CYP11A1: cholesterol side-­
chain cleavage. Enzyme activities include
20-­hydroxylase, 22-­hydroxylase, and 20,22-­lyase. CYP17A1: activities include 17α-­hydroxylase and 17,20-­lyase. 3βHSD2 (HSD3B2): activities include 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (type 2) and D5D4-­isomerase. CYP21A2: activity is 21-­hydroxylase. CYP11B1: activity is 11β-­hydroxylase.
CYP11B2: activities include 18-­hydroxylase (CMOI) and 18-­dehydrogenase (CMOII). SRD5A1: activity is 5α-­reductase type 1. SRD5A2: activity is
5α-­reductase type 2. HSD17B2: activity is 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2. HSD17B3: activity is 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
3. AKR1C2/4: activities are 3α-­reductase types 1 and 3. AKR1C2/RoDH (ox): activities are 3α-­reductase and 3-­hydroxyepimerase. ARO, aromatase;
CMOI, corticosterone methyl oxidase type 1; CMOII, corticosterone methyl oxidase type 2; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; 5αDHP, 5α dihydroprogesterone. (Adapted from Kim MS, Donohoue PA. Adrenal disorders. In Kappy MS, Allen DB, Geffner ME, eds.
Pediatric Practice Endocrinology, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill, 2014; and Flück CE, Meyer-­Böni M, Pandey AV, et al. Why boys will be boys: two
pathways of fetal testicular androgen biosynthesis are needed for male sexual differentiation. Am J Hum Genet. 2011;89:201–218.)

Table 628.1  Revised Nomenclature
PREVIOUS

CURRENTLY ACCEPTED

Intersex

Disorders of sex development
(DSDs)

Male pseudohermaphrodite

46,XY DSD

Undervirilization of an XY male

46,XY DSD

Undermasculinization of an XY
male

46,XY DSD

46,XY intersex

46,XY DSD

Female pseudohermaphrodite

46,XX DSD

Overvirilization of an XX female

46,XX DSD

Masculinization of an XX female

46,XX DSD

46,XX intersex

46,XX DSD

True hermaphrodite

Ovotesticular DSD

Gonadal intersex

Ovotesticular DSD

XX male or XX sex reversal

46,XX testicular DSD

XY sex reversal

46,XY complete gonadal
dysgenesis

From Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. Consensus statement on management of
intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–e500. Table 1.

terms with their revised etiologic classification nomenclature. Table 622.1
in Chapter 622 lists some of the many genes that may be abnormal in various forms of DSD. Gender fluidity (nonconformity) has become a socially
and, in New York State, legally accepted concept and is often expressed
by self-­identified people as intersex. New York State has an intersex category on its birth certificate. Partial androgen insensitivity, 5α-­reductase
deficiency, and mixed gonadal dysgenesis are often associated with gender dissatisfaction, and an intersex designation may help with future self-­
identification once the child is mature.
The definition of atypical or ambiguous genitalia, in a broad sense,
is any case in which the external genitalia do not appear completely
male or completely female. Although there are standards for genital
size dimensions, variations in size of these structures do not always
constitute ambiguity.
Development of the external genitalia begins with the potential to
be either male or female (Fig. 628.2). Virilization of a female, the most
common form of DSD, results in varying phenotypes (Fig. 628.3) that
develop from the basic bipotential genital appearances of the embryo
(see Fig. 628.2).

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH
ATYPICAL OR AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA

The appearance of the external genitalia is rarely diagnostic of a particular disorder and thus does not often allow distinction among the
various forms of DSD. The most common forms of 46,XX DSD are
virilizing forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. It is important to
note that in 46,XY DSD, the specific diagnosis is not found in up to
50% of cases; partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS) and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
Table 628.2  Etiologic Classification of Disorders of Sex
Development
46,XX DSD
Androgen Exposure
Fetal/fetoplacental source
21-­Hydroxylase (P450c21 or CYP21) deficiency
11β-­Hydroxylase (P450c11 or CYP11B1) deficiency
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase II (3β-­HSD II) deficiency
Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR deficiency)
Aromatase (P450arom or CYP19) deficiency
Glucocorticoid receptor gene pathogenic variant
Maternal source
Virilizing ovarian tumor
Virilizing adrenal tumor
Androgenic drugs
Disorder of Ovarian Development
XX gonadal dysgenesis
Testicular DSD (SRY+, SOX9 duplication)
Undetermined Origin
Associated with genitourinary and gastrointestinal tract defects
46,XY DSD
Defects in Testicular Development
Denys-­Drash syndrome (pathogenic variant in WT1)
WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary malformation,
retardation)
Deletion of 11p13
Campomelic syndrome (autosomal gene at 17q24.3-­q25.1) and
SOX9 pathogenic variant
XY pure gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome)
Pathogenic variant in SRY
XY gonadal agenesis
Unknown cause
Deficiency of Testicular Hormones
Leydig cell aplasia
Pathogenic variant in LH receptor
Lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (P450scc or CYP11A1) deficiency;
pathogenic variant in StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein)
3β-­HSD II deficiency
17-­Hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase (P450c17 or CYP17) deficiency
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome because of antimüllerian
hormone gene variants or receptor defects for antimüllerian
hormone
Defect in Androgen Action
Dihydrotestosterone deficiency because of 5α-­reductase II
pathogenic variants or AKR1C2/AKR1C4 variants
Androgen receptor defects:
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome
Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome
(Reifenstein and other syndromes)
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (defect in conversion of
7-­dehydrocholesterol to cholesterol, DHCR7)
OVOTESTICULAR DSD
XX
XY
XX/XY chimeras
SEX CHROMOSOME DSD
45,X (Turner syndrome and variants)
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome and variants)
45,X/46,XY (mixed gonadal dysgenesis, sometimes a cause of
ovotesticular DSD)
46,XX/46,XY (chimeric, sometimes a cause of ovotesticular DSD)
DSD, Disorders of sex development.
Data from Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. Consensus statement on management of
intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–e500.

3505

pure gonadal dysgenesis are common identifiable etiologies in XY
DSD. At one center with a large experience, the etiologies of DSD in
250 patients older than 25 years were compiled. The six most common diagnoses accounted for 50% of the cases. These included virilizing congenital adrenal hyperplasia (14%), androgen insensitivity
syndrome (AIS; 10%), mixed gonadal dysgenesis (8%), clitoral/labial
anomalies (7%), hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (6%), and 46,XY
small-­for-­gestational-­age males with hypospadias (6%). Potential diagnostic clues are noted in Tables 628.3 and 628.4.
The potential of not finding a diagnosis in patients with DSD and the
resulting lack of specific management emphasizes the need for thorough diagnostic evaluations. These include biochemical characterization of possible steroidogenic enzymatic defects in each patient with
genital ambiguity. The parents need counseling about the potentially
complex nature of the baby’s condition and guidance as to how to deal
with their well-­meaning but curious friends and family members. The
evaluation and management should be carried out by a multidisciplinary team of experts that includes pediatric endocrinology, pediatric surgery/urology, pediatric radiology, newborn medicine, genetics,
and psychology. Once the sex of rearing has been agreed on by the family and team, treatment can be organized. Genetic counseling should
be offered when the specific diagnosis is established.
After a complete history and physical exam, the common diagnostic
approach includes multiple steps, described in the following outline.
These steps are usually performed simultaneously rather than waiting
for results of one test before performing another, because of the sensitive and sometimes urgent nature of the condition. Careful attention to
the presence of physical features other than the genitalia is crucial to
determine if a diagnosis of a particular multisystem syndrome is possible (see Chapters 628.1, 628.2, and 628.3). Table 628.5 summarizes
many of the features of commonly encountered causes of DSD. Exome
sequencing or molecular testing using specific DSD DNA panels are
quite useful in the diagnostic evaluation, especially in 46,XY DSD, and
may become first-­line diagnostic tests.
Diagnostic tests include the following:
1.	Blood karyotype, with rapid determination of sex chromosomes (in
many centers this is available within 24-­48 hours)
2.	Other blood tests
a.	
Screen for congenital adrenal hyperplasia: cortisol biosynthetic precursors and adrenal androgens (particularly
17-­hydroxyprogesterone and androstenedione for 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, the most common form). In the United States, all 50
states have a newborn screen for 21-­hydroxylase deficiency.
b.	Screen for androgen biosynthetic defects with serum levels of androgens and their precursors.
c.	
Assess for gonadal response to gonadotropin stimulation to
screen for the presence and function of testicular gonadal tissue:
obtain serum levels of testosterone and DHT before and after IM
injections of hCG.
d.	Molecular genetic analyses for SRY, other Y-­specific loci, and
when needed, other single-­gene defects associated with DSD.
e.	Gonadotropin (LH and follicle-­stimulating hormone [FSH]) levels.
3.	The internal anatomy of patients with ambiguous genitalia can be
defined with one or more of the following studies:
a.	Voiding cystourethrogram
b.	Endoscopic examination of the genitourinary tract
c.	Pelvic ultrasound; renal and adrenal ultrasound
d.	Pelvic MRI
e.	Exploratory laparoscopy to locate and characterize/biopsy the
gonads
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3506 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Sexual appearance of fetus at 3rd to 4th mo of pregnancy

Sexual appearance of fetus at 2nd to 3rd mo of pregnancy

Genital
tubercle
(penis)
Urethral fold

Genital
tubercle
(clitoris)
Inner labial fold

Urethral groove

Vulval groove

Scrotal swelling
Genital tubercle

Male

Anus

Female

Anus

Outer labial
swelling

Genital groove

Urethrolabial fold

Sexual appearance of fetus at time of birth

Labioscrotal fold

Anus

Male and female identical

Male

Penis
Urethral raphe
(joining line of
urethral fold)
Scrotal raphe
(joining line of
scrotal swelling)
Scrotum
Anus
Female

Clitoris
Urethral
opening
Labia minora
Labia majora
Vaginal opening
Anus

Fig. 628.2 Schematic demonstration of differentiation of normal male and female genitalia during embryogenesis. (From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW. Atlas
of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 2002: p. 328.)

Table 628.3  Associations of Genital Abnormalities
ABNORMAL
CHARACTERISTICS

A

C

B

D

E

Fig. 628.3 Examples of atypical genitalia. These cases include

ovotesticular disorder of sexual development (A) and congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia (B-­E). (B-­D, Courtesy D. Becker, MD, Pittsburgh.
From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 4th ed.
St. Louis: Mosby, 2002: p. 329.)

628.1 46,XX DSD
Patricia A. Donohoue
The genotype is XX and the gonads are ovaries, but the external genitalia are virilized. There is no significant prenatal AMH production
because the gonads are ovaries. Thus the uterus, fallopian tubes, and
cervix develop. The varieties and causes of this condition are relatively
few. Most instances result from exposure of the female fetus to excessive exogenous or endogenous androgens during intrauterine life. The
changes consist principally of virilization of the external genitalia (clitoral hypertrophy and labioscrotal fusion).

CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
See Chapter 616.1.

EXAMPLES OF ASSOCIATED
DISORDERS

MALE-­APPEARING GENITALIA
Micropenis
Growth hormone or luteinizing hormone
deficiency
Testosterone deficiency (in second and
third trimesters)
Partial androgen insensitivity
Syndrome: idiopathic
Hypospadias (more
severe)

Disorders of gonadal development
46,XX DSD
Ovotesticular DSD
46,XX or 46,XY DSD
Syndrome: idiopathic

Impalpable gonads

Anorchia
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome
46,XX DSD with 21-­or 11β-­hydroxylase
deficiency
Cryptorchidism

Small gonads

47,XXY, 46,XX DSD
Dysgenetic or rudimentary testes

Inguinal mass (uterus
or tube)

Persistent müllerian duct syndrome,
dysgenetic testes

FEMALE-­APPEARING GENITALIA
Clitoromegaly
XX with 21-­or 11β-­hydroxylase or
3β-­hydroxy dehydrogenase deficiency
Other 46,XX DSD
Gonadal dysgenesis, dysgenetic testes,
ovotesticular DSD
46,XY DSD
Tumor infiltration of clitoris
Syndrome: idiopathic
Posterior labial fusion

As for clitoromegaly

Palpable gonad(s)

Gonadal dysgenesis, dysgenetic testes,
ovotesticular DSD
46,XY DSD

Inguinal hernia or mass

As for palpable gonad(s)

DSD, Disorders of sex development.
From Al Remeithi S, Wherrett DK. Disorders of sex development. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff
AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 98.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
Table 628.4  Key Points in Evaluation of Infants with
Disorders of Sexual Development
Identification of
syndromic features in
physical exam

Evaluation of internal
genitalia to conclude
about exposure to
AMH using pelvic
ultrasound or MRI

• Craniosynostosis and other synostosis
in POR deficiency
• Cleft palate and second to third toe
syndactyly in Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz (SLO)
syndrome
• Pierre Robin sequence or campomelia
for SOX9 pathogenic variants
• Kidney abnormalities or dysfunction in
WTI or WNT4 pathogenic variants
• Cardiac abnormalities in Turner
syndrome, mixed gonadal dysgenesis
or GATA4 pathogenic variants
• Adrenal insufficiency in cases of SLO,
NR5A1 (SF-­1) pathogenic variants
• POR deficiency or congenital adrenal
hyperplasia or hypoplasia forms
• Polyneuropathy in DHH pathogenic
variants
• Chondrodysplasia in HHAT
pathogenic variants
• Blepharophimosis/ptosis in FOXL2
pathogenic variants
Normal Uterus In:
46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis
(CGD)
46,XX CGD
46,XX with androgen exposure (i.e.,
virilizing forms of CAH)
Turner syndrome
Abnormal Uterus In:
46,XY PGD (partial gonadal dysgenesis)
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis
Absent Uterus In:
46,XY DSD with androgen synthesis
defects and androgen action defects
46,XX testicular DSD

POR, P450 oxidoreductase; AMH, anti-Mullerian hormone; CAH, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia.
Modified from Rodriguez-­Buritica D. Overview of genetics of disorders of sexual
development. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2015;27:675–684. Table 1.

This is the most common cause of atypical genitalia and of 46,XX
DSD. Females with the 21-­hydroxylase and 11-­hydroxylase defects are
the most highly virilized, although minimal virilization also occurs
with the type II 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase defect (see Fig.
628.3). Female patients with salt-­losing congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(CAH) caused by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency tend to have more virilization than do patients with the non–salt-­losing form. Masculinization
may be so complete that a penile urethra results, and the patient may
appear to be a male with bilateral cryptorchidism.

AROMATASE DEFICIENCY

In 46,XX females, the rare condition of aromatase deficiency during fetal life leads to 46,XX DSD and results in hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism at puberty because of ovarian failure to synthesize
estrogen.
Examples of this condition include two 46,XX infants who had
enlargement of the clitoris and posterior labial fusion at birth. In
one instance, maternal serum and urinary levels of estrogen were
very low and serum levels of androgens were high. Cord serum levels of estrogen were also extremely low, and levels of androgen were
elevated. The second patient also had virilization of unknown cause
since birth, but the aromatase deficiency was not diagnosed until
14 years of age, when she had further virilization and failed to go

3507

into puberty. At that time, she had elevated levels of gonadotropins and androgens but low estrogen levels, and ultrasonography
revealed large ovarian cysts bilaterally. These patients demonstrate
the important role of aromatase in the conversion of androgens
to estrogens. Additional female and male patients with aromatase
deficiency as a consequence of pathogenic variants in the aromatase gene (CYP19) are known. Two siblings with this gene defect
were described, both of whom had tall stature because of a lack of
estrogen-­mediated epiphyseal fusion. The 28-­year-­old XX proband
was 177.6 cm tall (+2.5 SD) after having received hormonal replacement therapy. Her 24-­year-­old brother was 204 cm tall (+3.7 SD)
and had a bone age of 14 years. Low-­dose estradiol replacement,
carefully adjusted to maintain normal age-­appropriate levels, may
be indicated for affected females, even prepubertally.

CORTISOL RESISTANCE CAUSED BY A
GLUCOCORTICOID RECEPTOR GENE PATHOGENIC
VARIANT

A 9-­
year-­
old female with 46,XX DSD, thought to be caused by
21-­hydroxylase deficiency (CAH) since the age of 5 years, had elevated
cortisol levels both at baseline and after dexamethasone, hypertension, and hypokalemia, suggestive of the diagnosis of generalized glucocorticoid resistance. A novel homozygous variant in exon 5 of the
glucocorticoid receptor was demonstrated. In this Brazilian family,
the condition was autosomal recessive. Virilization occurs because of
excess adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation of adrenal
steroid production because the glucocorticoid receptor defect is also
present in the pituitary gland, which senses inadequate cortisol effect
to provide negative feedback.

P450 Oxidoreductase Deficiency

Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR), encoded by a gene on
7q11.2, is a cofactor required for normal enzymatic activity of the
microsomal 21-­and 17-­hydroxylases. POR deficiency thus causes
partial combined P450C17 and P450C21 steroidogenic defects.
Females are born with ambiguous genitalia, but as opposed to classic CAH, the virilization does not progress postnatally and androgen levels are normal or low. Males may be born undervirilized.
Both may exhibit bony abnormalities seen in Antley-­Bixler syndrome. Conversely, in a series of Antley-­Bixler syndrome patients,
those with ambiguous genitalia and disordered steroidogenesis had
cytochrome POR deficiency. Those without genital ambiguity with
normal steroidogenesis had FGFR2 pathogenic variants. The cardinal features of Antley-­Bixler syndrome include craniosynostosis,
severe midface hypoplasia, proptosis, choanal atresia/stenosis, frontal bossing, dysplastic ears, depressed nasal bridge, radiohumeral
synostosis, long bone fractures and femoral bowing, and urogenital
abnormalities.

VIRILIZING MATERNAL TUMORS

Rarely, the female fetus has been virilized by a maternal androgen-­
producing tumor. In a few cases, the lesion was a benign adrenal
adenoma, but all others were ovarian tumors, particularly androblastomas, luteomas, and Krukenberg tumors (Table 628.6). Maternal virilization may be manifested by enlargement of her clitoris,
acne, deepening of the voice, decreased lactation, hirsutism, and
elevated levels of androgens. In the infant, there is enlargement
of the clitoris of varying degrees, often with labial fusion. Mothers of children with unexplained 46,XX DSDs should undergo
physical examination and measurements of their own levels of
plasma testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate, and
androstenedione.

EXPOSURE TO ANDROGENIC DRUGS BY WOMEN
DURING PREGNANCY

Testosterone and 17-­methyltestosterone have been reported to cause
46,XX DSDs in some instances (see Table 628.6). The greatest number
of cases has resulted from the use of certain progestational compounds

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3508 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 628.5  Atypical Genitalia: Steps in Establishing the Diagnosis

21-­OH DEFICIENCY

GONADAL
DYSGENESIS WITH
Y CHROMOSOME

OVOTESTICULAR
DSD

PARTIAL
ANDROGEN
INSENSITIVITY

BLOCK IN
TESTOSTERONE
SYNTHESIS

CLINICAL FEATURE
Palpable gonad(s)

–

±

±

+

+

Uterus present*

+

+

Usually

–

–

Increased skin
pigmentation

±

–

–

–

–

Sick baby

±

–

–

–

±

Dysmorphic features

–

±

–

–

–

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS
Serum 17-­OHP
Elevated

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Electrolytes

Possibly abnormal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Possibly abnormal

Karyotype

46,XX

45,X/46,XY or others

46,XX most common

46,XY

46,XY

Testosterone
response to hCG

NA

Positive

Normal or reduced

Positive response

Reduced or absent

Gonadal biopsy

NA

Dysgenetic gonad

Ovotestis

Normal testis with
± Leydig cell
hyperplasia

Normal testis

Genital skin fibroblast
culture
AR assay, OR blood
DNA screening for
AR gene variants

Measure testosterone
precursors

Other testing

*As determined by ultrasound, MRI, or rectal examination.
AR, Androgen receptor; DSD, disorder of sex development; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; 21-­OH, 21-­hydroxylase; 17-­OHP, 17-­hydroxyprogesterone; NA, not applicable.
Adapted from Donohoue PA, Saenger PH. Ambiguous genitalia. In Finberg L, Kleinman RE, eds. Saunders Manual of Pediatric Practice, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2002: p. 874.

Table 628.6  Sources of Maternal-­Derived Androgens
ENDOGENOUS
Benign
Luteoma of pregnancy
Adrenal adenoma
Hyperreactio luteinalis
Thecoma/fibroma
Stromal hyperthecosis
Brenner tumor
Serous cystadenoma
Mature cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst)
Malignant
Metastatic carcinomas (Krukenberg tumor)
Sex-­cord stromal tumors—granulosa cell and Sertoli-­Leydig tumors
Adrenal cortical carcinoma
Cystadenocarcinoma
Hilar cell tumor
EXOGENOUS
Synthetic Androgens
Danazol
Progestins (medroxyprogesterone acetate)
Potassium-­sparing diuretics
From Auchus RJ, Chang AY. 46,XX DSD: the masculinised female. Best Pract Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2010;24:219–242. Table 2.

for the treatment of threatened abortion. These progestins have since
been replaced by nonvirilizing ones.
Infants with virilization and 46,XX chromosomes and caudal
anomalies have been reported for whom no virilizing agent could be

identified. In such instances, the disorder is usually associated with
other congenital defects, particularly of the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts. Y-­specific DNA sequences, including SRY, are absent. In one
case, a scrotal raphe and elevated testosterone levels were found, but
the cause remains unknown.

SF-­1 Pathogenic Variants

In a worldwide study of patients with 46,XX ovotesticular DSD,
a specific variant in SF-­1 was identified: p.Arg92Trp. Functional
studies showed that the variant probably interfered with inhibition
of testicular development. In one family with a maternally transmitted variant, the mother had early menopause. Multiple other SF-­1
variants have been reported to cause isolated ovarian insufficiency,
some associated with 46,XY DSDs in their offspring.

46,XX Testicular DSD

In this condition, also known as XX male, the gonads are testicular and
virilization is typically incomplete. Infertility and/or gonadal failure
may develop after childhood. Many cases are caused by translocation
of SRY sequences onto one of the X chromosomes, often paired with
duplication of SOX-­9. The appropriate sex of rearing may be difficult
to determine.

46,XX Gonadal Dysgenesis

These females typically present at puberty with normal female genitalia
and lack of breast development and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Normal müllerian structures are present, but ovaries are absent
or streaked.

Undetermined/Unknown

Rarely, 46,XX DSDs can be associated with other congenital anomalies,
especially those of the GU or GI tract, and are thus multifactorial in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
origin. These include cloacal exstrophy and MURCS association (müllerian hypoplasia, renal agenesis, and cervicothoracic somite abnormalities). Isolated deficiency of müllerian development is known as
Meyer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser syndrome.

3509

dysgenetic gonads. Wilms tumor usually occurs by 2 years of age.
Some cases also had unexplained obesity, raising the question of an
obesity-­associated gene in this region of chromosome 11 and naming the syndrome WAGRO.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Campomelic Syndrome

628.2 46,XY DSD
Patricia A. Donohoue
In this condition the genotype is XY but the external genitalia are
either not completely virilized, are ambiguous (atypical), or are
completely female. When gonads can be found, they typically contain testicular elements; their development ranges from rudimentary to normal. Because the process of normal virilization in the
fetus is so complex, it is not surprising that there are many varieties
and causes of 46,XY DSD. The etiology is not identified in up to
50% of cases.

DEFECTS IN TESTICULAR DIFFERENTIATION

The first step in male differentiation is conversion of the bipotential
gonad into a testis. In the XY fetus, if there is a deletion of the short
arm of the Y chromosome or of the SRY gene, male differentiation
does not occur. The phenotype is female; müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts are well developed because of the absence of AMH,
and gonads consist of undifferentiated streaks. By contrast, even
extreme deletions of the long arm of the Y chromosome (Yq−) have
been found in normally developed males, most of whom are azoospermic and have short stature. This indicates that the long arm of
the Y chromosome normally has genes that prevent these manifestations. In many syndromes in which the testes fail to differentiate,
Y chromosomes are morphologically normal on karyotyping.

Wilms Tumor-Suppressor Gene Pathogenic Variants:
Denys-­Drash, Frasier, and WAGR Syndromes

Denys-­Drash syndrome: The constellation of nephropathy with
atypical (ambiguous) genitalia and bilateral Wilms tumor is the major
phenotype of this syndrome. Most reported cases have been 46,XY.
Müllerian ducts are often present, indicating a global deficiency of
fetal testicular function. Patients with a 46,XX karyotype have normal
external genitalia. The onset of proteinuria in infancy progresses to
nephrotic syndrome and end-­stage renal failure by 3 years of age, with
focal or diffuse mesangial sclerosis being the most consistent histopathologic finding. Wilms tumor usually develops in children younger
than 2 years of age and is frequently bilateral. Gonadoblastomas have
also been reported.
Several pathogenic variants in WT1, located on chromosome 11p13,
have been found. WT1 functions as a tumor suppressor gene and a
transcription factor and is expressed in the genital ridge and fetal
gonads. Nearly all reported variants are near or within the zinc finger–coding region. One report found a zinc finger domain variant in
the WT1 alleles of a patient with no GU abnormalities, suggesting that
some cases of sporadic Wilms tumor may carry the WT1 pathogenic
variant.
Frasier syndrome: Different pathogenic variants in WT1, constitutional heterozygote variants at intron 9, have been described in Frasier
syndrome, a condition of nonspecific focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis, 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, and frequent gonadoblastoma, but without Wilms tumor.
WAGR syndrome: This acronym refers to a contiguous gene syndrome consisting of Wilms tumor, aniridia, GU malformations, and
retardation (WAGR). These children have a deletion of one copy
of chromosome 11p13, which may be visible on karyotype analysis. The deleted region encompasses the aniridia gene (PAX6) and
the Wilms tumor suppressor gene (WT1). Only the 46,XY patients
have genital abnormalities, ranging from cryptorchidism to severe
deficiency of virilization. Gonadoblastomas have developed in the

See Chapter 735.
This form of short-­limbed skeletal dysplasia is characterized by
anterior bowing of the femur and tibia, small, bladeless scapulae,
small thoracic cavities, and 11 pairs of ribs, along with malformations of other organs. It is usually lethal in early infancy. Approximately 75% of reported 46,XY patients exhibit a completely female
phenotype; the external and internal genitalia are female. Some
46,XY patients have ambiguous genitalia. The gonads appear to be
ovaries but histologically may contain elements of both ovaries and
testes.
The gene responsible for the condition is SOX9 and is on 17q24-­
q25. This gene is structurally related to SRY and directly regulates
development of the type II collagen gene (COL2A1). The same variants may result in different gonadal phenotypes. Gonadoblastoma
was reported in a patient with this condition. The inheritance is
autosomal dominant.

SF-­1 (Also Known as Ad4BP and NR5A1) Defects and
46,XY DSD

Adrenal insufficiency and 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis have been
described in patients with pathogenic variants in SF-­1. In some of
these patients, if the mother shares the SF-­1 variant, she has premature
ovarian insufficiency. SF-­1–related 46,XY DSD may also occur in the
absence of adrenal insufficiency and may resemble PAIS.
46,XY sex reversal has also been described in patients with deletions
of parts of autosomal loci on chromosomes 2q, 9p, and 10q.

XY Pure Gonadal Dysgenesis (Swyer Syndrome)

The designation pure distinguishes this condition from forms of
gonadal dysgenesis that are of chromosomal origin and associated with somatic anomalies. Affected patients have normal stature and a female phenotype, including vagina, uterus, and fallopian
tubes, but at pubertal age, breast development and menarche fail to
occur. None of the other phenotypic features associated with 45,X
(Turner syndrome) are present. Patients present at puberty with
hypergonadotropic primary amenorrhea. Familial cases suggest an
X-­linked or a sex-­limited dominant autosomal transmission. Most
of the patients examined have had pathogenic variants in SRY. The
gonads consist of almost totally undifferentiated streaks despite the
presence of a cytogenetically normal Y chromosome. The primitive
gonad cannot accomplish any testicular function, including suppression of müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts. There may be hilar
cells in the gonad capable of producing some androgens; accordingly, some virilization, such as clitoral enlargement, may occur
at the age of puberty. The streak gonads may undergo neoplastic
changes, such as gonadoblastomas and dysgerminomas, and should
be removed as soon as the diagnosis is established, regardless of the
age of the patient.
Pure gonadal dysgenesis also occurs in XX individuals.

XY Gonadal Agenesis Syndrome (Embryonic
Testicular Regression Syndrome)

In this rare syndrome, the external genitalia are slightly ambiguous but more nearly female. Hypoplasia of the labia; some degree
of labioscrotal fusion; a small, clitoris-­like phallus; and a perineal
urethral opening are present. No uterus, no gonadal tissue, and usually no vagina can be found. At the age of puberty, no sexual development occurs and gonadotropin levels are elevated. Most children
have been reared as females. In several patients with XY gonadal
agenesis in whom no gonads could be found on exploration, significant rises in testosterone followed stimulation with hCG, indicating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3510 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Leydig cell function somewhere. Siblings with the disorder are
known.
It is presumed that testicular tissue was active long enough during fetal life for AMH to inhibit development of müllerian ducts but
not long enough for testosterone production to result in virilization. In one patient, no deletion of the Y chromosome was found by
means of Y-­specific DNA probes. Testicular degeneration seems to
occur between the 8th and 12th fetal week. Regression of the testis
before the 8th week of gestation results in Swyer syndrome; between
the 14th and 20th weeks of gestation, it results in the rudimentary
testis syndrome; and after the 20th week, it results in anorchia.
In bilateral anorchia, sometimes referred to as vanishing testes
syndrome, testes are absent, but the male phenotype is complete;
it is presumed that tissue with fetal testicular function was active
during the critical period of genital differentiation but that sometime later it was damaged. Bilateral anorchia in identical twins
and unilateral anorchia in identical twins and in siblings suggest a
genetic predisposition. Coexistence of anorchia and gonadal agenesis syndrome in a sibship is evidence for a relationship between the
disorders. A retrospective review of urologic explorations revealed
absent testes in 21% of 691 testes. Of those, 73% had blind-­ending
cord structures with the suggested site of the vanishing testes being
the inguinal canal (59%), abdomen (21%), superficial inguinal ring
(18%), and scrotum (2%). It was suggested that the presence of
cord structures on laparoscopy should prompt inguinal exploration
because viable testicular tissue was found in four of these children.

DEFICIENCY OF TESTICULAR HORMONE
PRODUCTION

Several genetic defects have been delineated in the enzymatic synthesis
of testosterone by the fetal testis, and a defect in Leydig cell differentiation has been described. These defects produce 46,XY males with inadequate masculinization. Because levels of testosterone are normally low
before puberty, an hCG stimulation test may be needed in children to
assess the ability of the testes to synthesize testosterone.

Leydig Cell Aplasia

Patients with aplasia or hypoplasia of the Leydig cells usually have
female phenotypes, but there may be mild virilization. Testes, epididymis, and vas deferens are present; the uterus and fallopian
tubes are absent because of normal production of AMH. There is
no breast development at puberty, but pubic hair development may
be normal because of the production of adrenal androgens. Plasma
levels of testosterone are low and do not respond to hCG; LH levels
are elevated. The Leydig cells of the testes are absent or markedly
deficient. The defect may involve a lack of functional receptors for
LH. In children, hCG stimulation is necessary to differentiate the
condition from the AISs. There is male-­limited autosomal recessive
inheritance. The human LH/chorionic gonadotropin (CG) receptor is a member of the G-­protein–coupled superfamily of receptors
that contains seven transmembrane domains. Several inactivating
pathogenic variants of the LH/CG receptor have been described in
males with hypogonadism suspected of having Leydig cell hypoplasia or aplasia.
High serum LH and low FSH were noted in one male with hypogonadism owing to a pathogenic variant in the gene for the β-­subunit of
FSH (see Table 622.1).

Lipoid Adrenal Hyperplasia

See Chapter 616.
This is the most severe form of CAH; enlarged adrenal glands
result from accumulation of cholesterol and cholesterol esters. The
rate-­limiting process in steroidogenesis is the transport of free cholesterol through the cytosol to the inner mitochondrial membrane,
where the P450 side-­chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc; CYP11A1)
acts. Cholesterol transport into mitochondria is mediated by the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR). StAR is a 30-­kDa

protein essential for steroidogenesis and is encoded by a gene on
chromosome 8p11.2. The mitochondrial content of StAR increases
between 1 and 5 hours after ACTH stimulation, long after the acute
ACTH-­induced increase in steroidogenesis. This has led some to
suggest that extramitochondrial StAR might also be involved in
the acute response to ACTH. Most patients with lipoid CAH have
pathogenic variants in the gene encoding StAR, and a few have variants in CYP11A1.
All serum steroid levels are low or undetectable, whereas ACTH and
plasma renin levels are quite elevated. The phenotype is female in both
genetic females and males. Genetic males have no müllerian structures
because the testes can produce normal AMH but no steroid hormones.
These children present with acute adrenal crisis and salt wasting in
infancy. Most patients are 46,XY. In a few patients, ovarian steroidogenesis is present at puberty.
The regulatory role of StAR-­independent steroidogenesis is illustrated by 46,XX 4-­month-­old twins with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia.
One died at 15 months because of cardiac complications related to
coarctation of the aorta. The adrenal glands had characteristic lipid
deposits. The surviving twin had spontaneous puberty with feminization at 11.5 years and menarche at 13.8 years. When restudied at
the age of 15 years, a homozygous frameshift-­inactivating variant
in StAR was discovered. This supports the hypothesis that StAR-­
independent steroidogenesis was able to proceed until enough
intracellular lipid accumulated to damage steroidogenic activity.
Partial defects in only partially virilized males and delayed onset
of salt wasting have been described. Complete CYP11A1 defects
may be incompatible with life because only this enzyme can convert
cholesterol to pregnenolone, which then becomes progesterone,
a hormone essential for the maintenance of normal mammalian
pregnancy. Heterozygous variants in CYP11A1 were described in
a 4-­year-­old with 46,XY sex reversal and late-­onset form of lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia. At 6-­7 weeks of gestation, when maternal corpus luteum progesterone synthesis stops, the placenta, which does
not express StAR, produces progesterone by StAR-­independent steroidogenesis using the CYP11A1 enzyme system.

3β-­Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Deficiency

Males with this form of CAH (see Chapter 616) have various degrees
of hypospadias, with or without bifid scrotum and cryptorchidism,
and, rarely, a complete female phenotype. Affected infants usually
develop salt-­losing manifestations shortly after birth. Incomplete
defects, occasionally seen in males with premature pubarche, as well
as late-­onset nonclassic forms, have been reported. These children
have pathogenic variants of the gene for type II 3β-­hydroxysteroid
enzyme, resulting in impairment of steroidogenesis in the adrenals
and gonads; the impairment may be unequal between adrenals and
gonads. Normal pubertal changes in some males could be explained
by the normally present type I 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
present in many peripheral tissues. Infertility is frequent. There is
no correlation between degree of salt wasting and degree of phenotypic abnormality.

Deficiency of 17-­Hydroxylase/17,20-­Lyase

A single enzyme (CYP17A1) encoded by a single gene on chromosome 10q24.3 has both 17-­hydroxylase and 17,20-­lyase activities
in adrenal and gonadal tissues (see Chapter 616). Many different
pathogenic gene variants have been reported. Genetic males usually
have a complete female phenotype or, less often, various degrees of
undervirilization, from labioscrotal fusion to perineal hypospadias
and cryptorchidism. Pubertal development fails to occur in both
genetic sexes.
In the classical disorder, there is decreased synthesis of cortisol by
the adrenals and of sex steroids by the adrenals and gonads. Levels
of the steroid precursor with mineralocorticoid activity, deoxycorticosterone and corticosterone, are markedly increased and lead to the
hypertension and hypokalemia characteristic of this form of 46,XY

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development

3511

DSD. Although levels of cortisol are low, the elevated ACTH and corticosterone levels prevent symptomatic cortisol deficiency. The renin-­
aldosterone axis is suppressed because of the strong mineralocorticoid
effect of elevated deoxycorticosterone. Virilization does not occur at
puberty; levels of testosterone are low and those of gonadotropins are
increased. Because fetal production of AMH is normal, no müllerian
duct remnants are present. In XY phenotypic females, gonadectomy
and replacement therapy with hydrocortisone and sex steroids are
indicated.
The defect follows autosomal recessive inheritance. Affected XX
females are usually not detected until young adult life, when they fail to
experience normal pubertal changes and are found to have hypertension and hypokalemia. This condition should be suspected in patients
presenting with primary amenorrhea and hypertension whose chromosomal complement is either 46,XX or 46,XY.
Some patients originally described as having isolated 17,20 lyase
deficiency were subsequently shown to have a defect in the production
of DHT because of deficiency of enzymes in the alternative pathway of
DHT synthesis.

Deficiency of 17-­Ketosteroid Reductase

This enzyme, also called 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, catalyzes
the final step in testosterone biosynthesis. It is necessary to convert
androstenedione to testosterone, DHEA to androstenediol, and estrone
to estradiol. Deficiency of 17-­ketosteroid reductase in the fetal testis
causes the male fetus to have complete or near-­complete female phenotype. Müllerian ducts are absent, and a shallow vagina is present. The
diagnosis is based on the ratio of androstenedione to testosterone. In
prepubertal children, stimulation with hCG may be necessary to make
the diagnosis.
The defect is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. At least
four different types of 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase are recognized, each coded by genes on different chromosomes. Type III
is the enzyme responsible for testicular production of testosterone.
This defect is more common in a highly inbred Arab population in
Gaza than it is in other populations. The gene for the disorder is at
9q22 and is expressed only in the testes, where it converts androstenedione to testosterone. Most patients are diagnosed at puberty
because of virilization and the failure to menstruate. Testosterone
levels at puberty may approach normal, presumably as a result of
peripheral conversion of androstenedione to testosterone; at this
time, some patients may spontaneously adopt a male gender role.
Type I 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, encoded by a gene on
chromosome 17q21, converts estrone to estradiol and is found in the
placenta, ovary, testis, liver, prostate, adipose tissue, and endometrium.
Type II, whose gene is on chromosome 16q24, reverses the reactions of
types I and III (converting testosterone to androstenedione and estrone
to estradiol, respectively). Type IV is similar in action to type II. A late-­
onset form of 17-­ketosteroid reductase deficiency presents as gynecomastia in young adult males.

Persistent Müllerian Duct Syndrome

In this disorder, there is persistence of müllerian (paramesonephric) duct derivatives in otherwise completely virilized males. Cases
have been reported in siblings and identical twins. Cryptorchidism
is present in 80% of affected males, and during surgery for this or
inguinal hernia, the condition is discovered when a fallopian tube
and uterus are found. The degree of müllerian development is variable and may be asymmetric. Testicular function is normal in most,
but testicular degeneration has been reported. Some affected males
acquire testicular tumors after puberty. In a study of 38 families,
16 families had defects in the AMH gene, located on the short arm
of chromosome 19. Affected patients had low AMH levels. In 16
families with high AMH levels, the defect was in the AMH type
II receptor gene, with 10 of 16 having identical 27-­bp deletions on
exon 10 in at least one allele.

Fig. 628.4 5α-­Reductase deficiency. (From Wales JKH, Wit JM, Rogol

AD. Pediatric Endocrinology and Growth, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003: p. 165.)

Treatment consists of removal of as many of the müllerian structures as possible without causing damage to the testis, epididymis, or
vas deferens.

DEFECTS IN ANDROGEN ACTION
Dihydrotestosterone Deficiency

Decreased production of DHT in utero results in marked ambiguity of
external genitalia of affected males. Biosynthesis and peripheral action
of testosterone are normal.
The phenotype commonly associated with this condition results in
males who have a small phallus, bifid scrotum, urogenital sinus with
perineal hypospadias, and a blind vaginal pouch (Fig. 628.4). Testes are
in the inguinal canals or labioscrotal folds and are normal histologically. There are no müllerian structures. Wolffian (mesonephric) structures—the vas deferens, epididymis, and seminal vesicles—are present.
Most affected patients have been identified initially as females but at
puberty, virilization occurs; the phallus enlarges, the testes descend and
grow normally, and spermatogenesis occurs. There is no gynecomastia.
Beard growth is scanty, acne is absent, the prostate is small, and recession of the temporal hairline fails to occur. Virilization of the wolffian
duct is caused by the action of testosterone itself, although masculinization of the urogenital sinus and external genitals depends on the action
of DHT during the critical period of fetal masculinization. Growth of
facial hair and of the prostate also appears to be DHT dependent.
The adult height reached is close to that of the father and other male
siblings. There is significant phenotypic heterogeneity. This has led to
a classification of such patients into five types of steroid 5α-­reductase
deficiency (SRD).
Several different gene defects of SRD5A2 (the 5α-­reductase type 2
gene leading to SRD) have been identified, located on the short arm of
chromosome 2, in patients from throughout the world. Familial clusters have been reported from the Dominican Republic, Turkey, Papua
New Guinea, Brazil, Mexico, and the Middle East. There is no reliable
correlation between genotype and phenotype.
The disorder is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait but is limited to males; normal homozygous females with normal fertility indicate that in females DHT has no clinically significant role in sexual
differentiation or in ovarian function later in life. The clinical diagnosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3512 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
should be made as early as possible in infancy. It is important to distinguish this from PAIS because patients with PAIS are far less sensitive
to androgen than are patients with SRD. The biochemical diagnosis of
SRD is based on finding normal serum testosterone levels, normal or
low DHT levels with markedly increased basal and especially hCG-­
stimulated testosterone:DHT ratios (>17), and high ratios of urinary
etiocholanolone to androsterone. Children with androgen insensitivity have normal hepatic 5α reduction and thus a normal ratio of tetrahydrocortisol to 5α-­tetrahydrocortisol, as opposed to those with SRD.
It is important to note that many, but not all, children with SRD
reared as females in childhood have changed to a male role around
the time of puberty. It appears that exposures to testosterone in utero,
neonatally, and at puberty have variable contributions to the formation
of male gender identity. Infants with this condition should be reared as
males whenever practical. Treatment of male infants with DHT results
in phallic enlargement.
Another cause of DHT deficiency is a block in an alternative pathway of DHT synthesis. Patients previously thought to have 46,XY DSD
because of isolated 17,20-­lyase deficiency have subsequently been characterized as having pathogenic variants in AKR1C2 (3α-­reductase type
3) or both AKR1C2 and AKR1C4 (3α-­reductase type 4) (see Fig. 628.1).
These findings showed that both the classical and alternative pathways
to DHT must be intact for normal prenatal virilization.

Androgen Insensitivity Syndromes

The AISs are the most common forms of male DSDs, occurring with
an estimated frequency of 1/20,000 genetic males. This group of heterogeneous X-­linked recessive disorders is caused by more than 150
different pathogenic variants in the androgen receptor gene, located
on Xq11-­12: single point variants result in amino acid substitutions or
premature stop codons, frameshift and premature terminations, gene
deletions, and splice-­site variants.

testes and normal or elevated testosterone and LH levels are common
to all such children (Figs. 628.5 and 628.6).
In complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), an extreme
form of failure of virilization, genetic males appear female at birth and
are invariably reared accordingly. The external genitalia are female. The
vagina ends blindly in a pouch, and the uterus is absent because of the
normal production and effect of AMH by the testes. In ∼30% of patients,
unilateral or bilateral fallopian tube remnants are found. The testes are usually intraabdominal but may descend into the inguinal canal; they consist
largely of seminiferous tubules. At puberty, there is normal development
of breasts and the habitus is female, but menstruation does not occur and
sexual hair is absent. Adult heights are commensurate with those of normal males despite profound congenital deficiency of androgenic effects.
The testes of affected adult patients produce normal male levels of
testosterone, which are converted to normal levels of DHT. Failure
of normal male differentiation during fetal life reflects a defective
response to androgens at that time. The absence of androgenic effects
is caused by a striking resistance to the action of endogenous or exogenous testosterone at the cellular level.
Prepubertal phenotypic females with this disorder are often detected
when inguinal masses prove to be testes or when a testis is unexpectedly found during herniorrhaphy. Approximately 1–2% of females with
an inguinal hernia prove to have this disorder. In infants, elevated LH
levels should suggest the diagnosis. In older children and adults, amenorrhea is the usual presenting symptom. In prepubertal children, the
condition must be differentiated from other types of XY undervirilized males in which there is complete feminization. These include XY
gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome), true agonadism, Leydig cell
aplasia including LH receptor defects, and 17-­ketosteroid reductase
deficiency. All these conditions, unlike CAIS, are characterized by low

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical spectrum of patients with AISs, all of whom have a 46,XY
chromosomal complement, range from phenotypic females (in complete AIS), to males with various forms of ambiguous genitalia and
undervirilization (partial AIS, or clinical syndromes such as Reifenstein syndrome), to phenotypically normal-­
appearing males with
infertility. In addition to normal 46,XY chromosomes, the presence of

A

B

Fig. 628.5 A, Partial androgen insensitivity with descended testes in
bifid labioscrotal folds. B, Less severe partial androgen insensitivity with
severe hypospadias and maldescent of testes. (From Wales JKH, Wit
JM, Rogol AD. Pediatric Endocrinology and Growth, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003: p. 165.)

Fig. 628.6 Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome at adolescence,

male sex of rearing. Note gynecomastia from peripheral aromatase
conversion of testosterone to estrogen. Abundant pubic hair implies
only partial resistance. (From Wales JKH, Wit JM, Rogol AD. Pediatric
Endocrinology and Growth, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003: p.
165.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
Table 628.7  Causes of a Partial Androgen Insensitivity
Syndrome–Like Phenotype
DEFECTS IN ANDROGEN PRODUCTION
Partial gonadal dysgenesis
Pathogenic variants in SRY, NR5A1, WT1
Pathogenic variants of the luteinizing hormone receptor
Biosynthetic enzyme deficiencies
17,20-­Lyase deficiency
P450 oxidoreductase deficiency
17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency type 3
5α-­Reductase deficiency type 2
GENETIC
Klinefelter syndrome
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
Denys-­Drash syndrome
Frasier syndrome
PAIS
Pathogenic variants of the androgen receptor gene
Normal androgen receptor gene with fetal growth restriction
NR5A1, Nuclear receptor subfamily 5 A1; PAIS, partial androgen insensitivity syndrome;
SRY, sex-­determining region Y; WT1, Wilms tumor 1.
From Hughes IA, Davies JD, Bunch TI, et al. Androgen insensitivity syndrome. Lancet.
2012;380:1419–1428. Panel 1.

3513

activity in addition to the production of estradiol contributes to the
feminization of these women.
The psychosexual and surgical management of patients with PAIS is
extremely complex and depends in large part on the presenting phenotype. Osteopenia is recognized as a late feature of AIS.
Molecular analyses have suggested that phenotype may depend in
part on somatic mosaicism of the androgen receptor gene. The presence of mosaicism shifts the phenotype to a higher degree of virilization than expected from the genotype of the mutant allele alone.
Genetic counseling is difficult in families with androgen receptor
gene variants. In addition to lack of genotype-­phenotype correlations,
there is a high rate (27%) of de novo pathogenic variants in families.
Sex hormone–binding globulin reduction after exogenous androgen
administration (stanozolol) correlates with the severity of the receptor
defect and may become a useful clinical tool. Successful therapy with
supplemental androgens has been reported in patients with PAIS and
various variants of the androgen receptor in the DNA-­binding domain
and the ligand-­binding domain.
Pathogenic variants in androgen receptors are also reported in
patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy in whom clinical
manifestations including testicular atrophy, infertility, gynecomastia,
and elevated LH, FSH, and estradiol levels usually manifest between
the third and fifth decades of life.

UNDETERMINED CAUSES
levels of testosterone as neonates and during adult life and by failure to
respond to hCG during the prepubertal years.
Although patients with CAIS have unambiguously female external
genitals at birth, those with PAIS have a wide variety of phenotypic presentations, ranging from perineoscrotal hypospadias, bifid scrotum, and
cryptorchidism to extreme undervirilization appearing as clitoromegaly
and labial fusion. Some forms of PAIS are known as specific syndromes.
Patients with Reifenstein syndrome have incomplete virilization characterized by hypogonadism, severe hypospadias, and gynecomastia (see Fig.
628.6). Gilbert-­Dreyfus and Lubs syndromes are also classified as PAISs.
In all cases, abnormalities in the androgen receptor gene have been identified. Table 628.7 lists other causes of a PAIS-­like syndrome.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of patients with PAIS may be particularly difficult in
infancy. The postnatal surge in testosterone and LH is diminished
in those with CAIS but not in those with PAIS. In some, especially
those sufficiently virilized in infancy, the diagnosis is not suspected
until puberty, when there is inadequate virilization with lack of facial
hair or voice change and the appearance of gynecomastia. Azoospermia and infertility are common. Androgen receptor defects are
recognized in adults who have a small phallus and testes and infertility. A single–amino acid substitution in the androgen receptor was
reported in a large Chinese family in whom some affected members
were fertile whereas others had gynecomastia and/or hypospadias.

Treatment and Prognosis

In patients with CAIS whose sexual orientation is unambiguously
female, the testes should be removed because they have malignant
potential. Historically, they were removed as soon as they were discovered. However, there is a trend to allow the testes to remain because
they are the source of estradiol (through conversion from testosterone),
and this results in normally timed puberty with the individual’s endogenous hormones. Careful monitoring for testicular masses should be
performed, and removal of the testes is advised in early adulthood.
Laparoscopic removal of Y chromosome–bearing gonads has been
performed in patients with AIS and in those with gonadal dysgenesis.
In ∼30% of patients, malignant tumors, usually seminomas, develop
by 50 years of age. Several teenage females developed seminomas.
Replacement therapy with estrogens is indicated at the age of puberty
in those whose testes were removed in childhood.
Normal breasts develop in affected females who have not had their
testes removed by the age of puberty. The absence of androgenic

Other XY undervirilized males display great variability of the external and internal genitalia and various degrees of phallic and müllerian development. The testes may be histologically normal or
rudimentary, or there may only be one. No recognized cause is identified in up to 50% of children with 46,XY DSDs. Some ambiguity of
the genitalia is associated with a wide variety of chromosomal aberrations, which must always be considered in the differential diagnosis, the most common being 45,X/46,XY syndrome (see Chapter
626.1). It may be necessary to karyotype several tissues to establish
mosaicism. Other complex genetic syndromes, many resulting from
single-­gene variants, are associated with varying degrees of ambiguity of the genitalia, particularly in the male. These entities must be
identified by the associated extragenital malformations.
Smith-­L emli-­Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the sterol Δ7-­reductase gene
located on chromosome 11q12-­q13. It is characterized by prenatal
and postnatal growth restriction, microcephaly, ptosis, anteverted
nares, broad alveolar ridges, syndactyly of the second to third toes,
and severe cognitive impairment (see Chapter 106.3). Its incidence
is 1 in 20,000-­30,000 live births in populations of Northern and
Central European origin; 70% are male. Genotypic males usually
have genital ambiguity and, occasionally, partial sex reversal with
female genital ambiguity or complete sex reversal with female external genitalia. Müllerian duct derivatives are usually absent. Affected
46,XX patients have normal genitalia. Two types of Smith-­Lemli-­
Opitz syndrome have been recognized: the classical form (type I)
described earlier and the acrodysgenital syndrome, which is usually
lethal within 1 year and is associated with severe malformations,
postaxial polydactyly, and extremely abnormal external genitalia
(type II). Pyloric stenosis is associated with Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz
syndrome type I and Hirschsprung disease with type II. Cleft palate, skeletal abnormalities, and one case of a lipoma of the pituitary
gland have been seen in type II cases. Some authors believe in a
spectrum of disease severity rather than in the previous classification. Low plasma cholesterol with elevated 7-­dehydrocholesterol, its
precursor, are found in types I and II, and the levels do not correlate with severity. Maternal apolipoprotein E values do seem to
correlate with severity. The most common prenatal expression of
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome is intrauterine growth retardation
(see Chapter 106.3 for treatment).
46,XY DSD subjects also have been described in siblings with α-­
thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3514 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

628.3 Ovotesticular DSD
Patricia A. Donohoue
In ovotesticular DSD, both ovarian and testicular tissues are present,
either in the same or in opposite gonads. Affected patients have ambiguous genitalia, varying from normal female genitalia with only slight
enlargement of the clitoris to almost normal male external genitalia
(see Fig. 628.3A).
Approximately 70% of all patients have a 46,XX karyotype.
Ninety-­
seven percent of affected patients of African descent
are 46,XX. Less than 10% of persons with ovotesticular DSD are
46,XY. Approximately 20% have 46,XX/46,XY mosaicism. Half of
these are derived from more than one zygote and are chimeras (chi
46,XX/46,XY). The presence of paternal and both maternal alleles
for some blood groups is demonstrated. An ovotesticular DSD chimera, 46,XX/46,XY, was reported as resulting from embryo amalgamation after in vitro fertilization. Each embryo was derived from
an independent, separately fertilized ovum.
Examination of 46,XX ovotesticular DSD patients with Y-­specific
probes has detected less than 10% with a portion of the Y chromosome, including the SRY gene. Ovotesticular DSD is usually sporadic,
but several siblings have been reported. The cause of many cases of
ovotesticular DSD is unknown.
The most frequently encountered gonad in ovotesticular DSD is
an ovotestis, which may be bilateral. If unilateral, the contralateral
gonad is usually an ovary but may be a testis. The ovarian tissue
is normal, but the testicular tissue is dysgenetic. The presence and
function of testicular tissue can be determined by measuring basal
and hCG-­stimulated testosterone levels along with AMH levels.
Patients who are highly virilized and have had adequate testicular function with no uterus are usually reared as males. If a uterus
exists, virilization is often mild and testicular function minimal;
assignment of female sex may be indicated. Selective removal of
gonadal tissue inconsistent with sex of rearing may be indicated. In
a few families, 46,XY ovotesticular DSD subjects and 46,XX males
have been described in the same sibship.
Defects in R-­Spondin1, encoded by the RSPO1 gene, have been
described in 46,XX ovotesticular DSD. Defects in SF-­1 have been
described in both XX and XY ovotesticular DSD.
Pregnancies with living offspring have been reported in 46,XX ovotesticular DSD individuals reared as females, but very few males with
ovotesticular DSD have fathered children. Approximately 5% of patients
will develop gonadoblastomas, dysgerminomas, or seminomas.

DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF DISORDERS
OF SEX DEVELOPMENT

In the neonate, ambiguity of the genitals requires immediate attention to decide on the sex of rearing as early in life as possible. The
family of the infant needs to be informed of the child’s condition as
early, completely, compassionately, and honestly as possible. Caution must be used to avoid feelings of guilt, shame, and discomfort.
Guidance needs to be provided to alleviate both short-­term and
long-­term concerns and to allow the child to grow up in a completely supportive environment. The initial care is best provided by
a team of professionals that includes neonatologists and pediatric
specialists, endocrinologists, radiologists, surgeons/urologists, psychologists, and geneticists, all of whom remain focused foremost
on the needs of the child. Management of the potential psychologic
upheaval that these disorders can generate in the child or the family is of paramount importance and requires physicians and other
healthcare professionals with sensitivity, training, and experience
in this field.
While awaiting the results of chromosomal analysis, pelvic ultrasonography is indicated to determine the presence of a uterus and

ovaries. Presence of a uterus and absence of palpable gonads usually suggest a virilized XX female; however, as described previously,
these structures may also be found in 46,XY DSD. A search for the
source of virilization should be undertaken; this includes studies of
adrenal hormones to rule out varieties of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and studies of androgens and estrogens occasionally may be
necessary to rule out aromatase deficiency. Virilized XX females
are generally (but not always) reared as females even when highly
virilized.
The absence of a uterus, with or without palpable gonads, often indicates an undervirilized male and an XY karyotype. Measurements of
levels of gonadotropins, testosterone, AMH, and DHT are necessary
to determine whether testicular production of androgen is present
and is normal. Undervirilized males who are totally feminized may be
reared as females. Certain significantly feminized infants, such as those
with 5α-­reductase deficiency, may be reared as males because these
children virilize normally at puberty. Sixty percent of individuals with
5α-­reductase deficiency assigned as female in infancy live as males as
adults. An infant with a comparable degree of feminization resulting
from an androgen receptor defect, such as CAIS, may be successfully
reared as a female.
When receptor disorders are suspected in the XY male with a
small phallus (micropenis), a course of three monthly IM injections
of testosterone enanthate (25-­50 mg) may assist in the differential
diagnosis of androgen insensitivity and in the treatment of the small
phallus.
In some mammals, the female exposed to androgens prenatally or
in early postnatal life exhibits nontraditional sexual behavior in adult
life. Most, but not all, females who have undergone fetal masculinization from CAH or from maternal progestin therapy have female sexual
identity, although during childhood they may appear to prefer male
playmates and activities over female playmates and feminine play with
dolls in mothering roles.
In the past it was thought that surgical treatment of ambiguous
genitalia to create a female appearance, particularly when a vagina
is present, was more successful than construction of male genitalia.
Considerable controversy exists regarding these decisions. Sexual
functioning is to a large extent more dependent on neurohormonal
and behavioral factors than the physical appearance and functionality of the genitalia. Similarly, controversy exists regarding the timing of the performance of invasive and definitive procedures, such
as surgery. Whenever possible without endangering the physical or
psychologic health of the child, an expert multidisciplinary team
should consider deferring elective surgical repairs and gonadectomies until the child can participate in the informed consent for
the procedure. One study of children (59 males and 18 females)
with gender dysphoria but without documentation of genomic or
enzymologic abnormalities indicated that most of these children no
longer have gender dysphoria after completion of puberty. Among
those who do, homosexuality and bisexuality are the most frequent
diagnoses.
For patients with DSD who have Y-­
chromosome material
and intraabdominal gonads, gonadectomy is generally recommended because of the risk of gonadal tumors, many of which are
malignant.
The pediatrician, pediatric endocrinologist, and psychologist, along
with the appropriate additional specialists, should provide ongoing
compassionate, supportive care to the patient and the patient’s family
throughout childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Support groups
are available for families and patients with many of the conditions
discussed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

Section 6

Diabetes Mellitus in
Children
Chapter 629

Diabetes Mellitus

3515

expressing human leukocyte antigens (HLAs). Autoantibodies to β-­
cell antigens, including islet cell cytoplasm (ICA), insulin autoantibody
(IAA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), islet antigen 2 (IA-­2A, formerly ICA512), and zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8A), are detected in serum
from affected subjects. These can be detected months to years before the
clinical onset of T1DM. In some children and adolescents with apparent
T1DM, the β-­cell destruction is not immune mediated. This subtype of
diabetes occurs in patients of African or Asian origin and is distinct from
known causes of β-­cell destruction such as drugs or chemicals, viruses,
mitochondrial gene defects, pancreatectomy, and ionizing radiation.
These individuals may have ketoacidosis, but they have extensive periods of remission with variable insulin deficiency, similar to patients with
T2DM. Patients with T1DM require lifelong treatment with insulin.

TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS

629.1 Classification of Diabetes Mellitus
David R. Weber
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common chronic metabolic disease characterized by hyperglycemia as a cardinal biochemical feature. The major forms
of diabetes are differentiated by insulin deficiency versus insulin resistance: type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) results from deficiency of insulin
secretion because of pancreatic β-­cell damage; type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) is a consequence of insulin resistance occurring at the level of
skeletal muscle, liver, and adipose tissue, with various degrees of β-­cell
impairment. T1DM is the most common endocrine metabolic disorder
of childhood and adolescence, with important consequences for physical and emotional development. Individuals with T1DM confront serious
lifestyle alterations, including an absolute daily requirement for exogenous insulin, the need to monitor their own glucose level, and the need
to pay attention to dietary intake. Morbidity and mortality stem from a
constant potential for acute metabolic derangements and from long-­term
complications. Potential acute complications include the development
of hypoglycemia related to insulin excess or hyperglycemic ketoacidosis
from insulin deficiency. Long-­term complications typically manifest in
adulthood and are related to the adverse effects of chronic hyperglycemia and associated metabolic abnormalities on tissues and organ systems.
This can result in microvascular diseases such as retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy and macrovascular complications such as ischemic
heart disease and arterial obstruction with gangrene of the extremities.
DM is not a single entity, but rather a heterogeneous group of disorders in which there are distinct genetic patterns and other etiologic
and pathophysiologic mechanisms that lead to impairment of glucose
tolerance through deficient insulin production or action. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) has proposed a diabetes classification
system that includes four categories: type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes,
other specific types, and gestational diabetes. An expanded list of diabetes etiologies is provided in Table 629.1. The current criteria for the
diagnosis of diabetes are provided in Table 629.2. A thorough clinical
history and physical exam are often sufficient to determine the etiology; however, in some cases additional testing may be required.

TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS

Formerly called insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) or juvenile
diabetes, T1DM is characterized by low or absent levels of endogenously
produced insulin and by dependence on exogenous insulin to prevent
development of ketoacidosis, an acute life-­threatening complication of
T1DM. The natural history includes four distinct stages: (1) preclinical β-­
cell autoimmunity with progressive defect of insulin secretion, (2) onset
of clinical diabetes, (3) transient remission honeymoon period, and (4)
established diabetes during which there may occur acute and/or chronic
complications and decreased life expectancy. The onset occurs predominantly in childhood, with a median age of 7-­15 years, but it may present
at any age. The incidence of T1DM varies markedly across the world but
has increased in nearly all parts of the world over recent decades (Fig.
629.1). Both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors contribute
to the pathogenesis. Susceptibility to T1DM is genetically controlled by
alleles of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II genes

Formerly known as adult-­
onset diabetes mellitus or non–insulin-­
dependent diabetes mellitus, T2DM develops because of insulin resistance
and progressive non-­autoimmune β-­cell failure. There is a strong heritable component to T2DM, although the genetic basis remains poorly
understood. Population-­based studies have linked T2DM risk with polymorphisms in a large number of genes related to insulin secretion, insulin action, energy expenditure, and birthweight; however, the collective
contribution of these variants to overall T2DM risk remains low at <20%.
Although T2DM has long been the most prevalent form of diabetes in
adults, the rise in childhood obesity over the past few decades has led to a
markedly increased incidence of this disease in children and adolescents.
Pediatric T2DM accounts for most of the new cases of diabetes in high-­
risk populations such as obese adolescents of Black or Hispanic population ancestry (see Chapter 65). Childhood-­onset T2DM differs from adult
disease in that it is associated with a more rapid decline in β-­cell function
and the earlier development of T2DM-­related complications.
The presentation of T2DM is typically more insidious than that with
T1DM. In contrast to patients with T1DM, who are usually ill at the time
of diagnosis and whose presentation rarely spans more than a few weeks,
children with T2DM often seek medical care because of excessive weight
gain and fatigue as a result of insulin resistance and/or the incidental
finding of glycosuria during routine physical examination. A history of
polyuria and polydipsia is not always a cardinal clinical feature in these
patients. Acanthosis nigricans (dark pigmentation of skin creases in
the nape of the neck especially), a sign of insulin resistance, is present
in the majority of patients with T2DM and is accompanied by a relative
hyperinsulinemia at the time of the diagnosis. However, as the disease
progresses, β-­cell function becomes increasingly impaired such that children with advanced T2DM often present in diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
Healthy lifestyle interventions and treatment with metformin remain
the cornerstones of T2DM treatment in children and adolescents. Liraglutide (a glucagon-­like peptide-­1 receptor agonist) is approved in children ≥10 years and may have an additional benefit of slowing weight gain.
Insulin therapy is required for patients who present with severe hyperglycemia and for those patients in whom hyperglycemia worsens in spite of
lifestyle modification and noninsulin pharmacologic management.

OTHER SPECIFIC TYPES OF DIABETES
Monogenic Diabetes

The term monogenic diabetes is used to refer to a heterogeneous group of
single-­gene disorders resulting in impaired insulin secretion. This category encompasses maturity-­onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and
transient and permanent neonatal diabetes (TND or PND). Characteristics of monogenic diabetes can include age of onset before 6 months
(for TND or PND), development of hyperglycemia before 25 years of
age, and strong family history of diabetes. Monogenic etiologies are
estimated to comprise anywhere from 1% to 10% of all diabetes cases,
with the uncertainty related to the clinical difficulty in differentiating
these cases from T1DM and T2DM. Monogenic forms of diabetes may
present with hyperglycemia, and consequent polyuria and polydipsia, or
may be diagnosed simply by routine screening. Extrapancreatic manifestations vary by genetic defect (see Table 629.1 and Chapter 629.4) and
can include hepatic, renal, and central nervous system (CNS) manifestations. Treatment is guided by genetic diagnosis and clinical course, with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3516 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.1  Etiologic Classifications of Diabetes Mellitus
I. TYPE 1 DIABETES (Β-­CELL DESTRUCTION ULTIMATELY LEADING
TO COMPLETE INSULIN DEFICIENCY)
A. Immune Mediated
B. Idiopathic
II. TYPE 2 DIABETES (VARIABLE COMBINATIONS OF INSULIN
RESISTANCE AND INSULIN DEFICIENCY)
A. Typical
B. Atypical
III. OTHER SPECIFIC TYPES
A. Genetic Defects Of β-­Cell Function (Monogenic Diabetes)
1.	Neonatal diabetes
a.	Pathogenic variants leading to transient neonatal diabetes
(KCNJ11, ABCC8, 6q24 overexpression, INS, ZFP57,
SLC2A2 HNF1β)
b.	Pathogenic variants leading to permanent neonatal
diabetes (KCNJ11, ABCC8, INS, GATA6, EIF2AK3, GCK,
PTF1A, FOXP3, GLIS3, PDX1, SLC2A2, SLC19A2, GATA4,
NEUROD1, NEUROG3, NKX2-­2, RFX5, IER3IP1, MNX1)
2.	MODY (maturity-­onset diabetes of the young) syndromes
a.	MODY 1 chromosome 20, HNF4α
b.	MODY 2 chromosome 7, GCK
c.	MODY 3 chromosome 12q24.2, HNF1α, TCF-­1
d.	MODY 4 chromosome 13q12.1, IPF-­1 (PDX1)
e.	MODY 5 chromosome 17, HNF1β, TCF-­2
f.	MODY 6 chromosome 2q32, NEUROD1
g.	MODY 7 chromosome 2p25, KLF11
h.	MODY 8 chromosome 9q34, CEL
i.	MODY 9 chromosome 7q32, PAX4
j.	MODY 10 chromosome 11p15.5, INS
k.	MODY 11 chromosome 8p23, BLK
l.	MODY 12 chromosome 11p15, ABCC8
m.	MODY 13 chromosome 11p15, KCNJ11
n.	MODY 14 chromosome 3p14, APPL1
3.	Mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants (includes one form
of Wolfram syndrome, Pearson syndrome, Kearns-­Sayre, and
maternally inherited diabetes and deafness)
4. Wolfram syndrome—DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes
mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness):
a. WFS1-­Wolframin—chromosome 4p
b. Wolfram locus 2—chromosome 4q22-­24
c. Wolfram mitochondrial
5.	Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia and diabetes

D. Other Autoimmune Syndromes Associated With Diabetes
1.	IPEX (immunodysfunction, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy,
X-­linked)
2.	Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndromes (APS)
a.	APS-­1 (APCED)
b.	APS-­2
3.	Stiff person syndrome
4.	Anti-­insulin receptor antibodies
E. Drug Or Chemical Induced
1.	Antirejection—cyclosporine, sirolimus
2.	Glucocorticoids (with impaired insulin secretion; e.g., cystic
fibrosis)
3.	l-­Asparaginase
4.	β-­Adrenergic blockers
5.	Vacor (rodenticide)
6.	Phenytoin (Dilantin)
7.	α-­Interferon
8.	Diazoxide
9.	Nicotinic acid
10.	Pentamidine
11.	Immune checkpoint inhibitors (immune mediated)
F. Diseases of Exocrine Pancreas
1.	Cystic fibrosis
2.	Trauma/pancreatectomy
3.	Pancreatitis/ionizing radiation
4.	Hemochromatosis
5.	Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
G. Infections
1.	Congenital rubella
2.	Cytomegalovirus
3.	Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
H. Endocrinopathies Associated With Diabetes
1.	Cushing (hypercortisolism)
2.	Acromegaly (growth hormone excess)
3.	Pheochromocytoma
4.	Glucagonoma
5.	Somatostatinoma
6.	Aldosteronoma
IV. GESTATIONAL DIABETES

B. Genetic Defects of Insulin Action
1.	Type A insulin resistance
2.	Donohue syndrome
3.	Rabson-­Mendenhall syndrome
4.	Lipoatrophic diabetes syndromes
C. Other Genetic Syndromes Associated With Diabetes (Insulin
Resistance Or Deficiency)
1.	Down syndrome
2.	Turner syndrome
3.	Klinefelter syndrome
4. Prader-­Willi syndrome
5.	Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
6.	Alström syndrome
7. Werner syndrome
8.	Friedreich ataxia
Modified from Sperling MA, Tamborlane WV, Battelino T, et al. Diabetes mellitus. In: Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Box 19-­1.

some forms being responsive to oral sulfonylureas and others requiring
insulin replacement. Children diagnosed with diabetes before 6 months of
age should have genetic testing for TND/PND, and older individuals with
diabetes not characteristic of T1DM or T2DM in the setting of a family
history of diabetes should have genetic testing for monogenic forms of diabetes. A comparison of the four types of diabetes is noted in Table 629.3.

In organ transplantation survivors, there is a linkage between cyclosporine and tacrolimus and post-­transplantation DM, ascribed to a number of mechanisms. Certain genetic syndromes, including those with
abnormalities of the insulin receptor or the immune system, are also
included in this category.

OTHER ETIOLOGIES OF DIABETES

The term prediabetes is used to identify individuals with abnormalities in blood glucose homeostasis who are at increased risk for the
development of diabetes (see Table 629.2). Prediabetes is defined
by impaired fasting glucose (IFG, fasting glucose 100-­125 mg/dL

Examples include diabetes secondary to exocrine pancreatic diseases
(cystic fibrosis), other endocrine diseases (Cushing syndrome), infection, and ingestion of certain drugs or poisons (the rodenticide Vacor).

PREDIABETES

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
Table 629.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Dysglycemia and
Diabetes Mellitus
DYSGLYCEMIA

DIABETES MELLITUS

IMPAIRED FASTING GLUCOSE
Fasting (at least 8 hr) plasma
glucose 100-­125 mg/dL (5.6-­
7.0 mmol/L)

Fasting (at least 8 hr) plasma
glucose ≥126 mg/dL
(7.0 mmol/L)
Or

IMPAIRED GLUCOSE TOLERANCE
2-­hr plasma glucose during
2-­hr plasma glucose during
OGTT ≥140 mg/dL
OGTT ≥200 mg/dL
(7.8 mmol/L), but <200 mg/dL
(11.1 mmol/L)
(11.1 mmol/L)
Or
PREDIABETES
Hemoglobin A1c 5.7–6.4% (39-­
47 mmol/mol)

Hemoglobin A1c ≥6.5% (48 mmol/
mol)
Or
Symptoms* of diabetes mellitus
plus random or casual
plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL
(11.1 mmol/L)†

*Symptoms include polyuria, polydipsia, and unexplained weight loss with glucosuria
and ketonuria.
†Results should be confirmed by repeat testing if in absence of unequivocal

hyperglycemia.
OGTT, Oral glucose tolerance test.
Adapted from the Report of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification
of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care. 1999;20(Suppl 1):S5; with data from American
Diabetes Association. Standards in Medical Care of Diabetes – 2017. Diabetes Care.
2017;40(Suppl 1):S11–S24.

<5 per 100,000

10 to <20 per 100,000

≥30 per 100,000

5 to <10 per 100,00

20 to <30 per 100,000

No data available

Fig. 629.1 Map of age-­sex standardized incidence rates (per 100,000)

from publications of type 1 diabetes in children age under 15 yr. (From
Patterson CC, Karuranga S, Salpea P, et al. Worldwide estimates of incidence, prevalence and mortality of type 1 diabetes in children and
adolescents: results from the International Diabetes Federation Diabetes Atlas, 9th edition. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2019;157:107842. Fig 1.)

[5.6-­6.9 mmol/L]), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT, 2 hours postprandial glucose 140-­199 mg/dL [7.8-­11 mmol/L]), or hemoglobin A1c
(HbA1c) values of 5.7–6.4% (39-­47 mmol/mol). A fasting glucose concentration of 99 mg/dL (5.5 mmol/L) is the upper limit of normal. This
choice is near the level above which acute-­phase insulin secretion is
lost in response to intravenous administration of glucose and is associated with a progressively greater risk of the development of microvascular and macrovascular complications. Many individuals with IFG are
euglycemic in their daily lives and may have normal or nearly normal
HbA1c levels. Individuals with IFG often manifest hyperglycemia only
when challenged with the oral glucose load used in the standardized
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).

3517

Prediabetes is not a clinical entity, but rather a risk factor for future
diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This may be observed as an intermediate stage in any of the disease processes listed in Table 629.1. Prediabetes is often associated with insulin resistance syndrome (also
known as metabolic syndrome), which consists of insulin resistance,
compensatory hyperinsulinemia to maintain glucose homeostasis,
obesity (especially abdominal or visceral obesity), dyslipidemia of the
high-­triglyceride or low-­or high-­density lipoprotein type, or both in
addition to hypertension. Insulin resistance is directly involved in the
pathogenesis of T2DM.

629.2 Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (Immune
Mediated)
David R. Weber

EPIDEMIOLOGY

T1DM accounts for approximately 10% of all cases of diabetes in all
ages, affecting up to 2 million people in the United States and more
than 15 million people in the world; approximately 15,000 youths are
diagnosed with T1DM each year. Although T1DM accounts for most
cases of diabetes in childhood, it is not limited to this age-­group; new
cases continue to present in adult life, and up to 50% of individuals
with T1DM present as adults. The incidence of T1DM is highly variable among different racial and ethnic groups (see Fig. 629.1). The
overall age-­adjusted incidence of T1DM varies from <5 in 100,000
per year in parts of Asia, Africa, and South America to more than 30
in 100,000 per year in Northern Europe. The incidence of T1DM is
increasing in most (but not all) populations, and this increase appears
to be most marked in populations where the incidence of autoimmune
diseases was historically low. Data from Western European diabetes
centers suggest that the annual rate of increase in T1DM incidence is
2–5%, whereas some Central and Eastern European countries demonstrate an even more rapid increase—up to 9%. Data from the United
States have shown that the incidence of T1DM in children increased
by 1.9% per year from 2002 to 2015 from 19.5/100,000 to 22.3/100,000.
Steeper increases in annual incidence were seen in people of Asian/
Pacific Islander (4.4%), Hispanic (4%), and Black (2.7%) versus those
of White (0.7%) racial/ethnic background.
Females and males are almost equally affected, with a modest male
preponderance in some populations (Western European/United
States and a female preponderance in others (Japanese); there is no
apparent correlation with socioeconomic status. Peaks of presentation occur in two age-­groups: at 5-­7 years of age and at the time of
puberty. The first peak may correspond to the time of increased exposure to infectious agents coincident with the beginning of school; the
second peak may correspond to the pubertal growth spurt induced by
gonadal steroids and the increased pubertal growth hormone secretion (which antagonizes insulin). The understanding of the cause
of diabetes or of its increased incidence remains elusive. A growing
number of cases are presenting between 1 and 2 years of age, especially in high-­risk groups; the average age of presentation is older in
low-­risk populations. Low-­risk groups that migrate to a high-­risk
country seem to acquire the increased risk of that country. There can
be marked differences in incidence rates in various ethnic groups
within the same country; incidence rates (per 100,000) in the 10-­to
14-­year-­old age-­group in the United States range from a low of 7.1 in
Native Americans to 17.6 in Hispanics, 19.2 in Black Americans, and
32.9 in Whites.

GENETICS

There is a clear familial clustering of T1DM, with prevalence in siblings approaching 8%, whereas the prevalence in the general population in the United States is only 0.4%. Risk of T1DM is also increased
when a parent has T1DM, and this risk differs between the two parents;
the risk is 3–4% if the mother is affected but 5–6% when the father is
affected. In monozygotic twins, the concordance rate ranges from 30%
to 65%, whereas dizygotic twins have a concordance rate of 6–10%.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3518 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.3  Key Features of Diabetes in Pediatric Patients
MONOGENIC DIABETES
(MATURITY-­ONSET
DIABETES IN THE YOUNG) NEONATAL DIABETES

TYPE 1 DIABETES

TYPE 2 DIABETES

Age at diagnosis

6 mo-­18 yr

Puberty; rarely younger
than 10 yr

Younger than 25 yr

Younger than 6 mo

Causes and genetic factors

Autoimmune; genetic
predisposition (HLA and
other genes)

Obesity; genetic and
ethnic predisposition

Autosomal dominant;
HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK,
HNF1B (see Table 629.1)

KCNJ11, ABCC8, INS (see
Table 629.1)

Associated features

Lean or mildly overweight
at diagnosis, often with
weight loss; thyroid
autoimmunity; celiac
disease

Obesity; acanthosis
nigricans; polycystic
ovarian syndrome;
hypertension;
hyperlipidemia; fatty liver
disease; family history

Lean or weight loss at
diagnosis; GCK variants
are asymptomatic

Failure to thrive

Diabetic ketoacidosis at
presentation

Yes; about 25%

Yes; 5–20%

No

Yes; frequency not
described

Treatment

Insulin

Lifestyle modification;
metformin; liraglutide;
insulin; bariatric surgery

Sulfonylurea; no treatment
for GCK variants

Sulfonylurea for KCJN11
and ABCC8 variants;
insulin for other variants

Adapted from Cameron FJ, Wherrett DK. Care of diabetes in children and adolescents: controversies, changes, and consensus. Lancet. 2015;385:2096–2104. Table 1.

Because the concordance rate of dizygotic twins is higher than the sibling risk, factors other than the shared genotypes (e.g., the shared intrauterine environment) may play a role in increasing the risk in dizygotic
twins. Furthermore, the genetic susceptibility for T1DM in the parents
of an affected child is estimated at 3%. It should be kept in mind that
although there is a large genetic component in T1DM, 85% of newly
diagnosed patients with T1DM do not have an affected family member.

Monogenic Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus

Classic single-­gene defects are an extremely rare cause of autoimmune-­
mediated T1DM. IPEX (immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy, X-­linked) syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in
FOXP3 and other genes. The FOXP3 is a gene involved in immune system responses. A member of the FOX protein family, FOXP3 appears
to function as the master regulator in the development and function of
regulatory T cells. These variants lead to the lack of a major population
of regulatory T lymphocytes, with resulting overwhelming autoimmunity and development of diabetes (as early as 2 days of age) in approximately 80% of the children with this disorder.
Wolfram syndrome (DIDMOD: diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness) is an autosomal recessive disease caused
predominantly by pathogenic variants in WFS1 and is a progressive
neurodegenerative disease. Case definition requires the presence of
T1DM and optic atrophy. This syndrome may be present in ∼5% of
patients with T1DM.
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS-­1) is
caused by pathogenic variants in AIRE leading to abnormalities in
expression of peripheral antigens within the thymus and/or abnormalities of negative selection in the thymus. This results in widespread
autoimmunity. Approximately 18% of children with this syndrome
develop T1DM.

Genes Altering the Risk of Autoimmune Type 1
Diabetes Mellitus

The risk of developing T1DM is modified by the influence of several
risk loci. The genomic region with by far the greatest contribution to
the risk of T1DM is the MHC on chromosome 6p21. Outside of the
MHC, genome-­wide association studies have identified T1DM to be
associated with at least 100 different single-­nucleotide polymorphisms,
from which about 50 genes have emerged as potentially causal. Notable
high-­risk loci include INS, PTPN22, IL2RA, CTLA4, IFIH1, ERBB3,
and BAD. The contribution of each non-­MHC locus to T1DM risk is
small, making individual variants less useful for predicting the genetic

risk of T1DM in a patient. The known functions of these genes suggest the primary etiologic pathways of diabetes, namely, HLA class II
and class I molecules binding, T-­and β-­cell activation, innate pathogen
viral responses, chemokine and cytokine signaling, and T-­regulatory
and antigen-­presenting cell functions.

Major Histocompatibility Complex/Human Leukocyte
Antigen–Encoded Susceptibility to Type 1 Diabetes
Mellitus

The MHC is a large genomic region that contains a number of genes
related to immune system function in humans. These genes are further
divided into HLA classes I, II, III, and IV. Class II genes are the ones
most strongly associated with risk of T1DM, but some of the risk associated with various HLA types is a result of variation in genes in HLA
classes other than class II. Overall, genetic variation in the HLA region
can explain 40–50% of the genetic risk of T1DM.
Some of the known associations include the HLA DR3/4-­DQ2/8
genotype; compared to a population prevalence of T1DM of approximately 1 in 300, DR3/4-­DQ2/8 newborns from the general population
have a 1 in 20 genetic risk. This risk of development of T1DM is even
higher when the high-­risk HLA haplotypes are shared with a sibling or
parent with T1DM. If one sibling has T1DM and shares the same high-­
risk DR3/4-­DQ2/8 haplotype with another sibling, the risk of autoimmunity in the other sibling is 50%. Moreover, this risk approaches 80%
when siblings share both HLA haplotypes identical by descent. This
is known as the relative paradox and points to the existence of other
shared genetic risk factors (most likely in the extended HLA haplotype).
With advances in genotyping, further discrimination is possible and
we can identify more specific risk ratios for specific haplotypes. For
example, the DRB1*0401-­
DQA1*0301g-­
DQB1*0302 haplotype has
an odds ratio (OR) of 8.39, whereas the DRB1*0401-­DQA1*0301g-­
DQB1*0301 haplotype has an OR of 0.35, implicating the DQB1*0302
allele as a critical susceptibility allele. There are some dramatically protective DR-­DQ haplotypes (e.g., DRB1*1501-­DQA1*0102-­DQB1*0602
[OR = 0.03], DRB1*1401-­DQA1*0101-­DQB1*0503 [OR = 0.02], and
DRB1*0701-­DQA1*0201-­DQB1*0303 [OR = 0.02]). The DR2 haplotype (DRB1*1501-­DQA1*0102-­DQB1*0602) is dominantly protective
and is present in 20% of the general population but is seen in only 1%
of patients with T1DM.

Role of Aspartate at Position 57 in DQB1

DQB1*0302 (high risk for diabetes) differs from DQB1*0301 (protective against diabetes) only at position 57, where it lacks an aspartic acid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
residue. The DQB1*0201 allele (increased risk for diabetes) also lacks
aspartic acid at position 57, and it has been proposed that the presence of aspartate at this position alters the protein-­recognition and
protein-­binding characteristics of this molecule. Although the absence
of aspartate at this position appears to be important in most studies
on White individuals, it does not have the same role in Korean and
Japanese populations. Moreover, certain low-­risk DQB1 genotypes also
lack aspartic acid at position 57, including DQB1*0302/DQB1*0201
(DR7) and DQB1*0201 (DR3)/DQB1*0201 (DR7). Thus the presence
of aspartate at this position is usually, but not always, protective in
White populations but not necessarily in other populations.

Role of Human Leukocyte Antigen Class I

Although the alleles of class II HLA genes appear to have the strongest associations with diabetes, recent genotyping studies and analyses of pooled data have identified associations with other elements in
the HLA complex, especially HLA-­A and HLA-­B. The most significant
association is with HLA-­B39, which confers high risk for T1DM in
three different populations, makes up the majority of the signal from
HLA-­B, and is associated with a lower age of onset of the disease.

Non-­MHC/HLA Genes Associated with T1DM Risk

The second locus found to be associated with risk of T1DM was localized to a region upstream of the INS. Susceptibility in this region has
been primarily mapped to a variable number of tandem repeats approximately 500 base pairs (bp) upstream of the insulin gene. This highly
polymorphic region consists of anywhere from 30 to several hundred
repeats of a 14-­to 15-­bp unit sequence (ACAGGGGTCTGGGG). The
high-­risk allele has been found to be associated with lower insulin and
messenger RNA (mRNA) production in the thymus, suggesting a possible mechanism for decreased immune tolerance to insulin. A number
of candidate genes linked to T1DM susceptibility have also been associated with increased risk of other autoimmune disease. These include
the genes PTPN22, IL2RA, CTLA4, and IFIH1, which are involved
in immune system regulation. Others, such as ERBB3 and BAD, are
thought to be associated with cell apoptosis.

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

That ∼45–70% of monozygotic twins are discordant for T1DM, the
variation seen in urban and rural areas populated by the same ethnic
group, the change in incidence that occurs with migration, the increase
in incidence that has been seen in almost all populations in the last few
decades, and the occurrence of seasonality all provide evidence that
environmental factors also play a significant role in the causation of
T1DM.

Viral Infections

It is possible that various viruses play a role in the pathogenesis of
T1DM, but no single virus, and no single pathogenic mechanism,
stands out in the environmental etiology of T1DM. Instead, a variety of viruses and mechanisms may contribute to the development of
diabetes in genetically susceptible hosts. Invoked mechanisms involve
direct infection of β cells by viruses resulting in lysis and release of
self-­antigens, direct viral infection of antigen-­presenting cells causing
increased expression of cytokines, and molecular mimicry, which is the
notion that viral antigens exhibit homology to self-­epitopes.
The clearest evidence of a role for viral infection in human T1DM is
seen in congenital rubella syndrome. Prenatal infection with rubella is
associated with β-­cell autoimmunity in up to 70%, with development
of T1DM in up to 40% of infected children. The time lag between infection and development of diabetes may be as large as 20 years. T1DM
after congenital rubella is more likely in patients who carry the higher-­
risk genotypes. Interestingly, there appears to be no increase in risk of
diabetes when rubella infection develops after birth or when live-­virus
rubella immunization is used.
Studies have shown an increase in evidence of enteroviral infection in patients with T1DM and an increased prevalence of enteroviral RNA in prenatal blood samples from children who subsequently
develop T1DM. It has been reported that mumps infection leads to

3519

the development of β-­cell autoimmunity with high frequency and to
T1DM in some cases. Although mumps may play a role in some cases,
the fact that T1DM incidence has increased steadily in several countries after universal mumps vaccination was introduced and that the
incidence is extremely low in several populations where mumps is still
prevalent indicates that mumps alone is not a major causal factor in
diabetes.

The Hygiene Hypothesis: Possible Protective Role of
Infections

Although some viral infections may increase the risk of T1DM, infectious agents may also play a protective role against diabetes. The
hygiene hypothesis states that T1DM risk is increased in industrialized
countries, where the observation that there are fewer infections implies
that the immune system is less well trained for its main task, namely
host defense. Some call this theory the microbial deprivation hypothesis.
The hygiene hypothesis states that lack of exposure to childhood infections may increase an individual’s chances of developing autoimmune
diseases, including T1DM. Rates of T1DM and other autoimmune
disorders are generally lower in underdeveloped nations with a high
prevalence of childhood infections and tend to increase as these countries become more developed. The incidence of T1DM differs almost
sixfold between Russian Karelia and Finland, even though both are
populated by genetically related populations and are adjacent to each
other and at the same latitude. The incidence of autoimmunity in the
two populations varies inversely with immunoglobulin (Ig) E antibody
levels, and IgE is involved in the response to parasitic infestation. All
these observations suggest that decreased exposure to certain parasites
and other microbes in early childhood may lead to an increased risk of
autoimmunity in later life, including autoimmune diabetes. Nonetheless, retrospective case-­control studies have been equivocal at best, and
direct evidence of protection by childhood infections is still lacking.

Gastrointestinal Microbiome

There is emerging evidence that the intestinal microbiome is altered
in T1DM; however, a cause-­and-­effect relationship has yet to be established. Human studies have found that the intestinal microbiome in
T1DM has decreased diversity of microbial species and contains fewer
butyrate-­producing organisms compared to healthy controls. Butyrate
is a short-­chain fatty acid that is thought to be antiinflammatory and
may have a role in protecting the intestinal epithelium, either directly
or indirectly, through an effect to increase mucin production. Theoretically, a disruption in epithelial integrity (the so-­called leaky gut) could
trigger inflammation and an enhanced autoimmune response because
of increased entry of pathogenic or dietary antigens into the bloodstream. Early, small-­scale prospective studies in infants and children at
high risk for T1DM have shown an imbalance favoring species including Bacteroides dorei and Bacteroides vulgatus among individuals who
went on to develop T1DM autoantibodies or disease compared with
those who did not. A larger study across six different study sites in The
Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) study
identified significant geographic differences in fecal microbiome composition, highlighting the challenges in this field of study.

Diet

Dietary exposure may modify T1DM risk; a definitive link between
any single dietary exposure and T1DM development has not been
found. The majority of interventional studies have not shown an effect
of delayed gluten exposure or the use of hydrolyzed formula to reduce
the risk for development of T1DM autoantibodies of disease. A meta-­
analysis of both interventional and observational studies concluded
that there was no association between early exposure of gluten or milk
protein and risk of T1DM. Some, but not all, studies have suggested
that breastfeeding lowers the risk of T1DM. The potential mechanism
for a protective effect of breast milk is not well understood but could be
related to a beneficial effect of breast milk on the infant immune system
or an indirect effect such as reduced exposure to other dietary antigens early in life. Timing of solid food introduction may modify T1DM
risk, as seen in a report from the Diabetes Autoimmunity Study in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3520 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Young (DAISY), which found that both early (before 4 months of age)
and late (after 6 months of age) introduction of solid foods predicted
development of T1DM.
Other dietary factors that have been suggested at various times as
playing a role in T1DM risk include omega-­3 fatty acids, vitamin D,
ascorbic acid, zinc, and vitamin E. Vitamin D is biologically plausible
(it has a role in immune regulation), and deficiency is more common
in northern countries like Finland where T1DM incidence is highest;
however, most observational studies have failed to find associations
between vitamin D level or supplementation and T1DM risk. Interventional studies to assess the effect of vitamin D supplementation on
T1DM risk are lacking.

PATHOGENESIS AND NATURAL HISTORY OF TYPE
1 DIABETES MELLITUS

In T1DM, a genetically susceptible host develops autoimmunity against
the host’s own β cells. What triggers this autoimmune response is complex and multifactorial. In some (but not all) patients, this immune-­
mediated process results in progressive destruction of β cells until a
critical mass of β cells is lost and insulin deficiency develops. Insulin
deficiency, in turn, leads to the onset of clinical signs and symptoms of
T1DM. At the time of diagnosis, if viable β cells are still present and
produce some insulin, there may be a partial remission of the disease
(honeymoon period), but over time, more β-­cell mass is destroyed,
despite any regeneration and/or persistence of β cells, and the patient
becomes totally dependent on exogenous insulin for survival (Fig.
629.2). Over time, some of these patients develop secondary complications of diabetes that appear, in part, to be related to how well-­
controlled the diabetes has been. The natural history of T1DM involves
some or all of the following stages, with two distinct identifiable stages
before onset of symptoms:
1.	Persistence of one or more islet autoantibodies with normoglycemia
and presymptomatic; can last years to decades (onset of autoimmune
islet disease AID])
2.	β-­cell autoimmunity with dysglycemia and presymptomatic; shorter
3.	Onset of symptomatic disease; usually quite brief, weeks, rarely
months
4.	Transient remission, usually within weeks of onset, may last 6-­12
months (“honeymoon”)

1. Precipitating
events might
occur in utero

5.	Established disease, lifelong
6.	Development of complications, quite variable

Initiation of Autoimmunity

Genetic susceptibility to T1DM is determined by several genes, with
the largest contribution coming from variants in the HLA system.
Nonetheless even with the highest-­risk haplotypes, most carriers will
not develop T1DM. In monozygotic twins, the concordance of the
development of T1DM is reported to be 30–65%. The observed rise
in incidence of T1DM, and particularly so in younger children with
an essentially genetically stable patient population, implies that something has accordingly changed in the environment. A number of factors, including maternal and intrauterine environmental influences,
route of neonatal delivery, foods and diet in infancy, viral infections,
lack of exposure to certain infections and antibiotic use, host microbiome, and even psychologic stress, are implicated in the pathogenesis of T1DM, but their exact role and the mechanism by which they
trigger or aggravate autoimmunity remain uncertain. What is clear is
that markers of autoimmunity are much more prevalent than clinical
T1DM, indicating that initiation of autoimmunity is a necessary, but
not a sufficient, condition for T1DM. Although no conclusive triggering factor has been identified, it seems that in most cases of T1DM
that are diagnosed in childhood, the onset of autoimmunity occurs
very early in life. In most children diagnosed before age 10 years, the
first signs of autoimmunity appear before age 2 years. Development of
autoimmunity is associated with the appearance of several autoantibodies. IAAs are usually the first to appear in young children, followed
by GAD, and later by IA-­2 and ZnT8 antibodies. The earliest antibodies
are predominantly of the IgG1 subclass. Not only is there spreading of
autoimmunity to more antigens (IAA, GAD, IA-­2A, ZnT8) but there
is also epitope spreading within one antigen. Initial GAD antibodies
tend to be against the middle region or the carboxyl-­terminal region,
whereas amino terminal antibodies usually appear later and are less
common in children.

Preclinical Autoimmunity with Progressive Loss of
β-­Cell Function

In nearly all patients, the appearance of autoimmunity is followed by
progressive or eventual destruction of β cells (Figs. 629.3 and 629.4).

2. Genetic predisposition
probably the key driver or
linkage to immune
abnormalities
(Precipitating event)
5. Presence of two or
more islet autoantibodies
might represent
asymptomatic type 1
diabetes

3. Beyond precipitating,
environment might
influence entire natural
history

6. Increasing glucose
excursions as individual
approaches symptomatic
onset

Genetic
predisposition

β-cell mass

Overt
immunologic
abnormalities
Normal insulin
release

Progressive
loss of
insulin
release
Overt
diabetes
Glucose
normal

4. Although overall loss of β
cells is potentially linear, it
could show a relapsing or
remitting pattern

C-peptide
present

7. Some patients produce
low concentrations of
C-peptide long after onset
No C-peptide
8. β-cell mass not always
zero in long-standing
disease

Age (yr)

Fig. 629.2 The natural history of T1DM—a 25-­yr-­old concept revisited. A re-­creation of the model of T1DM, originally proposed in 1986, is shown

in black. Additions and conjectures based on recent knowledge gains are shown in green boxes. (From Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS, Michels AW.
Type 1 diabetes. Lancet. 2014;383:69–78. Fig. 4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

15

Merged genetic score
> 14.4
13.1 - 14.4
< 13.1

10
5
0
0

1

2

3
4
Age (years)

5

6

20

3521

20
Cumulative risk for
type 1 diabetes (%)

20

Cumulative risk for multiple
islet autoantibodies (%)

Cumulative risk for one or more
islet autoantibodies (%)

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

15
10
5
0

15
10
5
0

0

1

2

3
4
Age (years)

5

6

0

2

Number at risk

Number at risk

Number at risk

907 858 755 687 635 598 550
1713 1639 1457 1318 1233 1175 1084
878 831 750 692 650 620 581

907 875 777 707 657 625 580
1713 1651 1480 1343 1268 1209 1120
878 841 764 709 668 638 600

907
1713
878

897
1694
874

4
6
Age (years)

8

10

876
1679
868

522
996
505

167
305
164

835
1603
822

A
The stages to type 1 diabetes

Genetic
risk
Immune
activation
Immune
response

Starting point
15 x increased
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
risk of T1D in
those with
Immune
relatives with
activation
Clinical
Immune
Normal blood Abnormal
Longdisease
blood sugar
diagnosis
sugar
standing
Beta cells are response
T1D
attacked
≥2
≥2
Development ≥ 2
autoantibodies autoantibodies autoantibodies
of single
autoantibody
B

Fig. 629.3 Contributing factors and disease progression in type 1 diabetes. A, Cumulative risks of one or more islet autoantibodies, multiple islet

autoantibodies, and type 1 diabetes development in TEDDY children with the HLA DR3/DR4-­DQ8 or DR4-­DQ8/DR4-­DQ8 genotype stratified by
their merged score. The cumulative risk of developing one or more islet autoantibodies (left graph), multiple islet autoantibodies (middle graph),
and type 1 diabetes (right graph, y axis) is shown relative to age in yr (x axis) and was calculated using the Kaplan ± Meier method. Curves are shown
for children with genetic scores in the upper (orange line), lower (green line), and two middle (blue line) quartiles. The shaded areas represent the
95% confidence interval of the cumulative risk. The numbers at risk indicate the number of children included in the analysis at each age. B, Type
1 diabetes progression and stages of type 1 diabetes. Stage 1 is the start of type 1 diabetes, marked by individuals having two or more diabetes-­
related autoantibodies and normal blood sugar concentrations. In stage 2, individuals have dysglycemia without symptoms. Stage 3 is the time
of clinical diagnosis. T1D, type 1 diabetes. (A from Bonifacio E, Beyerlein A, Hippich M, et al. Genetic scores to stratify risk of developing multiple
islet autoantibodies and type 1 diabetes: A prospective study in children. PLoS Med. 2018;15:e1002548. Fig. 4; B from Greenbaum CJ, Speake C,
Krischer J, et al. Strength in numbers: opportunities for enhancing the development of effective treatments for type 1 diabetes—the TrialNet experience. Diabetes. 2018;67:1216–1225.)

Antibodies are a marker for the presence of autoimmunity, but the
actual damage to the β cells is primarily T-­cell mediated (see Fig. 629.4).
Histologic analysis of the pancreas from patients with recent-­onset
T1DM reveals insulitis, with an infiltration of the islets of Langerhans
by mononuclear cells, including T and B lymphocytes, monocytes/
macrophages, and natural killer cells. The process in human T1DM is
not necessarily linear, and there may be an undulating downhill course,
with remissions and relapses, in the development of T1DM.

Role of Autoantibodies

Even though T1DM does not occur as a direct consequence of autoantibody formation, the risk of developing clinical disease increases
dramatically with an increase in the number of antibodies; only 15%
of children with one antibody will progress to diabetes in 10 years, but
this risk increases to 70% when two antibodies are present and 90%
when three are present. The risk of progression also varies with the
intensity of the antibody response, and those with higher antibody
titers are more likely to progress to clinical disease. Another factor that
appears to influence progression of β-­cell damage is the age at which
autoimmunity develops; children in whom IAAs appeared within the
first 2 years of life rapidly developed anti–islet cell antibodies and progressed to diabetes more frequently than children in whom the first
antibodies appeared between ages 5 and 8 years.

Role of Genetics in Disease Progression

In a large study of healthy children, the appearance of single antibodies
is relatively common and usually transient and does not correlate with
the presence of high-­risk HLA alleles; those carrying high-­risk HLA
alleles are more likely to develop multiple antibodies and progress to
disease. Similarly, the appearance of antibodies is more likely to predict
diabetes in those with a family history of diabetes versus those with no
family history of T1DM. Environmental factors may induce transient
autoimmunity in many children, but those with genetic susceptibility
are more likely to see progression of autoimmunity and eventual development of diabetes.

Role of Environmental Factors

Environmental factors may also act as accelerators of T1DM after the
initial appearance of autoimmunity. This is evident from the fact that
the incidence of T1DM can vary several-­fold between populations that
have the same prevalence of autoimmunity. The incidence of T1DM in
Finland is almost fourfold higher than in Lithuania, but the incidence
of autoimmunity is similar in both countries.
The fact that all children with evidence of autoimmunity and of
autoreactive T cells do not progress to diabetes indicates that there
are checkpoints at which the autoimmune process can be halted or
reversed before it progresses to full-­blown diabetes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3522 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
function if the autoimmune destructive process could be halted and if
islet cell regeneration could occur.

A
B cell

CD4

PREDICTION

APC

Regulatory
T cell

D

E

Macrophage

C
B

CD8

Neutrophil

Natural killer cell

Pancreatic islet

Fig. 629.4 The immunopathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. The de-

velopment of type 1 diabetes is thought to be initiated by the presentation of β-­cell peptides by antigen-­presenting cells (APCs). APCs
bearing these autoantigens migrate to the pancreatic lymph nodes,
where they interact with autoreactive CD4+ T lymphocytes, which in
turn mediate the activation of autoreactive CD8+ T cells (A). These activated CD8+ T cells return to the islet and lyse β cells expressing immunogenic self-­antigens on major histocompatibility complex class I
surface molecules (B). β-­Cell destruction is further exacerbated by the
release of proinflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species from
innate immune cells (macrophages, natural killer cells, and neutrophils)
(C). This entire process is amplified by defects in regulatory T lymphocytes, which do not effectively suppress autoimmunity (D). Activated T
cells within the pancreatic lymph node also stimulate B lymphocytes to
produce autoantibodies against β-­cell proteins. These autoantibodies
can be measured in circulation and are considered a defining biomarker
of type 1 diabetes (E). (From DiMeglio LA, Evans-­Molina C, Oram RA.
Type 1 diabetes. Lancet. 2018;391:2449–2458. Fig. 3.)

Onset of Clinical Disease

Patients with progressive β-­cell destruction will eventually present
with clinical T1DM. It was thought that 90% of the total β-­cell mass is
destroyed by the time clinical disease develops, but other studies have
revealed that this is not always the case. It appears that β-­cell destruction is more rapid and more complete in younger children, whereas
in older children and adults, the proportion of surviving β cells is
greater (10–20% in autopsy specimens), and some β cells (about 1%
of the normal mass) survive up to 30 years after the onset of diabetes. Because autopsies are usually done only on patients who died of
DKA, these figures may underestimate the actual β-­cell mass present
at diagnosis. Functional studies indicate that up to 40% of the insulin
secretory capacity may be preserved in adults at the time of presentation of T1DM. Ultrasensitive assays indicate that C-­peptide production
is measurable decades after the onset of T1DM. The fact that newly
diagnosed diabetic individuals may still have a significant surviving
β-­cell mass is important because it raises the possibility of secondary
prevention of T1DM. Similarly, the existence of viable β cells years
or decades after initial presentation indicates that even patients with
long-­standing diabetes may be able to exhibit some recovery of β-­cell

Autoimmunity precedes clinical T1DM, and indicators of autoimmune
responses may be useful markers for disease prediction. Individuals at
risk for T1DM can be identified by a combination of genetic, immunologic, and metabolic markers. The most informative genetic locus,
HLA class II, confers about half of the total genetic risk but has a low
positive predictive value (PPV) when used in the general population.
Autoantibodies provide a practical readout of β-­cell autoimmunity,
are easily sampled in venous blood, and have become the mainstay of
T1DM prediction efforts. By comparison, and even though T lymphocytes mediate β-­cell destruction, T cells are rare in blood, and assays
of their function have been difficult to standardize and validate. In the
first-­degree relatives of patients with T1DM, the number of positive
autoantibodies can help estimate the risk of developing T1DM: low risk
(single autoantibodies: PPV of 2–6%), moderate risk (2 autoantibodies:
PPV of 21–40%), and high risk (>2 autoantibodies: PPV of 59–80%)
over a 5-­year period. In children carrying the T1DM highest-­risk genotype (HLA-­DQB1*0201-­DQA1*05/DQB1*0302-­DQA1*03), insulitis
is almost 10 times more frequent (PPV 21%) than in children with other
genotypes (PPV 2.2%). But although autoantibodies are useful for the
prediction of T1DM in the relatives of patients with T1DM, outside of
that obvious population, the screening of the general population would
be required to identify healthy subjects at risk of T1DM. Indeed, ∼90%
of individuals with new-­onset T1DM have no family background of
T1DM. Screening the general population is difficult to justify, in part,
because the observed autoantibody prevalence greatly exceeds the low
disease prevalence in nonrelatives, leading to high false-­positive rates.

PREVENTION

Strategies for the prevention of T1DM are focused primarily on slowing progression of β-­cell loss after the onset of autoimmune islet disease through targeted immunosuppression of autoreactive regulatory T
cells. Numerous compounds are under investigation for this purpose,
including agents that could modulate regulatory T cells via stimulating
interleukin (IL)-­2, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α signaling, or CTLA
signaling and by inhibiting IL-­17 or T-­cell receptor (TCR) signaling.
Teplizumab, a humanized anti-­CD3 monoclonal antibody that inhibits
TCR signaling, has been shown to delay the onset of clinical diabetes
in high-­risk children and young adults. It is approved for use in the
United States for patients 8 years and older with stage 2 T1DM, defined
by at least two positive pancreatic islet cell autoantibodies and dysglycemia without hyperglycemia.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF T1DM

Insulin performs a critical role in the storage and retrieval of cellular
fuel. Its secretion in response to feeding is exquisitely modulated by
the interplay of neural, hormonal, and substrate-­related mechanisms
to permit controlled disposition of ingested foodstuff as energy for
immediate or future use. Insulin levels must be lowered to then mobilize stored energy during the fasted state. Thus in normal metabolism,
there are regular swings between the postprandial, high-­insulin anabolic state and the fasted, low-­insulin catabolic state that affect liver,
muscle, and adipose tissue (Table 629.4). T1DM is a progressive low-­
insulin catabolic state in which feeding does not reverse, but rather
exaggerates, these catabolic processes. With moderate insulinopenia,
glucose use by muscle and fat decreases and postprandial hyperglycemia appears. At even lower insulin levels, the liver produces excessive
glucose via glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, and fasting hyperglycemia begins. Hyperglycemia produces an osmotic diuresis (glycosuria) when the renal threshold is exceeded (180 mg/dL; 10 mmol/L).
The resulting loss of calories and electrolytes, as well as the worsening
dehydration, produces a physiologic stress with hypersecretion of stress
hormones (epinephrine, cortisol, growth hormone, and glucagon).
These hormones, in turn, contribute to the metabolic decompensation
by further impairing insulin secretion (epinephrine), by antagonizing
its action (epinephrine, cortisol, growth hormone), and by promoting

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
Table 629.4  Influence of Feeding (High Insulin) or of
Fasting (Low Insulin) on Some Metabolic
Processes in Liver, Muscle, and Adipose
Tissue*

Liver

Muscle

HIGH PLASMA INSULIN
(POSTPRANDIAL STATE)

LOW PLASMA INSULIN
(FASTED STATE)

Glucose uptake
Glycogen synthesis
Absence of
gluconeogenesis
Lipogenesis
Absence of ketogenesis

Glucose production
Glycogenolysis
Gluconeogenesis

Glucose uptake

Absence of glucose
uptake
Fatty acid and ketone
oxidation
Glycogenolysis
Proteolysis and amino
acid release

Glucose oxidation
Glycogen synthesis
Protein synthesis
Adipose
tissue

Glucose uptake
Lipid synthesis
Triglyceride uptake

Absence of lipogenesis
Ketogenesis

Absence of glucose
uptake
Lipolysis and fatty acid
release
Absence of triglyceride
uptake

*Insulin is considered to be the major factor governing these metabolic processes.
Diabetes mellitus may be viewed as a permanent low-­insulin state that, if untreated,
results in exaggerated fasting.

glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, and ketogenesis (glucagon,
epinephrine, growth hormone, and cortisol) while decreasing glucose
use and glucose clearance (epinephrine, growth hormone, cortisol).
The combination of insulin deficiency and elevated plasma values
of the counterregulatory hormones is also responsible for accelerated
lipolysis and impaired lipid synthesis, with resulting increased plasma
concentrations of total lipids, cholesterol, triglycerides, and free fatty
acids. The hormonal interplay of insulin deficiency and glucagon excess
shunts the free fatty acids into ketone body formation; the supranormal
rate of formation of these ketone bodies, principally β-­hydroxybutyrate
and acetoacetate, exceeds the capacity for peripheral use and renal
excretion. Accumulation of these keto acids results in metabolic acidosis (DKA) and compensatory rapid, deep, nondyspneic breathing
to excrete excess CO2 (Kussmaul respiration). Acetone, formed by
nonenzymatic conversion of acetoacetate, is responsible for the characteristic fruity odor of the breath. Ketones are excreted in the urine
in association with cations and thus further increase losses of water
and electrolyte and bicarbonate regenerating ability. With progressive
dehydration, acidosis, hyperosmolality, and diminished cerebral oxygen use, consciousness becomes impaired, and the patient ultimately
becomes comatose.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The classic clinical manifestations of new-­onset diabetes in children
reflect the hyperglycemic and catabolic physiologic state and include
polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss. Other common
symptoms include fatigue, weakness, and a general feeling of malaise.
Patients presenting with more advanced disease will exhibit signs of
DKA, including dehydration, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, altered mental status, and in extreme cases, coma. If the diagnosis is not recognized, the progression of symptoms follows a predictable course from
early intermittent polyuria, to sustained polyuria and weight loss, followed by development of DKA. In most cases, this initial progression
occurs over a period of weeks rather than months.
Initially, when only insulin reserve is limited, occasional asymptomatic postprandial hyperglycemia occurs. When insulin secretory

3523

capacity declines, blood glucose levels begin to rise. When the blood
glucose increases above the renal threshold, intermittent polyuria
and/or nocturia begins. With further β-­cell loss, chronic hyperglycemia causes a more persistent diuresis, which often includes nocturnal
enuresis in younger children. Female patients may develop vulvovaginal candidiasis from the chronic glycosuria. Eventually, daily losses of
water and glucose may be as high as 5 L and 250 g, respectively, representing 1,000 calories, or 50%, of the average daily caloric intake. These
losses trigger compensatory polydipsia and polyphagia; however, progressive dehydration and weight loss will inevitably ensue unless treatment is initiated.
When the disease continues to progress, ketoacids begin to accumulate. At this stage in the disease, rapid clinical deterioration is possible.
Ketoacids produce abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, and emesis and
thereby impede the patient’s ability to maintain sufficient oral replacement of urinary water losses. Dehydration accelerates, as manifested by
weakness, orthostasis, and further weight loss. As in any hyperosmotic
state, the degree of dehydration may be clinically underestimated
because intravascular volume is conserved at the expense of intracellular volume. Signs and symptoms of advanced ketoacidosis include
Kussmaul respirations (deep, heavy, nonlabored, rapid breathing),
fruity breath odor (acetone), prolonged corrected Q-­T interval, diminished neurocognitive function, and coma. Approximately 20–40% of
children with new-­onset diabetes progress to DKA before diagnosis;
data from the United States suggest that the prevalence of DKA at onset
of T1DM is increasing.
Clinical progression typically happens more quickly in younger
children, owing to either more aggressive autoimmune destruction of
β-­cells and/or to lower β-­cell mass. Disease onset in infancy is associated with a greater likelihood of DKA at presentation. Weight loss in
younger children and individuals with more rapidly progressive disease will be composed mostly of acute fluid loss, whereas weight loss
in adolescents and individuals with slowly progressive disease will also
include significant fat and lean mass deficits as a result of prolonged
starvation. In any child, the progression of symptoms may be accelerated by the stress of an intercurrent illness or trauma, when counterregulatory (stress) hormones counter the limited insulin secretory
capacity.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of T1DM is usually straightforward (see Table 629.2).
Although most symptoms are nonspecific, the most important clue is
an inappropriate polyuria in any child with signs of dehydration and
poor weight gain. Hyperglycemia can be identified quickly from capillary blood by use of a glucometer; glycosuria and ketonuria can readily be determined by urine dipstick. Nonfasting blood glucose greater
than 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) with typical symptoms is diagnostic
with or without ketonuria. In the obese child, T2DM must be considered (see Chapter 629.3). Once hyperglycemia is confirmed, it is prudent to determine whether DKA is present (especially if ketonuria is
found) by checking a venous blood sample for bicarbonate and pH and
also to evaluate for electrolyte abnormalities—even if signs of dehydration are minimal. A baseline HbA1c will be confirmatory and allows an
estimate of the duration of hyperglycemia and provides an initial value
by which to compare the effectiveness of subsequent therapy. Falsely
low HbA1c levels are noted in hemolytic anemias (sickle cell anemia,
others), pure red cell aplasia, blood transfusions, and anemias associated with hemorrhage, cirrhosis, myelodysplasias, or renal disease
treated with erythropoietin.
Testing for autoimmunity (T1DM autoantibodies) (see Chapter
629.1) should be considered in cases where the differentiation between
T1DM and T2DM is not apparent and in cases where there is a strong
family history suggestive of monogenic and syndromic diabetes. The
presence of other autoimmune diseases associated with T1DM should
be sought at or shortly after diagnosis, including celiac disease (by
tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A [IgA] and total IgA) and
autoimmune hypothyroidism (by thyroid-­stimulating hormone [TSH]
and free or total thyroxine). Because significant physiologic perturbations can affect thyroid and celiac screening tests, individuals with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3524 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
only mild abnormalities should have tests repeated after several weeks
before instituting therapy. In addition, because there is an increased
risk of cardiovascular disease associated with diabetes, it is also recommended to obtain a fasting lipid profile in children ≥10 years of age
once glucose control has been established.
Rarely, a child has transient hyperglycemia with glycosuria while
under substantial physical stress or illness. This usually resolves permanently during recovery from the stressors. Stress-­produced hyperglycemia can reflect a limited insulin reserve temporarily revealed
by elevated counterregulatory hormones. A child with temporary
hyperglycemia should therefore be monitored for the development of
symptoms of persistent hyperglycemia and be tested with an HbA1c if
such symptoms occur. Formal testing in a child who remains clinically
asymptomatic is not necessary.
Routine screening procedures, such as postprandial determinations
of blood glucose or screening OGTTs, have yielded low detection rates
in healthy, asymptomatic children, even among those considered at
risk, such as siblings of diabetic children. Accordingly, such screening
procedures are not recommended in children.

TREATMENT

Therapy is tailored to the degree of insulinopenia at presentation.
Most children with new-­onset T1DM have mild to moderate symptoms, have minimal dehydration with no history of emesis, and have
not progressed to ketoacidosis. They can be started on subcutaneous insulin therapy directly. About 20–40% of children with new-­
onset diabetes present in DKA, which can be arbitrarily classified as
mild, moderate, or severe (Table 629.5), and the range of symptoms
depends on the degree of ketoacidosis. Cardinal biochemical abnormalities include elevations in blood and urine ketones, an increased
anion gap, a decreased serum bicarbonate (or total CO2) and pH,
and an elevated effective serum osmolality. Hyponatremia is commonly present with hyperglycemia and is the result of an osmotic
dilution as water shifts into the extracellular fluid. Potassium and
phosphate depletion is common after prolonged polyuria but may
be masked by acidosis, which leads to extracellular shifting of these
ions.

Treatment of Diabetic Ketoacidosis

Severe insulinopenia (or lack of effective insulin action) results in a
physiologic cascade of events in three general pathways:
1.	Excessive glucose production coupled with reduced glucose use raises serum glucose. This triggers an osmotic diuresis, with urinary loss
of fluid and electrolytes, dehydration, and activation of the renin-­
angiotensin-­aldosterone axis with accelerated potassium loss. When
glucose elevation and dehydration are severe and persist for several
hours, the risk of cerebral edema increases.
2.	Increased catabolic processes result in cellular losses of sodium, potassium, and phosphate.
3.	Increased release of free fatty acids from peripheral fat stores supplies substrate for hepatic ketoacid production. When ketoacids
accumulate, buffer systems are depleted, and a metabolic acidosis
ensues.
Therapy must address both the initiating event in this cascade (insulinopenia) and the subsequent physiologic disruptions.

Reversal of DKA is associated with inherent risks that include hypoglycemia, hypokalemia, and cerebral edema. Any protocol must be
used with caution and close monitoring of the patient. Adjustments
based on sound medical judgment may be necessary for any given level
of DKA (Figs. 629.5 and 629.6).

Dehydration and Hyperglycemia

Judicious fluid resuscitation is the first step in the medical management
of DKA. Correction of fluid deficits must be tempered by the potential
risk of cerebral edema. It is prudent to approach any child in any hyperosmotic state with cautious rehydration. The effective serum osmolality
(Eosm = 2 × [Nauncorrected] + [glucose]) is an accurate index of tonicity of
the body fluids, reflecting intracellular and extracellular hydration better
than measured plasma osmolality. It is calculated with sodium and glucose
in mmol/L. This value is usually elevated at the beginning of therapy and
should steadily normalize. A rapid decline, or a slow decline to a subnormal range, may indicate an excess of free water entering the vascular space
and an increasing risk of cerebral edema. Therefore patients should not be
allowed oral fluids until rehydration is well underway and significant electrolyte shifts are no longer likely. Limited ice chips may be given as a minimal oral intake. All fluid intake and output should be closely monitored.
Calculation of fluid deficits using clinical signs is difficult in children
with DKA because intravascular volume is better maintained in the hypertonic state. For any degree of tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, decreased
skin temperature, or orthostatic blood pressure change, the child with
DKA will be more dehydrated than the child with a normotonic fluid
deficit. Typically, an initial intravenous bolus of 10-­20 mL/kg of glucose-­
free isotonic sodium salt solution such as Ringer lactate or 0.9% sodium
chloride is given over 1 to 2 hours. Further fluid boluses should be given
only for hemodynamically unstable patients. This bolus is given as isotonic
saline because the patient is inevitably hypertonic, keeping most of the
initial infusion in the intravascular space. Subsequent fluid replacement
then consists of 0.45% or 0.9% sodium chloride infused at a rate calculated
to replace the fluid deficit (after subtracting initial fluid bolus) over 24-­
48 hours plus maintenance. The fluid deficit can be calculated empirically
if a recent weight is available, estimated at 5–10% of body weight based
upon clinical severity, or by assuming a standard water deficit (85 mL/kg).
Practically, this is generally equivalent to a rate of ∼1.5 times maintenance,
which can be substituted for simplicity in most situations.
The optimal fluid protocol to prevent CNS complications (cerebral
edema) of DKA remains uncertain. When children with DKA were
randomly assigned to one of four treatment arms consisting of fast or
slow fluid deficit repletion of 0.9% or 0.45% sodium chloride, there
were no differences in short-­or long-­term neurocognitive outcomes
among any of the treatment arms. In general, after reestablishing the
intravascular volume and avoiding rapid declines of blood glucose
levels and hyponatremia, fluid replacement rates or fluid composition
may subsequently be administered per protocol (see Fig. 629.5). It is
possible that cerebral injury preceded therapy and is the result of DKA
and not rates or composition of IV fluids.
Insulin must be given to promote movement of glucose into cells, to
subdue hepatic glucose production, and to halt the movement of fatty
acids from the periphery to the liver. An initial IV insulin bolus does not
speed recovery and may increase the risk of hypokalemia and hypoglycemia. Therefore insulin infusion is typically begun without an insulin bolus at

Table 629.5  Classification of Diabetic Ketoacidosis
NORMAL

MILD

MODERATE

SEVERE*

HCO2 (mEq/L, venous)†

20-­28

16-­20

10-­15

<10

pH (venous)†

7.35-­7.45

7.25-­7.35

7.15-­7.25

<7.15

Clinical

No change

Oriented, alert but
fatigued

Kussmaul respirations;
oriented but sleepy;
arousable

Kussmaul or depressed respirations;
sleepy to depressed sensorium
to coma

*Severe hypernatremia (corrected Na >150 mEq/L) would also be classified as severe diabetic ketoacidosis.
†HCO and pH measurement are method dependent; normal ranges may vary.
2

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3525

Immediate assessment
Clinical history
Polyuria, polydipsia,
nocturia, enuresis
Weight loss
Nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain
Weakness, fatigue
Confusion, ↓ level of
consciousness

Clinical signs
Dehydration
Deep sighing
respiration (Kussmaul)
Smell of ketones
Lethargy/drowsiness

Biochemical features and
investigations
Ketones in urine
↑ blood glucose
Acidemia (vpH <7.3, HCO3 <15 mmol/L)
Urea, electrolytes
Other investigations as indicated

Diagnosis confirmed
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Contact senior staff

Shock (reduced peripheral pulses)
Reduced conscious level/coma

Dehydration >5%
Not in shock
Acidotic (hyperventilation)
Vomiting

Minimal dehydration
Tolerating oral fluid

Resuscitation
Airway ± NG tube
Breathing (100% oxygen)
Circulation (0.9% saline
10–20 mL/kg over 1–2 hr
and repeat until circulation
is restored)
See CE management below

IV therapy
Saline 0.9% 10 mL/kg over 1 hr; may repeat
Calculate fluid requirements
Correct fluid deficit over 24–48 hr
ECG for abnormal T-waves
Add KCI 40 mmol per liter fluid

Therapy
Start with SC insulin
Continue oral hydration

No improvement
Continuous insulin infusion at 0.05–0.1 unit/kg/hr
starting 1 hr after fluids initiated

Critical observations
Hourly blood glucose
Hourly fluid input and output
Neurologic status at least hourly
Electrolytes every 2 hr after starting IV fluid therapy
Monitor ECG for T-wave changes

Acidosis not improving

Re-evaluate
IV fluid calculations
Insulin delivery system and dose
Need for additional resuscitation
Consider sepsis

Blood glucose ≤17 mmol/L (300 mg/dL)
or
Blood glucose falls >5 mmol/L/hr (90 mg/dL)

IV therapy
Change to 0.45% or 0.9% saline; add glucose
to fluids (5%–12.5%) to prevent hypoglycemia
Adjust sodium infusion to promote an
increase in measured serum sodium

Improved
Clinically well, ketoacidosis resolved, tolerating oral fluids
Transition to SC insulin
Start SC insulin then stop IV insulin after an
appropriate interval

Neurologic deterioration
WARNING SIGNS:
Severe or progressive
headache, slowing heart rate,
irritability, confusion, decreased
consciousness, incontinence,
specific neurologic signs

Exclude hypoglycemia
Is it cerebral edema?

CE management
Give mannitol 0.5–1 g/kg or 3%
hypertonic saline
Adjust IV fluids to maintain
normal BP, but avoid overhydration
Call senior staff
Move to ICU
Consider cranial imaging
only after patient stabilized

Fig. 629.5 Algorithm for the management of diabetic ketoacidosis. CE, cerebral edema; ECG, electrocardiogram; KCl, potassium chloride; SC,

subcutaneous. (Adapted from Pinhas-Hamiel O, Sperling M. Diabetic ketoacidosis. In: Hochberg Z, ed. Practical Algorithms in Pediatric Endocrinology. 3rd ed. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 2017:112–113.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3526 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Fluids

Electrolytes

Bolus 0.9% saline 20 cc/kg, repeat
until perfusion established

Maintenance fluids plus
deficit replacement
over 24–48 hours;
0.45–0.75% saline

Replace urine
output

Insulin
HHS

Hyperosmolar DKA

When serum K+ <5 mEq/L,
start replacement
with K 40 mEq/L

Start insulin infusion
when BG no longer
decreases with fluid alone

Start insulin after
initial fluid bolus

Monitor electrolytes,
calcium, magnesium,
phosphate every 2–4
hours

IV regular insulin
0.025–0.05 unit/kg/hr

IV regular insulin
0.05–0.1 unit/kg/hr
depending on degree
of acidosis

Frequently assess circulatory status
Adjust rate and electrolyte composition of fluids as needed

Titrate insulin dose to
decrease blood glucose
4–5.5 mmol/L (75–100
mg/dL) per hour

Fig. 629.6 Algorithm for the treatment of hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndromes (HHS). BG, blood glucose. (From Zeitler P, Haqq A, Rosenbloom A,

Glaser N. Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome in children: pathophysiological considerations and suggested guidelines for treatment.
J Pediatr. 2011;158(1):9–14, 14.e1–2.)

a rate of 0.05 to 0.1 units/kg/hr after initial fluid resuscitation is complete.
This approximates maximal insulin output in normal subjects during an
OGTT. Rehydration alone also lowers glucose levels by improving renal
perfusion and enhancing renal excretion. The combination of these therapies usually causes a rapid initial decline in serum glucose levels. Persistent decreases in serum glucose of >100 mg/dL/hr may increase the risk
of cerebral edema; therefore careful monitoring of serum glucose and
adjustment of the dextrose concentration of the IV fluids is essential. The
dextrose concentration of the IV fluids should be 5% (D5) once serum
glucose falls below ∼300 mg/dL and 10% once glucose is below 200 mg/
dL. The use of a two-­bag system is the preferred approach for managing
the dextrose concentrations of the infused IV fluid during DKA. A two-­
bag system consists of two IV bags of identical electrolyte concentrations,
where one bag contains 0% dextrose and the other contains 10% dextrose.
The fluids are administered via a Y-­site and can be easily titrated to infuse
fluids ranging from 0% to 10% dextrose.
Once the blood glucose level decreases below ∼180 mg/dL (10
mmol/L), the osmotic diuresis stops and rehydration accelerates without
further increase in the infusion rate. Repair of hyperglycemia occurs well
before correction of acidosis. Therefore insulin is still needed to control
fatty acid release and ketosis after normal glucose levels are reached. If
serum glucose levels fall below 100 mg/dL despite an infusion of D10-­
containing IV fluids, the glucose infusion rate can be increased by
increasing dextrose to 12.5% or by increasing the infusion rate. Alternatively, the IV insulin rate can be decreased if ketosis continues to improve.
The initial serum sodium is usually normal or low because of the
osmolar dilution caused by hyperglycemia and the effect of an elevated sodium-­free lipid fraction. An estimate of the reconstituted, or
“true,” serum sodium for any given glucose level above 100 mg/dL (5.6
mmol/L) is calculated as follows:

or

 1.6 mEq / L Na  for every 100 mg / dL glucose in 
 Na    

 excess of 100


1.6 mEq





LNa
for
every
5.6
mmol
 Na    
in excess of 5.6 


L glucos e





The sodium should increase by approximately 1.6 mmol/L for each
100 mg/dL decline in the glucose. The corrected sodium is usually

normal or slightly elevated and indicates moderate hypernatremic
dehydration. If the corrected value is greater than 150 mmol/L, severe
hypernatremic dehydration may be present and may require slower
fluid replacement. The sodium should steadily increase with therapy.
Declining sodium may indicate excessive free water accumulation and
increased risk of cerebral edema.
Both the metabolic shift to a catabolic predominance and the acidosis move potassium and phosphate from the cell to the serum. The
osmotic diuresis, the kaliuretic effect of the hyperaldosteronism, and
the ketonuria then accelerate renal losses of potassium and phosphate.
Sodium is also lost with the diuresis, but free water losses are greater
than isotonic losses. With prolonged illness and severe DKA, total
body losses can approach 10-­13 mEq/kg of sodium, 5-­6 mEq/kg of
potassium, and 4-­5 mEq/kg of phosphate. These losses continue for
several hours during therapy until the catabolic state is reversed and
the diuresis is controlled. For example, 50% of infused sodium may
be lost in the urine during IV therapy. Even though the sodium deficit
may be repaired within 24 hours, intracellular potassium and phosphate may not be completely restored for several days.
Although patients with DKA have a total body potassium deficit,
the initial serum level is often normal or elevated. This is caused by the
movement of potassium from the intracellular space to the serum, both
as part of the ketoacid buffering process and as part of the catabolic
shift. These effects are reversed with therapy, and potassium returns to
the cell. Improved hydration increases renal blood flow, allowing for
increased excretion of potassium in the elevated aldosterone state. The
net effect is often a dramatic decline in serum potassium levels, especially in severe DKA. This can precipitate changes in cardiac conductivity, flattening of T waves, and prolongation of the QRS complex and
can cause skeletal muscle weakness or ileus. The risk of myocardial dysfunction is increased with shock and acidosis. Potassium levels must be
closely followed and electrocardiographic monitoring continued until
DKA is substantially resolved. Potassium should be added to the IV fluids once serum potassium declines below 5.5 mEq/L and titrated. A 1:1
mixture of potassium chloride (or acetate) and potassium phosphate is
typically used. Rarely, the IV insulin must be temporarily held if serum
potassium levels drop below 3 mEq/L. It is unclear whether phosphate
deficits contribute to symptoms of DKA such as generalized muscle
weakness. In pediatric patients, a deficit has not been shown to compromise oxygen delivery via a deficiency of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate. In
most cases, the inclusion of potassium phosphate as outlined earlier
will be sufficient; however, additional IV supplementation with potassium phosphate can be used if needed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
Pancreatitis (usually mild) is occasionally seen with DKA, especially if prolonged abdominal distress is present; serum amylase and
lipase may be elevated. If the serum lipase is not elevated, the amylase
is likely nonspecific or salivary in origin. Serum creatinine adjusted
for age may be falsely elevated owing to interference by ketones in the
autoanalyzer methodology. An initial elevated value rarely indicates
renal failure and should be rechecked when the child is less ketonemic. Blood urea nitrogen may be elevated with prerenal azotemia and
should be rechecked as the child is rehydrated. Mildly elevated creatinine or blood urea nitrogen is not a reason to withhold potassium
therapy if good urinary output is present.

Ketoacid Accumulation

Low insulin infusion rates (0.02-­0.05 units/kg/hr) are usually sufficient
to stop peripheral release of fatty acids, thereby eliminating the flow of
substrate for ketogenesis. Ketogenesis continues until fatty acid substrates already in the liver are depleted, but this production declines
much more quickly without new substrate inflow. Bicarbonate buffers,
regenerated by the distal renal tubule and by metabolism of ketone
bodies, steadily repair the acidosis once ketoacid production is controlled. Bicarbonate therapy may increase the risk of hypokalemia and
cerebral edema; it should be considered only in rare situations with severe
acidosis unresponsive to standard DKA management.
There should be a steady increase in pH and serum bicarbonate as
therapy progresses. Kussmaul respirations should abate and abdominal pain resolve. Persistent acidosis may indicate inadequate insulin or
fluid therapy, infection, or rarely lactic acidosis. Urine ketones may be
positive after ketoacidosis has resolved because the nitroprusside reaction routinely used to measure urine ketones by dipstick measures only
acetoacetate. During DKA, most excess ketones are β-­hydroxybutyrate,
which increases the normal ratio to acetoacetate from 3:1 to as high
as 8:1. With resolution of the acidosis, β-­hydroxybutyrate converts to
acetoacetate, which is excreted into the urine and detected by the dipstick test. Therefore persistent ketonuria may not accurately reflect the
degree of clinical improvement and should not be relied on as an indicator of therapeutic failure. β-­Hydroxybutyrate can be measured from
serum and even by bedside capillary ketometer and is used in some
protocols to monitor the resolution of DKA and help determine when
to transition from IV to subcutaneous insulin administration.
All patients with known diabetes presenting in DKA should be
checked for precipitating events (infection, poor compliance, trauma)
that may have triggered the metabolic decompensation.

Diabetic Ketoacidosis Protocol

See Figure 629.5.
Even though DKA can be of variable severity, a common approach
to all cases simplifies the therapeutic regimen and can be safely used for
most children. Fluids are best calculated based on weight, not body surface area (m2), because heights are rarely available for the acutely critically ill child. Children with milder DKA recover in 10-­20 hours (and
need less total IV fluid before switching to oral intake), whereas those
with more severe DKA may require up to 36 hours with this protocol.
Any child can be transitioned to oral intake and subcutaneous insulin
when DKA has resolved (total CO2 >15 mEq/L; pH >7.30; sodium is
stable between 135 and 145 mEq/L; anion gap closed; no emesis). A
dose of long-­acting insulin is given (or continuous subcutaneous infusion is started via pump) and the insulin drip is discontinued approximately 30 minutes later. Typically, transition is timed to occur around
mealtime so that short-­acting insulin can be given as well. Frequent
(every 2-­3 hours) short-­acting insulin bolusing may need to be given
until ketosis resolves.
A flow sheet is mandatory for accurate monitoring of changes in
acidosis, electrolytes, fluid balance, and clinical status, especially if the
patient is transferred from the emergency department to an inpatient
setting with new caretakers. This flow sheet is best implemented by a
central computer system, which allows for rapid update and wide availability of results, as well as rule-­driven highlighting of critical values. A
paper flow sheet suffices if it stays with the patient, is kept current, and
is reviewed frequently by the physician. Any flow sheet should include

3527

columns for serial electrolytes, pH, glucose, and fluid balance. Blood
glucose should be tested every hour and electrolytes should be tested
every 1-­2 hours for children with severe DKA and every 3-­4 hours for
those with mild to moderate DKA.

Cerebral Edema

Cerebral edema is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in
children and adolescents with T1DM. Despite the clinical significance
of this complication, its etiology remains incompletely understood. A
case control study of DKA suggested that baseline acidosis and abnormalities of sodium, potassium, and blood urea nitrogen concentrations
were important predictors of risk of cerebral edema. Early bolus administration of insulin and high volumes of fluid were also identified as risk
factors. The incidence of cerebral edema in children with DKA has not
changed over the past 15-­20 years, despite the widespread introduction
of gradual rehydration protocols during this interval. Radiographic
imaging is frequently unhelpful in making the diagnosis of cerebral
edema. Consequently, each patient must be closely monitored (see
Fig. 629.5). For all but the mildest cases, this includes frequent neurologic checks for any signs of increasing intracranial pressure, such as a
change of consciousness, depressed respiration, worsening headache,
bradycardia, apnea, pupillary changes, papilledema, ptosis, posturing,
and seizures. In the event of the development of cerebral edema, immediate interventions should include elevation of the head of the bed,
reduction in IV fluid rate, and administration of mannitol (typically 1
g/kg infused intravenously over 20 minutes). Children with moderate
to severe DKA have a higher overall risk of cerebral edema and should
be treated in a hospital environment where appropriate monitoring can
occur.

Nonketotic Hyperosmolar Coma

This syndrome is characterized by severe hyperglycemia (blood glucose >800 mg/dL; 44 mmol/L), absence of or only slight ketosis, nonketotic acidosis, severe dehydration, depressed sensorium or frank
coma, and various neurologic signs that may include grand mal seizures, hyperthermia, hemiparesis, and positive Babinski signs. Respirations are usually shallow, but coexistent metabolic (lactic) acidosis
may be manifested by Kussmaul breathing. Serum osmolarity is commonly 350 mOsm/kg or greater. This condition is uncommon in children, although it may be increasing in frequency with the rise in the
incidence of T2DM. Among adults, mortality rates are high, possibly
in part because of delays in recognition and institution of appropriate therapy. In children, there has been a high incidence of preexisting
neurologic injury. Profound hyperglycemia may develop over a period
of days, and initially, the obligatory osmotic polyuria and dehydration may be partially compensated for by increasing fluid intake. In
some cases, consumption of excessive sugar-­sweetened beverages may
further exacerbate hyperglycemia. With progression of disease, thirst
becomes impaired, possibly because of alteration of the hypothalamic
thirst center by hyperosmolarity and, in some instances, because of a
preexisting defect in the hypothalamic osmoregulating mechanism.
The low production of ketones is attributed mainly to the hyperosmolarity, which in vitro blunts the lipolytic effect of epinephrine and
the antilipolytic effect of residual insulin; blunting of lipolysis by the
therapeutic use of β-­adrenergic blockers may contribute to the syndrome. Depression of consciousness is closely correlated with the
degree of hyperosmolarity in this condition and in DKA. Hemoconcentration may also predispose to cerebral arterial and venous thromboses before therapy is initiated.
Treatment of nonketotic hyperosmolar coma is directed at rapid
repletion of the vascular volume deficit with normal saline and very
slow correction of the hyperosmolar state (see Fig. 629.6). The fluid
deficit should be estimated at 12–15% of body weight. Additional normal saline boluses may be required to reduce tachycardia and poor
perfusion. One-­half isotonic saline (0.45% NaCl; may use normal
saline) is administered at a rate estimated to replace 50% of the volume
deficit in the first 12 hours, and the remainder is administered during
the ensuing 24 hours. The rate of infusion and the saline concentration are titrated to result in a slow decline of serum osmolality. When

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3528 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
the blood glucose concentration approaches 300 mg/dL, the hydrating
fluid should be changed to 5% dextrose in 0.45% NaCl. Approximately
20 mEq/L of potassium chloride should be added to each of these fluids
to prevent hypokalemia. Serum potassium and plasma glucose concentrations should be monitored at 2-­hour intervals for the first 12 hours
and at 4-­hour intervals for the next 24 hours to permit appropriate
adjustments of administered potassium and insulin.
Insulin can be given by continuous intravenous infusion only after
serum glucose levels no longer decline with fluid administration. The
IV insulin should be initiated at a low dose of 0.025-­0.05 units/kg/hr
and titrated to achieve a slow decline in serum glucose of 50-­75 mg/dL/
hr (2.8-­4.2 mmol/L/hr). The presence of ketosis or more severe acidosis
may necessitate earlier insulin initiation.

INITIATION OF SUBCUTANEOUS INSULIN THERAPY

Excellent diabetes control involves many goals: to maintain blood
glucose and HbA1c levels as close to normal without causing hypoglycemia, to eliminate polyuria and nocturia, to prevent ketoacidosis, to
permit normal growth and development, and to avoid development
of diabetes-­related complications—all while minimizing the impact
on lifestyle. The specific components of therapy include initiation
and adjustment of insulin, extensive teaching of the child and caretakers, and reestablishment of the life routines. Each aspect should be
addressed early in the overall care.

Table 629.6  Approach to Calculating Initial
Subcutaneous Insulin Doses at Diagnosis
of Type 1 Diabetes (or Type 2 Diabetes
Requiring Intensive Insulin Therapy) for
Patients Starting on a Basal-­Bolus Regimen
CALCULATE TOTAL DAILY DOSE (TDD) OF INSULIN*
Minimum starting dose:
0.2 units/kg/day
Add to the minimum dose as
follows:
-­Initial blood glucose >200 mg/
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
dL
-­Ketosis at presentation
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
-­Acidosis (by pH or serum
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
bicarbonate)
-­Puberty (Tanner stage 2 or
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
greater)†
CALCULATE DOSES OF BASAL AND BOLUS INSULIN‡
Basal dose (long-­acting insulin)
x = 50% of TDD
(x = daily dose of basal insulin,
typically given as one dose
before bedtime)
Carbohydrate coverage (short-­
acting insulin)

y = 450 / TDD
(1 unit of insulin for every “y”
grams of carbohydrates
consumed at snacks/meals)

Insulin sensitivity factor (short-­
acting insulin)

z = 1800 / TDD
(1 unit of insulin will lower blood
glucose by “z” mg/dL)

Insulin Therapy

Insulin therapy is initiated at the time of diagnosis for all patients with
T1DM. The starting dose may range from 0.4 to 1.2 units/kg/day and is
calculated based on a number of factors, including age, pubertal stage,
and presence or absence of DKA. Typically, prepubertal children presenting without DKA can be started on a dose of 0.4-­0.6 units/kg/day.
Overweight pubertal adolescents presenting with DKA may need up to
1-­1.2 units/kg/day. Insulin requirements in infancy vary tremendously,
from <0.2 units/kg/day to >1 unit/kg day. Table 629.6 shows typical
starting ranges for total daily insulin dose (units/kg/day) in children.
The precise optimal insulin dose can only be determined empirically, after beginning with the previously mentioned starting doses,
with frequent self-­monitored blood glucose levels and insulin adjustment by the diabetes team. Many children with new-­onset diabetes
have some residual β-­cell function (the honeymoon period), which is
associated with reduced exogenous insulin needs shortly after starting
treatment. Residual β-­cell function usually fades within a few months
and is reflected as a steady increase in insulin requirements and wider
glucose excursions.
The initial insulin schedule should be directed toward the optimal degree of glucose control in an attempt to duplicate the activity of
the β cell. There are inherent limits to our ability to mimic the β cell.
Exogenous insulin does not have a first pass to the liver, whereas 50%
of pancreatic portal insulin is taken up by the liver, a key organ for the
disposal of glucose. Absorption of an exogenous dose continues despite
hypoglycemia, whereas endogenous insulin secretion ceases and serum
levels quickly lower with a normally rapid clearance. The absorption
rate from an injection varies by injection site and patient activity level,
whereas endogenous insulin is secreted directly into the portal circulation. Despite these fundamental physiologic differences, acceptable glucose control can be obtained with insulin analogs used in a basal-­bolus
regimen. Basal-­bolus regimens can be accomplished with multiple daily
injections (MDIs), where a slow-­onset, long-­duration background insulin is given once or twice daily for between-­meal glucose control (basal)
and a rapid-­onset insulin is given with meals to provide carbohydrate
coverage and correct hyperglycemia. Alternatively, an insulin pump can
be used, where a rapid-­onset insulin is used to provide both basal (via
continuous infusion) and bolus (at mealtimes and as needed for hyperglycemia) coverage. The doses of short-­acting insulin include two components: carbohydrate ratio (typically expressed as 1 unit of insulin for
a set number of grams of carbohydrates) and insulin sensitivity factor
(ISF), also referred to as the correction factor, and typically expressed as
1 unit of insulin will decrease blood sugar by a set number of mg/dL to
achieve a target blood glucose level). Target blood glucose levels should

*Patients with obesity or severe insulin resistance may require an additional 0.2 units/
kg/day (or more) of insulin.
†For example, a prepubertal child presenting with hyperglycemia only with a blood
glucose of 325 mg/dL would be started on a TDD of insulin of 0.4 units/kg/day,
whereas a pubertal adolescent presenting in DKA would be started on 1 units/kg/day.
‡Other equations for calculating basal and bolus insulin doses have been proposed
and can be found in the literature. All equations provide only an estimate of insulin
requirements. All patients need frequent monitoring of blood glucose after initiation
of insulin, and most will require dose adjustments.

be individualized according to factors including age, duration of diabetes, history of hypoglycemia, time of day, and physical activity, but will
generally range between 90 and 180 mg/dL. Formulas for calculating the
basal dose, carbohydrate ratio, and ISF from the total daily insulin dose
are provided in Table 629.6
All preanalog insulins form hexamers, which must dissociate into
monomers subcutaneously before being absorbed into the circulation.
Thus a detectable effect for regular insulin is delayed by 30-­60 minutes
after injection. This, in turn, requires delaying the meal 30-­60 minutes after
the injection for optimal effect—a delay rarely attained in a busy child’s life.
Regular insulin has a wide peak and a long tail for bolus insulin. This profile
limits postprandial glucose control, produces prolonged peaks with excessive hypoglycemic effects between meals, and increases the risk of nighttime hypoglycemia. Neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH, also known as
insulin isophane) is an intermediate-­acting insulin with inherent limitations as a basal insulin because it does not achieve a peakless background
insulin level. This produces a significant hypoglycemic effect during the
midrange of the duration. Thus it is often difficult to predict its interaction
with fast-­acting insulins. When regular insulin is combined with NPH,
the composite insulin profile poorly mimics normal endogenous insulin
secretion. Lente and ultralente insulins were other intermediate-­acting
insulins that have since been discontinued.
Lispro, aspart, and glulisine insulin are rapid-­onset analogs that
are absorbed much more quickly because they do not form hexamers. They provide discrete pulses, with onset of action in as little as 10
minutes, with little, if any, overlap and short tail effect. This allows better control of postmeal glucose increase and reduces between-­meal or
nighttime hypoglycemia. Other ultra-­fast-­acting insulin analogs are
being developed that promise even faster onset of action, a feature that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
may make these insulins especially useful in insulin pumps and closed-­
loop systems.
The long-­
acting analogs glargine, detemir, and degludec are
designed to provide longer duration of action, ranging from ∼20 hours
(glargine) to ∼40 hours (degludec). Glargine forms a precipitate after
subcutaneous injection, detemir binds to circulating albumin, and
degludec forms dihexamers—all of which lead to stabilization of the
hexameric structure, slower disassociation into insulin monomers, and
prolonged duration of action. The result is a flatter 24-­hour profile,
making it easier to predict the combined effect of a rapid bolus (lispro,
aspart, or glulisine) on top of the basal insulin and thereby create a
more physiologic pattern of insulin effect. Postprandial glucose elevations are better controlled, and between-­meal and nighttime hypoglycemia are reduced. An illustration of the insulin effect profiles of the
currently available short-­and long-­acting insulins is provided in Figures 629.7 and 629.8.
At diagnosis, the basal dose of long-­acting insulin is typically calculated to provide around 50% of the total daily dose, with the remainder
provided with bolus doses of short-­acting insulin at mealtimes (calculations used to determine insulin doses are provided in Table 629.6).
Over time the ratio of basal to bolus will typically shift downward and
will be affected by the magnitude of carbohydrate intake (especially
during adolescence). Some infants and toddlers may do well with a
higher percentage of their daily insulin provided as basal. There is considerable individual variability in the duration of action of long-­acting
insulins, and some younger children and obese adolescents will require
twice-­daily dosing of glargine. Both long-­and short-­acting insulins
are available for administration via multidose insulin pens, which are
generally easier to use compared with a traditional syringe and vial
approach.
Some families may be unable to administer four daily injections.
In these cases, a compromise may be needed. A three-­injection
regimen combining NPH with a rapid analog bolus at breakfast, a
rapid-­acting analog bolus at supper, and glargine at bedtime may
provide fair glucose control and eliminate the need for an injection at school. Further compromise to a two-­injection regimen may
occasionally be needed and frequently involves use of premixed
insulin preparations that include both rapid-­and intermediate-­
acting insulins (e.g., 70/30). For this regimen, 70% of the total daily
dose (TDD) is typically provided with breakfast and 30% of TDD
with dinner. An illustration of commonly used insulin regimens is
shown in Figure 629.8.

Insulin Pump Therapy

Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) via battery-­
powered pumps provides a closer approximation of normal plasma
insulin profiles and increased flexibility regarding timing of meals
and snacks compared with conventional insulin injection regimens.
Insulin pump models can be programmed with a patient’s personal

Lispro/aspart/glulisine
Regular
NPH
Detemir/glargine

0

20

Degludec

40

Duration of action (hours)

Fig. 629.7 Approximate insulin effect profiles. The following relative

peak effect and duration units are used: lispro/aspart/glulisine, peak 20
for 4 hr; regular, peak 15 for 7 hr; neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH)
peak 12 for 12 hr; detemir/glargine, peak 5 for 20-­24 hr; degludec peak
5 for 42 hr.

3529

insulin dose algorithms, including the ISF and carbohydrate ratios
for premeal glucose levels. At mealtimes, the patient enters the blood
glucose level (or it is automatically transmitted from a linked glucometer) and the carbohydrate content of the meal, and the pump
computer will calculate the proper insulin bolus dose. Although
CSII frequently improves metabolic control, this may not always
be the case. The degree of glycemic control is mainly dependent on
how closely patients adhere to the principles of diabetes self-­care,
regardless of the type of intensive insulin regimen. One benefit of
pump therapy may be a reduction in severe hypoglycemia and associated seizures. Randomized trials comparing multiple daily insulin
regimens using glargine insulin and CSII in children with T1DM
demonstrate similar metabolic control and frequency of hypoglycemic events. Most patients will initiate therapy with insulin pens;
timing of transition to an insulin pump can be individualized per
patient preference as soon as 6-­12 months after diagnosis.

Continuous Glucose Monitoring Systems

Continuous glucose monitoring systems (CGMs) consist of a subcutaneous glucose sensor that continuously measures interstitial fluid
glucose levels and a receiver to collect and display glucose data. CGMs
reduce, but do not eliminate, the need for finger stick blood glucose
checking, as calibrations with capillary blood glucose readings are
required at least every 12 hours. CGMs report blood glucose levels to
the patient/caregiver in real time and can be integrated with smartphones/watches for remote monitoring. To avoid hypoglycemia, the
CGM system sounds an alarm once a critical low blood sugar threshold
is reached. Additional alerts can be set to notify users of hyperglycemia
or rapid rates of change in glucose levels. Short-­term studies indicate
clinical benefits of these devices as compared to conventional methods of blood glucose monitoring when used by motivated and well-­
informed patients. CGMs also allow for the determination of time
in range, where the amount of time in and out of the target glycemic
range (defined by international consensus as glucose between 70 and 180
mg/dL) can be determined and tracked. Glycemic control has been traditionally monitored by HbA1c, which provides an estimate of average
blood glucose over the prior 2 to 3 months. Time in range allows for
a more granular assessment of glucose excursions within and between
days and may prove to be a more clinically significant metric of diabetes control. A limitation of CGM-­only systems is that they require the
user to respond to the alert, interpret the data, and intervene to prevent
hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic episodes. This limitation is mitigated
when the CGM is combined with an insulin pump in a closed-­loop
system.

Closed-­Loop Systems

A closed-­loop system allows for direct communication between the
continuous glucose sensor and insulin pump for automatic adjustment
of insulin infusion rates in response to glucose levels (Fig. 629.9). A
fully closed-­loop system would be completely independent of the user
and theoretically could improve glycemic control through the early
identification and response to glucose perturbation and by minimizing the opportunity for human error in insulin dosing. Both single-­
hormone (insulin only) and bihormone (insulin and glucagon) systems
are undergoing clinical investigation.
Several hybrid closed-­loop systems with integrated insulin pumps
and continuous glucose sensors have gained regulatory approval and
entered clinical practice. There is emerging evidence from short-­term
clinical trials that the use of hybrid closed-­loop systems can improve
time in range and reduce hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia compared
to sensor-­augmented systems. Current issues hampering full implementation of this technology include limitations in the accuracy and
precision of interstitial fluid glucose sensing, the need for short-­acting
insulins with more rapid onset of action, and complexity of day-­to-­day
use.

Adjunct Pharmacotherapy

Pramlintide acetate, a synthetic injectable analog of amylin, may be of
therapeutic value combined with insulin therapy. However, it has not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3530 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

L/A/G

L/A/G

advantage of eliminating the need for an injection at lunchtime. C,
Twice-­daily injection regimen: The use of a premixed insulin containing
a short-­and an intermediate-­acting insulin that is given twice daily is
sometimes necessary for families who are unable to manage more complex dosing regimens. Insulin 70/30 is one such product that combines
regular and NPH insulins. This produces the least physiologic profile,
with large excesses before lunch and during the early night, combined
with poor coverage before supper and breakfast.

L/A/G

Detemir/glargine/degludec

8:00

20:00

L/A/G

L/A/G

A

8:00

L/A/G

Detemir/glargine/degludec

Time of day
L/A/G

L/A/G

Basic and Advanced Diabetes Education

NPH
Detemir/glargine/degludec

8:00

20:00

L/A/G+NPH

B

L/A/G

8:00
Detemir/glargine/degludec

Time of day
Regular

NPH

gained widespread use. Metformin, an oral antihyperglycemic commonly used to treat T2DM, is sometimes used clinically as an adjunct
therapy in T1DM patients with evidence of significant insulin resistance (i.e., obesity, insulin requirements >1.2 units/kg/day, acanthosis
nigricans on exam). A clinical trial investigating the addition of metformin in overweight adolescents with T1DM did not find a sustained
effect of metformin to lower HbA1c but did show a reduction in daily
insulin dose and body mass index (BMI). Reports from observational
studies are likewise mixed. These agents would typically not be started
at diagnosis of T1DM.

Regular

NPH

Therapy consists not only of initiation and adjustment of insulin dose
but also of education of the patient and family. Teaching is most efficiently provided by experienced diabetes educators and dietitians.
In the acute phase, the family must learn the basics, which includes
monitoring the child’s blood glucose and urine and/or blood ketones,
preparing and injecting the correct insulin dose subcutaneously at the
proper time, recognizing and treating low blood glucose reactions, and
having a basic meal plan. Most families are trying to adjust psychologically to the new diagnosis of diabetes in their child and thus have
a limited ability to retain new information. Written materials covering
these basic topics help the family during the first few days.
Children and their families are also required to complete advanced
self-­management classes to facilitate implementation of flexible insulin management. These educational classes will help patients and their
families acquire skills for managing diabetes during athletic activities
and sick days. Likewise, further patient and caregiver education with a
diabetes educator familiar with diabetes technology is imperative when
adding a CGM or transitioning to an insulin pump.

Nutritional Management
8:00
Insulin 70/30

C

20:00

8:00

Insulin 70/30
Time of day

Fig. 629.8 Approximate composite insulin effect profiles of various

insulin dosing strategies. Meals are shown as rectangles below the
time axis. Injections are shown as labeled triangles; L/A/G, lispro, aspart, glulisine. All profiles are idealized using average absorption and
clearance rates. In typical clinical situations, these profiles vary among
patients. A given patient has varying rates of absorption depending on
the injection site, physical activity, and other variables. A, Basal-­bolus
regimen: A short-­acting insulin (Lantus/aspart/glulisine) is injected before meals, and a long-­acting basal insulin (glargine/detemir/degludec)
is injected at bedtime. Additional short-­acting insulin is given to cover
between-­meal snacks as needed (not shown). For patients on insulin
pumps, the composite insulin profile is similar; however, the basal insulin coverage is provided by a continuous infusion of short-­acting insulin. B, Thrice-­daily injection regimen: A short-­acting insulin (Lantus/
aspart/glulisine) and neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) are injected
with breakfast (the two types of insulin can be drawn up into one syringe for administration with a single injection), a short-­acting insulin is
injected with dinner, and a long-­acting basal insulin (glargine/detemir/
degludec) is injected at bedtime. Because NPH is not a peakless insulin,
this regimen is associated with greater risk of hypoglycemia compared
with the basal-­bolus regimen show in Figure 629.6A but does offer the

Nutrition plays an essential role in the management of patients with
T1DM. This is of critical importance during childhood and adolescence, when appropriate energy intake is required to meet the needs for
energy expenditure, growth, and pubertal development. There are no
special nutritional requirements for the diabetic child other than those
for optimal growth and development. Nutritional requirements for the
child are outlined on the basis of age, sex, weight, activity, and food
preferences. Cultural ethnic considerations must also be integrated
into the nutrition plan.
Total recommended caloric intake is based on size or surface area
and can be obtained from standard tables (Tables 629.7 and 629.8).
The caloric mixture should comprise approximately 55% carbohydrate,
30% fat, and 15% protein, but must be individualized to meet specific
patient needs. Approximately 70% of the carbohydrate content should
be derived from complex carbohydrates such as starch; intake of sucrose
and highly refined sugars should be limited. Complex carbohydrates
require prolonged digestion and absorption and thereby raise plasma
glucose levels slowly, whereas glucose from refined sugars, including
carbonated beverages, is rapidly absorbed and may cause wide swings
in the metabolic pattern. The consumption of sugar-­sweetened beverages, including soda and juice, should be discouraged. Priority should
be given to total calories and total carbohydrates consumed rather than
the source. Carbohydrate counting has become a mainstay in the nutrition education and management of patients with T1DM. Patients and
their families are provided with information regarding the carbohydrate contents of different foods and food label reading. This allows
patients to adjust their insulin dosage to their mealtime carbohydrate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3531

Meal

Glucose sensor
Individual
Delay (30-100 min) in
insulin absorption

Delay in insulin action
20 min periphery
100 min liver

Insulin pump
Alg

ori

thm

Need for
improved
insulin
kinetics

Adjust insulin dosing
based on glucose
fluctuations

A

B

Glucose
sensor

Insulin
pump

Correct for:
 Time lag
Errors and noise
Blood versus
interstitial values

Delay (5-15 min) in interstitial
plasma sensing
Algorithm
controller

Compensation for delays, errors, and noise
Safeguards against insulin overdose and underdose
Appreciate patient characteristics (e.g., exercise, behaviors)

Fig. 629.9 Closed-­loop system for T1DM (artificial pancreas). A, Prototype of a closed-­loop system. B, Components of a closed-­loop system. Three

potential delays in the system include glucose sensing in interstitial fluid, insulin absorption (depends on use of rapid vs regular insulin), and insulin
action in peripheral tissues and liver. (From Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS, Michels AW. Type 1 diabetes. Lancet. 2014;383:69–78. Fig. 5.)

Table 629.7  Calorie Needs for Children and Young
Adults
AGE

KCAL REQUIRED/KG BODY WEIGHT*

CHILDREN
0-­12 mo

120

1-­10 yr

100-­75

YOUNG WOMEN
11-­15 yr

35

≥16 yr

30

YOUNG MEN
11-­15 yr

80-­55 (65)

16-­20 yr
Average activity

40

Very physically active

50

Sedentary

30

*Gradual decline in calories per unit weight as age increases.
Numbers in parentheses are means.
From Nutrition Guide for Professionals. Diabetes education and meal planning.
Alexandria, VA, and Chicago, IL: The American Diabetes Association and The American
Dietetic Association, 1988.

intake. The use of carbohydrate counting and insulin-­to-­carbohydrate
ratios as a part of an MDI regimen allows for less rigid meal planning.
Flexibility in the use of insulin in relation to carbohydrate content of
food improves the quality of life.
Diets with high fiber content are useful in improving control of
blood glucose. Daily recommended fiber intake can be determined
using the equation:
Age in years + 5 = grams of fiber per day
Moderate amounts of sucrose consumed with fiber-­rich foods such
as whole-­grain bread may have no more glycemic effect than their

low-­fiber, sugar-­free equivalents. Saturated fat intake may increase in
patients with T1DM who reduce carbohydrate consumption to avoid
taking insulin doses by ingesting carbohydrate-­free foods. Total energy
from fat should not exceed 35%, and education should be provided
such that <10% of total energy should come from saturated and trans
fats. Dietary fats derived from animal sources should be reduced and
replaced by polyunsaturated fats from vegetable sources. Substituting
vegetable oil for animal oils or butter in cooking and lean cuts of meat,
poultry, and fish for fatty meats can help to achieve these goals. The
intake of cholesterol is also reduced by these measures. These simple
measures may reduce serum low-­density lipoprotein cholesterol, a
predisposing factor to atherosclerotic disease. Table 629.8 summarizes
typical nutritional guidelines for T1DM.
Each child and family can and should select a diet based on personal taste with the help of the physician or dietitian (or both). Emphasis should be placed on lifestyle changes to promote adherence to a
healthy, balanced diet on a daily basis. Occasional excesses (treats) are
permissible but should be limited just as for any child without diabetes.
Adjustments in meal planning must constantly be made to meet the
needs and the desires of each child. A consistent eating pattern with
appropriate supplements for exercise, the pubertal growth spurt, and
pregnancy in an adolescent with diabetes is important for metabolic
control.

Monitoring

Success in the daily management of the child with diabetes can be measured by the competence acquired by the family, and subsequently by
the child, in assuming responsibility for daily self-­care. Their initial and
ongoing instruction in conjunction with their supervised experience
can lead to a sense of confidence in adjusting an insulin dosage for
dietary deviations, for unusual physical activity, and for some intercurrent illnesses. Such acceptance of responsibility should make them
relatively independent of the physician for their ordinary care. The
physician must maintain ongoing interested supervision and shared
responsibility with the family and the child.
Self-­monitoring of blood glucose is an essential component of
managing diabetes. Effective monitoring often also includes other factors that influence blood glucose such as insulin dose, physical activity,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3532 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.8  Summary of Nutrition Guidelines for Children and/or Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
NUTRITION CARE PLAN
Promotes optimal compliance.
Incorporates goals of management: normal growth and development, control of blood glucose, maintenance of optimal nutritional status, and
prevention of complications. Uses staged approach.
NUTRIENT RECOMMENDATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
NUTRIENT
% OF CALORIES

RECOMMENDED DAILY INTAKE

Carbohydrate

High fiber, especially soluble fiber; optimal amount unknown

Will vary

Fiber

>20 g/day

Protein

12–20

Fat

<30

Saturated

<10

Polyunsaturated

6–8

Monounsaturated

Remainder of fat allowance

Cholesterol

300 mg

Sodium

Avoid excessive; limit to 3,000-­4,000 mg if hypertensive

ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Energy: If using measured diet, reevaluate prescribed energy level at least every 3 mo.
Protein: High-­protein intakes may contribute to diabetic nephropathy. Low intakes may reverse preclinical nephropathy. Therefore 12–20% of
energy is recommended; lower end of range is preferred. In guiding toward the end of the range, a staged approach is useful.
Alcohol: Safe use of moderate alcohol consumption should be taught as routine anticipatory guidance as early as junior high school.
Snacks: Snacks vary according to individual needs (generally three snacks per day for children; midafternoon and bedtime snacks for junior high
children or teens).
Alternative sweeteners: Use of a variety of sweeteners is suggested.
Educational techniques: No single technique is superior. Choice of educational method used should be based on patient needs. Knowledge of
variety of techniques is important. Follow-­up education and support are required.
Eating disorders: Best treatment is prevention. Unexplained poor control or severe hypoglycemia may indicate a potential eating disorder.
Exercise: Education is vital to prevent delayed or immediate hypoglycemia and to prevent worsened hyperglycemia and ketosis.
From Connell JE, Thomas-­Doberson D. Nutritional management of children and adolescents with insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus: a review by the Diabetes Care and Education
Dietetic Practice Group. J Am Diet Assoc. 1991;91:1556.

dietary changes, hypoglycemia, and illness. A record of these items
may be valuable in interpreting the self-­monitoring of blood glucose,
prescribing appropriate adjustments in insulin doses, and teaching the
family. If there are discrepancies in the self-­monitoring of blood glucose and other measures of glycemic control (such as the HbA1c), the
clinician should attempt to clarify the situation in a manner that does
not undermine their mutual confidence.
Daily blood glucose monitoring is accomplished using blood test
strips or a CGM. Test strips are impregnated with glucose oxidase that
permit blood glucose measurement from a drop of blood. A portable
calibrated reflectance meter can approximate the blood glucose concentration accurately. Glucometers contain a memory chip enabling
recall of each measurement and the ability to calculate measurement
average over a given interval and display the pattern on a computer
screen. Such information is a useful educational tool for verifying
degree of control and modifying recommended regimens. A small,
spring-­
loaded device that automates capillary bloodletting (lancing device) in a relatively painless fashion is commercially available.
Parents and patients should be taught to use these devices and measure blood glucose at least 4 times daily—before breakfast, lunch, and
supper and at bedtime. When insulin therapy is initiated and when
adjustments are made that may affect the overnight glucose levels, self-­
monitoring of blood glucose should also be performed at midnight and
3 am to detect nocturnal hypoglycemia. Standard blood glucose targets are 90-­130 mg/dL before meals and 90-­150 mg/dL before bedtime;
however, glycemic goals must be individualized to the patient based on
age, hypoglycemia risk, and other factors.
Glucose measurements that are consistently at or outside these limits, in the absence of an identifiable cause such as exercise or dietary
indiscretion, are an indication for a change in the insulin dose. If the

fasting blood glucose is high, the evening dose of long-­acting insulin
(or the early morning/overnight basal rate for insulin pump users)
is increased by 10–20% and/or additional fast-­acting insulin coverage for a bedtime snack may be considered. If the noon glucose level
exceeds set limits, the morning fast-­acting insulin-­to-­carbohydrate
ratio is increased by 10–20%. If the presupper glucose is high, the noon
fast-­acting insulin-­to-­carbohydrate ratio is increased by 10–20%. If
the prebedtime glucose is high, the presupper fast-­acting insulin-­to-­
carbohydrate ratio is increased by 10–15%. The ISF can be increased by
10–20% if it is found that insulin corrections given for hyperglycemia
do not normalize glucose levels as expected. Similarly, reductions in
the insulin type and dose should be made if the corresponding blood
glucose measurements are consistently below desirable limits.
A minimum of four daily blood glucose measurements (or CGM
use) should be performed. However, some children and adolescents
may need to have more frequent blood glucose monitoring based
on their level of physical activity and history of frequent hypoglycemic reactions. Families should be encouraged to become sufficiently
knowledgeable about managing diabetes.
The FDA has approved the use of CGMs to replace finger stick
blood glucose checking for the monitoring and treatment of diabetes in children 2 years of age and older. CGMs are minimally invasive
and entail the placement of a small, subcutaneous catheter that can be
easily worn by adults and children. The system provides information
that allows the patient and healthcare team to adjust the insulin regimen and the nutrition plan to improve glycemic control. CGMs can
be helpful in detecting asymptomatic nocturnal hypoglycemia and in
lowering HbA1c values without increasing the risk for severe hypoglycemia. Although there are potential pitfalls in CGM use, including
suboptimal compliance, human error, incorrect technique, and sensor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
failure, the implementation of CGMs in ambulatory diabetes practice
allows the clinician to diagnose abnormal glycemic patterns in a more
precise manner. In many cases, CGMs are now factory calibrated and
nearly eliminate the need for finger sticks. For these reasons, CGMs are
increasingly replacing finger stick blood testing as the primary means
of glucose monitoring in many patients with T1DM.

Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1c)

A reliable index of long-­term glycemic control is provided by measurement of glycosylated hemoglobin. HbA1c represents the fraction of
hemoglobin to which glucose has been nonenzymatically attached in
the bloodstream. The formation of glycosylated hemoglobin is a slow
reaction that is dependent on the prevailing concentration of blood
glucose; it continues irreversibly throughout the red blood cell’s life
span of approximately 120 days. The higher the blood glucose concentration and the longer the red blood cell’s exposure to it, the higher the
fraction of glycosylated hemoglobin, which is expressed as a percentage of total hemoglobin. Because a blood sample at any given time contains a mixture of red blood cells of varying ages, exposed for varying
times to varying blood glucose concentrations, an HbA1c measurement
reflects the average blood glucose concentration from the preceding
2-­3 months. For some patients, it may be helpful to translate HbA1c
into estimated average glucose (eAG) using the following equation:
eAG = 28.7 * HbA1c − 46.7

When measured by standardized methods to remove labile forms,
HbA1c is not influenced by an isolated episode of hyperglycemia.
HbA1c measurements should be obtained three to four times a year
to obtain a profile of long-­term glycemic control. The lower the HbA1c
level, the more likely it is that microvascular complications such as retinopathy and nephropathy will be less severe, delayed in appearance,
or even avoided altogether. Depending on the method used for determination, HbA1c values may be spuriously elevated in thalassemia (or
other conditions with elevated hemoglobin F) and spuriously lower in
sickle cell disease (or other conditions with high red blood cell turnover). Fructosamine can be used instead of HbA1c in these patients.
Although values of HbA1c may vary according to the method used for
measurement, in individuals without diabetes, the HbA1c is usually less
than 6%. The HbA1c target should be individualized, but the general
recommendation of the ADA and the International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes is that children, adolescents, and young
adults with T1DM should aim to achieve an HbA1c of <7%.

Exercise

Regular, daily exercise with the goal of 60 minutes of moderate­to vigorous-­intensity aerobic activity daily, with vigorous muscle-­
strengthening and bone-­strengthening activities at least 3 days per
week is recommended for all children with T1D. A potential complication of exercise in patients with diabetes is the development of hypoglycemia during or within the hours after exercise. Patients and families
should be educated on the risk of hypoglycemia and taught strategies
to ameliorate this risk, including frequent glucose monitoring before,
during, and after exercise; modifying diet and insulin doses around
times of exercise; and ensuring access to fast-­acting carbohydrates during exercise to treat hypoglycemia should it develop. Regular exercise
also improves glucoregulation by increasing glucose use by muscles
and increasing the insulin receptor number. In patients who are in
poor metabolic control, vigorous exercise may precipitate ketoacidosis because of the exercise-­induced increase in the counterregulatory
hormones.

Benefits of Improved Glycemic Control

The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) established
conclusively the association between higher glucose levels and long-­
term microvascular complications. Intensive management produced
dramatic reductions of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy by
47–76%. The data from the adolescent cohort demonstrated the same
degree of improvement and the same relationship between the outcome measures of microvascular complications.

3533

The beneficial effect of intensified treatment was determined by the
degree of blood glucose normalization independently of the type of
intensified treatment used. Frequent blood glucose monitoring was
considered an important factor in achieving better glycemic control for
the intensively treated adolescents and adults. Patients who were intensively treated had individualized glucose targets, frequent adjustments
based on ongoing capillary blood glucose monitoring, and a team
approach that focused on the person with diabetes as the prime initiator of ambulatory care. Care was constantly adjusted toward reaching
normal or near-­normal glycemic goals while avoiding or minimizing
severe episodes of hypoglycemia. Teaching emphasized a preventive
approach to blood glucose fluctuations with constant readjustment to
counterbalance any high or low blood glucose readings. Target blood
glucose goals were adjusted upward if hypoglycemia could not be
prevented.
Total duration of diabetes contributes to development and severity of complications. Nonetheless, many professionals have concerns
about applying the results of the DCCT to preschool-­age children, who
often have hypoglycemia unawareness with unique safety issues, and to
prepubertal school-­age children, who were not included in the DCCT.
The follow-­up study to the DCCT, called Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications (EDIC), assessed the incidence and
predictors of cardiovascular disease events such as heart attack, stroke,
or needed heart surgery, as well as diabetic complications related to the
eye, kidney, and nerves. The EDIC demonstrated that intensive blood
glucose control reduced the risk of any cardiovascular disease event by
42%. In addition, intensive therapy reduced the risk of nonfatal heart
attack, stroke, or death from cardiovascular causes by 57%.

Hypoglycemic Reactions

Hypoglycemia is the major limitation to tight control of glucose levels. Once injected, insulin absorption and action are independent of
the glucose level, thus creating a unique risk of hypoglycemia from an
unbalanced insulin effect. Insulin analogs may help reduce, but cannot
eliminate, this risk. Most children with T1DM can expect mild hypoglycemia each week, moderate hypoglycemia a few times each year,
and severe hypoglycemia every few years. These episodes are usually
not predictable, although exercise, delayed meals or snacks, and wide
swings in glucose levels increase the risk. Infants and toddlers are at
higher risk for hypoglycemia because they have more variable meals
and activity levels, are unable to recognize early signs of hypoglycemia, and are limited in their ability to seek a source of oral glucose
to reverse the hypoglycemia. The very young have an increased risk
of permanently reduced cognitive function as a long-­term sequela of
severe hypoglycemia. For these reasons, a more relaxed degree of glucose control may be tolerated in infants and young children.
Hypoglycemia can occur at any time of the day or night. Early symptoms and signs (mild hypoglycemia) may occur with a sudden decrease
in blood glucose to levels that do not meet standard criteria for hypoglycemia in children without diabetes. The child may show pallor,
sweating, apprehension or fussiness, hunger, tremor, and tachycardia,
all as a result of the surge in catecholamines as the body attempts to
counter the excessive insulin effect. Behavioral changes such as tearfulness, irritability, and aggression are more prevalent in children. As
glucose levels decline further, cerebral glucopenia occurs with drowsiness, personality changes, mental confusion, and impaired judgment
(moderate hypoglycemia), progressing to inability to seek help and seizures or coma (severe hypoglycemia). Prolonged severe hypoglycemia
can result in a depressed sensorium or strokelike focal motor deficits
that persist after the hypoglycemia has resolved. Although permanent
sequelae are rare, severe hypoglycemia is frightening for the child and
family and can result in significant reluctance to attempt even moderate glycemic control afterward.
Important counterregulatory hormones in children include growth
hormone, cortisol, epinephrine, and glucagon. The latter two seem
more critical in the older child. Many older patients with long-­standing
T1DM lose their ability to secrete glucagon in response to hypoglycemia. In the young adult, epinephrine deficiency may also develop as
part of a general autonomic neuropathy. This substantially increases the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3534 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
risk of hypoglycemia because the early warning signals of a declining
glucose level are as a result of catecholamine release. Recurrent hypoglycemic episodes associated with tight metabolic control may aggravate partial counterregulatory deficiencies, producing a syndrome of
hypoglycemia unawareness and reduced ability to restore euglycemia
(hypoglycemia-­associated autonomic failure). Avoidance of hypoglycemia allows some recovery from this unawareness syndrome.
The most important factors in the management of hypoglycemia are
an understanding by the patient and family of the symptoms and signs
of the reaction and an anticipation of known precipitating factors such
as gym or sports activities. Tighter glucose control increases the risk.
Families should be taught to look for typical hypoglycemic scenarios
or patterns in the home blood glucose log, so that they may adjust the
insulin dose and avert predictable episodes. A source of emergency
glucose should be available at all times and places, including at school
and during visits to friends. If possible, it is important to document
the hypoglycemia before treating, because some symptoms may not
always be from hypoglycemia. Any child suspected of having a moderate to severe hypoglycemic episode should be treated before testing. It
is important not to give too much glucose in response to hypoglycemia;
15 g should be given as juice or a sugar-­containing beverage or candy,
and the blood glucose checked 15-­20 minutes later.
Patients, parents, and teachers should also be instructed in the
administration of glucagon when the child cannot take glucose orally.
Glucagon is available for intramuscular or subcutaneous injection and
as a nasal powder. A glucagon kit should be kept at home and school.
The intramuscular dose of glucagon is 0.5 mg if the child weighs less
than 20 kg and 1.0 mg if more than 20 kg; the subcutaneous dose (via
prefilled device) is 0.5 mg if less than 45 kg and 1.0 mg if more than
45 kg; the intranasal dose is 3 mg. Glucagon produces a brief release
of glucose from the liver. Glucagon often causes emesis, which precludes giving oral supplementation if the blood glucose declines after
the glucagon effects have waned. Caretakers must then be prepared to
take the child to the hospital for IV glucose administration, if necessary. Mini-­dose glucagon (10 μg/yr of age up to a maximum of 150 μg
subcutaneously) is effective in treating hypoglycemia in children with
blood glucose less than 60 mg/dL who fail to respond to oral glucose
and remain symptomatic. Glucagon is reconstituted as per standard
instructions, then drawn up for subcutaneous injection using a standard insulin syringe, whereby 1 unit is the equivalent of 10 mcg of
glucagon.

Dawn Phenomenon and Somogyi Phenomenon

There are several reasons that blood glucose levels increase in the early
morning hours before breakfast. The most common is a simple decline
in insulin levels. This usually results in routinely elevated morning
glucose. The dawn phenomenon is thought to be mainly caused by
overnight growth hormone secretion and increased insulin clearance.
It is a normal physiologic process seen in most adolescents without diabetes, who compensate with more insulin output. A child with T1DM
cannot compensate. The dawn phenomenon is usually recurrent and
modestly elevates most morning glucose levels. Rarely, high morning
glucose is caused by the Somogyi phenomenon, a theoretical rebound
from late-­night or early-­morning hypoglycemia thought to be from an
exaggerated counterregulatory response. It is unlikely to be a common
cause, in that most children remain hypoglycemic (do not rebound)
once nighttime glucose levels decline. CGMs may help clarify a child’s
ambiguously elevated morning glucose levels.

Behavioral/Psychologic Aspects and Eating Disorders

Diabetes in a child affects the lifestyle and interpersonal relationships
of the entire family. Feelings of anxiety and guilt are common in parents. Similar feelings, coupled with denial and rejection, are equally
common in children, particularly during the rebellious teenage years.
Family conflict has been associated with poor treatment adherence
and poor metabolic control among youths with T1DM. On the other
hand, it has been shown that shared responsibility is consistently associated with better psychologic health, good self-­care behavior, and
good metabolic control, whereas responsibility assumed by either the

child or parent alone does not have outcomes that are equally successful. In some cases, links of shared responsibility to health outcomes
were stronger among older adolescents. However, no specific personality disorder or psychopathology is characteristic of diabetes; similar
feelings are observed in families with children who have other chronic
diseases.

COGNITIVE FUNCTION

There is evidence that children with T1DM are at higher risk of developing small differences in cognitive abilities compared to healthy age-­
matched peers. Evidence suggests that early-­onset diabetes (younger
than 7 years) is associated with cognitive difficulties compared to late-­
onset diabetes and healthy controls. The cognitive difficulties observed
were primarily learning and memory skills (both verbal and visual)
and attention/executive function skills. It is likely that the impact of
diabetes on pediatric cognition appears shortly after diagnosis. Indeed,
it has been observed that early-­onset diabetes and longer duration of
diabetes in some children with diabetes adversely affect their school
performance and educational achievements.

COPING STYLES

Children and adolescents with T1DM are faced with a complex set of
developmental changes and shifting burdens of the disease. Adjustment problems might affect psychologic well-­being and the course of
the disease by affecting self-­management and leading to poor metabolic control. Coping styles refer to typical habitual preferences for
ways of approaching problems and might be regarded as strategies that
people generally use to cope across a wide range of stressors. Problem-­
focused coping refers to efforts directed toward rational management
of a problem, and it is aimed at changing the situation causing distress.
On the other hand, emotion-­focused coping implies efforts to reduce
emotional distress caused by the stressful event and to manage or regulate emotions that might accompany or result from the stressor. In adolescents with diabetes, avoidance coping and venting emotions have
been found to predict poor illness-­specific self-­care behavior and poor
metabolic control. Patients who use more mature defenses and exhibit
greater adaptive capacity are more likely to adhere to their regimen.
Coping strategies seem to be age dependent, with adolescents using
more avoidance coping than younger children with diabetes.

NONADHERENCE

Family conflict, anger, sadness, or denial and feelings of anxiety or loss
of control find expression in nonadherence to instructions regarding nutritional and insulin therapy and in noncompliance with self-­
monitoring. When adolescents externalize behavior problems, such
behaviors interfere with adherence and may result in deterioration of
glycemic control. Such externalizing behaviors are common, whereas
repeated omission of insulin resulting in ketoacidosis in the same individual is less common, and episodes of deliberate overdosage with
insulin resulting in hypoglycemia are even less prevalent. They may,
however, be pleas for psychologic help or be manipulative attempts to
escape an environment perceived as undesirable or intolerable; occasionally, they may be manifestations of suicidal intent. Frequent admissions to the hospital for ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia should arouse
suspicion of an underlying emotional conflict. Overprotectiveness on
the part of parents is common and often is not in the best interest of
the adolescent patient. Feelings of being different or of being alone,
or both, are common and must be acknowledged. Tailoring the insulin administration and the timing of meals and blood sugar tests may
support individual lifestyle choices. Aggregating what they know about
diabetes, families and patients worry about the risk of complications
from diabetes and about the decreased life span. Unfortunately, misinformation abounds about the risks of the development of diabetes in
siblings or offspring and of pregnancy in young diabetic women. Even
appropriate information may cause further anxiety.
All of these issues must be spoken about at the outset, and many of
these problems can be averted through continued empathic counseling based on correct information, focusing on normality and on planning to be a productive member of society. Recognizing the potential

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
impact of these problems and that feelings of isolation and frustration
tend to be lessened by the sharing of common problems, peer discussion groups have been organized in many locales. Summer camps
for diabetic children afford an excellent opportunity for learning and
sharing under expert supervision. Education about the pathophysiology of diabetes, insulin dose, technique of administration, nutrition,
exercise, and hypoglycemic reactions can be reinforced by medical and
paramedical personnel. The presence of numerous peers with similar
problems offers new insights to the diabetic child. Residential treatment for children and adolescents with difficult-­to-­manage T1DM is
rarely available.

ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION

It has been shown that there are significant correlations between poor
metabolic control and depressive symptoms, a high level of anxiety, or
a previous psychiatric diagnosis. In a similar way, poor metabolic control is related to higher levels of personal, social, school maladjustment,
or family environment dissatisfaction. It is estimated that 20–26% of
adolescent patients may develop major depressive disorder. The prevalence of depression is twofold greater than controls in children with
diabetes and threefold greater in adolescents. Additionally, the prevalence of psychopathology is greater in people with diabetes. The course
characteristics of depression in young diabetic subjects and psychiatric
control subjects appear to be similar. However, eventual propensity of
diabetic youths for more protracted depressions is greater. There is also
a higher risk of recurrence among young diabetic females. On balance,
anxiety and depression play an important and complex role in T1DM;
their relationship to metabolic control does not yet appear clear. Therefore the healthcare providers managing a child or adolescent with diabetes should be aware of their pivotal role as counselor and advisor
and should closely monitor the mental health of patients with diabetes. Accordingly, the recommendation is screening for anxiety and/or
depression in subjects exhibiting symptoms, using a validated screening tool, followed by the appropriate referral to mental health providers
when warranted.

FEAR OF SELF-­INJECTING AND SELF-­TESTING

Extreme fear of self-­injecting insulin (injection phobia) is likely to compromise glycemic control and emotional well-­being. Likewise, fear
of finger pricks of CGM and pump site insertions can be a source of
distress and may seriously hamper self-­management. Children and
adolescents may either omit insulin dosing or refuse to rotate their
injection sites because repeated injection in the same site is associated with less pain sensation. Failure to rotate injection sites results
in subcutaneous scar formation (lipohypertrophy). Insulin injection
into the lipohypertrophic skin is usually associated with poor insulin
absorption, consequent frustration with lack of expected glucose control, and/or insulin leakage with resultant suboptimal glycemic control.
Children and adolescents with injection phobia and fear of self-­testing
can be counseled by a trained behavioral therapist and benefit from
such techniques as desensitization and biofeedback to attenuate pain
sensation and psychologic distress associated with these procedures.

3535

EATING DISORDERS

Treatment of T1DM involves constant monitoring of food intake. In
addition, improved glycemic control is sometimes associated with
increased weight gain. These factors, along with individual, familial,
and socioeconomic factors, can lead to an increased incidence of both
nonspecific and specific eating disorders, which can disrupt glycemic
control and increase the risk of long-­term complications. Eating disorders and subthreshold eating disorders are almost twice as common
in adolescent females with T1DM as in their nondiabetic peers. There
is less information regarding the prevalence of eating disorders among
male adolescents with T1DM. The prevalence of eating disorders identified in females with T1DM has ranged from 9% to 32% in different
studies. Other studies have found that approximately 11% of T1DM
adolescent females take less insulin than prescribed to lose weight.
Among adolescent females with T1DM and an eating disorder, the
misuse of insulin to lose weight is not uncommon.
When behavioral/psychologic problems and/or eating disorders
are assumed to be responsible for poor adherence with the medical
regimen, referral for psychologic evaluation and management is indicated. Behavioral therapists and psychologists usually form part of the
pediatric diabetes team in most centers and can help assess and manage emotional and behavioral disorders in diabetic children. Evaluation of nurse-­delivered motivational enhancement with and without
cognitive-­behavioral therapy in adults revealed that combined therapy
resulted in modest improvement in glycemic control. However, motivational enhancement therapy alone did not improve glycemic control.
Whereas in some studies the effect of therapist-­delivered motivational
enhancement therapy on glycemic control in adolescents with T1DM
lasted only as long as intensive individualized counseling continued,
in other studies, motivational interviewing was shown to be an effective method of facilitating changes in a teenager’s behavior with T1DM,
with corresponding improvement in glycemic control.

Management During Infections

Although infections are no more common in diabetic children than in
nondiabetic ones, they can disrupt glucose control and may precipitate
DKA. In addition, the child with diabetes is at increased risk of dehydration if hyperglycemia causes an osmotic diuresis or if ketosis causes
emesis. Counterregulatory hormones associated with stress blunt insulin action and elevate glucose levels. If anorexia occurs from ketosis,
lack of caloric intake increases the risk of hypoglycemia. Although
children younger than 3 years of age tend to become hypoglycemic and
older children tend toward hyperglycemia, the overall effect is unpredictable. Therefore frequent blood glucose monitoring, monitoring of
urine and/or blood ketones, and adjustment of insulin doses are essential elements of sick day guidelines (Table 629.9).
The overall goals are to maintain hydration, control glucose levels,
and avoid ketoacidosis. This can usually be done at home if proper sick
day guidelines are followed and with telephone contact with healthcare
providers. The development of ketones in a patient on insulin pump
therapy may be a sign of infusion failure and the infusion set should
be changed. The family should seek advice if home treatment does not

Table 629.9  Guidelines for Sick Day Management
GLUCOSE TESTING AND EXTRA RAPID-­ACTING INSULIN
URINE KETONE STATUS

INSULIN

CORRECTION DOSES*

COMMENT

Negative or small†

q2h

q2h for glucose >250 mg/dL

Check ketones every other void

Moderate to large‡

q1h

q1h for glucose >250 mg/dL

Check ketones each void; go to
hospital if emesis occurs

*Give insulin based on individualized dosing schedule. Also give usual dose for carbohydrate intake if glucose >150 mg/dL.
†For home serum ketones <1.5 mmol/L per commercial kit.
‡For home serum ketones >1.5 mmol/L.

Basal insulin: glargine or detemir basal insulin should be given at the usual dose and time. NPH and lente should be reduced by half if blood glucose <150 mg/dL and the oral intake
is limited.
Oral fluids: sugar-­free if blood glucose >250 mg/dL (14 mmol/L); sugar-­containing if blood glucose <250 mg/dL.
Call physician or nurse if blood glucose remains elevated after three extra doses, if blood glucose remains <70 mg/dL and child cannot take oral supplement, if dehydration occurs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3536 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
control ketosis, hyperglycemia, or hypoglycemia or if the child shows
signs of dehydration or has persistent vomiting. A child with significant
ketosis and emesis should be seen in the emergency department for a
general examination, to evaluate hydration, and to determine whether
ketoacidosis is present by checking serum electrolytes, glucose, pH, and
total CO2. A child whose blood glucose declines to less than 50-­60 mg/
dL (2.8-­3.3 mmol/L) and who cannot maintain oral intake may need IV
glucose, especially if further insulin is needed to control ketosis.

Management During Surgery

Surgery can disrupt glucose control in the same way as intercurrent
infections can. Stress hormones associated with the underlying condition and with the surgery itself cause insulin resistance. This increases
glucose levels, exacerbates fluid losses, and may initiate DKA. On the
other hand, caloric intake is usually restricted, which decreases glucose
levels. The net effect is as difficult to predict as during an infection.
Vigilant monitoring and frequent insulin adjustments are required to
maintain euglycemia and avoid ketosis.
For most elective and other smaller surgical procedures, patients
can simply be continued on their typical home basal regimens. This
includes injection of the usual dose of long-­acting insulin at the usual
time for patients on shots. Patients on pumps can simply wear the
pump during the surgery, if approved by hospital policy. Blood sugar
should be monitored hourly during the procedure and perioperatively;
hyperglycemia can be corrected using the standard home ISF, and IV
dextrose can be provided as needed for hypoglycemia. For major procedures, trauma, or situations where a prolonged period of decreased
oral intake is expected postoperatively, it is advisable to manage insulin
requirements with an IV insulin drip (Table 629.10). IV insulin is typically started at a dose of 0.03 units/kg/hr for patients who are euglycemic at the time of surgery. Serum glucose levels should be followed
every hour operatively and perioperatively, and the insulin dose and/or
the dextrose concentration of the IV fluids can be adjusted as needed.
In patients who are found to be hyperglycemic preoperatively (serum
glucose >250 mg/dL), it is advisable to check for ketones before starting
surgery. If significant ketosis is identified, surgery should be delayed
(if possible) until the ketosis can be treated and resolved. Postoperatively, the patient should not be discharged until blood glucose levels
are stable and oral intake is tolerated.

LONG-­TERM COMPLICATIONS: RELATION TO
GLYCEMIC CONTROL

Complications of DM include microvascular complications, such as
retinopathy and nephropathy; macrovascular complications, including coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral
vascular disease; peripheral and autonomic neuropathies; and diabetic
osteopathy manifesting as increased risk for osteoporosis and fracture.

Diabetic Retinopathy

Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness in the United
States in adults age 20-­65 years. The risk of diabetic retinopathy after

Table 629.10  Guidelines for Intravenous Insulin Coverage
During Surgery
BLOOD GLUCOSE
LEVEL (mg/dL)

INSULIN INFUSION
(units/kg/hr)

BLOOD GLUCOSE
MONITORING

<120

0.00

1 hr

121-­200

0.03

2 hr

200-­300

0.06

2 hr

300-­400

0.08

1 hr*

400

0.10

1 hr*

*Check urine ketones.
An infusion of 5% glucose and 0.45% saline solution with 20 mEq/L of potassium
acetate is given at 1.5 times the maintenance rate.

15 years’ duration of diabetes is 98% for individuals with T1DM and
78% for those with T2DM. Rates for diabetic retinopathy range from
close to 15% to up to 30%. Lens opacities (caused by glycation of tissue proteins and activation of the polyol pathway) are present in at
least 5% of those younger than age 19 years. Metabolic control has an
impact on the development of this complication, as prevalence rates
are substantially higher with increased duration of diabetes and higher
HbA1c, hypertension, and high cholesterol levels. Independent of duration, the prevalence of diabetic retinopathy is higher in T1DM. Genetic
factors may have a role, because only 50% of patients develop proliferative retinopathy. The earliest clinically apparent manifestations of
diabetic retinopathy are classified as nonproliferative or background
diabetic retinopathy—microaneurysms, dot and blot hemorrhages,
hard and soft exudates, venous dilation and beading, and intraretinal
microvascular abnormalities. These changes do not impair vision. The
more severe form is proliferative diabetic retinopathy, which manifests
by neovascularization, fibrous proliferation, and preretinal and vitreous hemorrhages. Proliferative retinopathy, if not treated, is relentlessly
progressive and impairs vision, leading to blindness. The mainstay of
treatment is panretinal laser photocoagulation. In advanced diabetic
eye disease—manifested by severe vitreous hemorrhage or fibrosis,
often with retinal detachment—vitrectomy is an important therapeutic
modality. Eventually, the eye disease becomes quiescent, a stage termed
involutional retinopathy. A separate subtype of retinopathy is diabetic
maculopathy, which is manifested by severe macular edema impairing
central vision. Focal laser photocoagulation may be effective in treating
diabetic maculopathy.
Diabetic patients should have an initial dilated and comprehensive examination by an ophthalmologist shortly after the diagnosis
of diabetes is made in patients with T2DM and within 3-­5 years after
the onset of T1DM (but not before age 10 years). Any patients with
visual symptoms or abnormalities should be referred for ophthalmologic evaluation. Subsequent evaluations for both T1DM and T2DM
patients should be repeated every 1-­2 years as recommended by an eye
care professional experienced in the diagnosis and management of diabetic retinopathy (Table 629.11).

Diabetic Nephropathy

Diabetic nephropathy is the leading known cause of end-­stage renal disease (ESRD) in the United States. Most ESRD from diabetic nephropathy is preventable. Diabetic nephropathy affects 20–30% of patients
with T1DM and 15–20% of T2DM patients 20 years after onset. The
mean 5-­year life expectancy for patients with diabetes-­related ESRD is
less than 20%. The increased mortality risk in long-­term T1DM may
be the result of nephropathy, which may account for approximately
50% of deaths. The risk of nephropathy increases with the duration
of diabetes (up until 25-­30 years’ duration, after which this complication rarely begins), degree of metabolic control, and genetic predisposition to essential hypertension. Only 30–40% of patients affected by
T1DM eventually experience ESRD. The glycation of tissue proteins
results in glomerular basement membrane thickening. The course of
diabetic nephropathy is slow. An increased urinary albumin excretion
rate of 30-­300 mg/24 hr (20-­200 μg/min)—microalbuminuria—can
be detected and constitutes an early stage of nephropathy from intermittent to persistent (incipient), which is commonly associated with
glomerular hyperfiltration and blood pressure elevation. As nephropathy evolves to an early overt stage with proteinuria (albumin excretion
rate >300 mg/24 hr or >200 μg/min), it is accompanied by hypertension. Advanced-­stage nephropathy is defined by a progressive decline
in renal function (declining glomerular filtration rate and elevation
of serum blood urea and creatinine), progressive proteinuria, and
hypertension. Progression to ESRD is recognized by the appearance
of uremia, nephrotic syndrome, and the need for renal replacement
(transplantation or dialysis).
Screening for diabetic nephropathy is a routine aspect of diabetes care. The ADA recommends yearly screening for individuals
with T2DM and yearly screening for those with T1DM after 5 years’
duration of disease with a random spot urine sample for albumin-­
to-­creatinine ratio. Abnormal results should be confirmed by two

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3537

Table 629.11  Screening Guidelines
INITIAL TESTING

FREQUENCY

TEST

Thyroid disease

At diagnosis

Every 1-­2 yr or sooner if symptoms

TSH, thyroid antibodies

Celiac

At diagnosis

Within 2 yr and again at 5 yr or
sooner if symptoms

IgA and TTG

Hypertension

At diagnosis

Each visit

Elevated BP based on ≥90th%
for age, sex, height on three
separate occasions

Dyslipidemia

≥10 yr of age at diagnosis once glucose
control established

If abnormal annually; every 5 yr if
initially normal

Goal LDL-­C <100 mg/dL

Nephropathy

At puberty or age ≥10 yr whichever comes
first, if T1DM ≥5 yr

Annually

Albuminuria; urine albumin-­to-­
creatinine ratio

Retinopathy

T1DM ≥3-­5 yr when ≥10 yr or puberty,
whichever comes first

Annually

Dilated eye exam

Neuropathy

At puberty or ≥10 year, whichever earlier if
T1DM >5 yr

Annually

Foot exam

BP, Blood pressure; IgA, immunoglobulin A; LDL, low density lipoprotein; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; TTG, tissue transglutaminase.
Data from American Diabetes Association. Children and adolescents: standards of medical care in diabetes—2018. Diabetes Care. 2018;41(Suppl 1):S126–S136.

additional specimens on separate days because of the high variability
of albumin excretion in patients with diabetes. Short-­term hyperglycemia, strenuous exercise, urinary tract infections, marked hypertension,
heart failure, and acute febrile illness can cause transient elevation in
urinary albumin excretion. There is marked day-­to-­day variability in
albumin excretion, so at least two of three collections done in a 3-­to
6-­month period should show elevated levels before microalbuminuria
is diagnosed and treatment is started. Once albuminuria is diagnosed,
a number of factors attenuate the effect of hyperfiltration on kidneys: (1) meticulous control of hyperglycemia, (2) aggressive control
of systemic blood pressure, (3) selective control of arteriolar dilation
by use of angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors (thus decreasing
transglomerular capillary pressure), and (4) dietary protein restriction
(because high protein intake increases the renal perfusion rate). Tight
glycemic control will delay the progression of microalbuminuria and
slow the progression of diabetic nephropathy.

DIABETIC NEUROPATHY

Both the peripheral and autonomic nervous systems can be involved;
diabetic neuropathy can develop in both children and adolescents. The
etiology of diabetic neuropathy remains incompletely understood, and
the impact of hyperglycemia on its development remains uncertain.
Observational studies done in the years before the era of intensive insulin therapy for T1DM reported a higher incidence of neuropathy compared with more recent studies. However, several studies have found
that the development of preclinical and symptomatic peripheral diabetic neuropathy in childhood is not strongly associated with either
glycemic control or duration of disease. The polyol pathway, nonenzymatic glycation, and/or disturbances of myoinositol metabolism,
affecting one or more cell types in the multicellular constituents of
the peripheral nerve, have been hypothesized to have an inciting role.
Other factors, such as possible direct neurotrophic effects of insulin,
insulin-­related growth factors, nitric oxide, and stress proteins, may
also contribute to the development of neuropathy. Using quantitative
sensory testing, abnormal cutaneous thermal perception is a common
finding in both upper and lower limbs in neurologically asymptomatic
young diabetic patients. Heat-­induced pain threshold in the hand is
correlated with the duration of the diabetes. There is no correlation
between quantitative sensory testing scores and metabolic control.
Subclinical motor nerve impairment as manifested by reduced sensory
nerve conduction velocity and sensory nerve action potential amplitude have been detected in as many as 10–58% of children with diabetes. An early sign of autonomic neuropathy, such as decreased heart rate
variability, may present in adolescents with a history of long-­standing
disease and poor metabolic control. A number of therapeutic strategies

have been attempted with variable results. These treatment modalities include (1) improvement in metabolic control, (2) use of aldose
reductase inhibitors to reduce by-­products of the polyol pathway, (3)
use of α-­lipoic acid (an antioxidant) that enhances tissue nitric oxide
and its metabolites, (4) use of anticonvulsants (e.g., lorazepam, valproate, gabapentin, carbamazepine, pregabalin, phenytoin, tiagabine, and
topiramate) for treatment of neuropathic pain, and (5) use of antidepressants (amitriptyline, imipramine, and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors). Additional medications include antiarrhythmics such as
lidocaine, topical analgesics, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

Skeletal Effects of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus

The skeleton is adversely affected by diabetes, with T1DM patients at
greater risk for skeletal complications than those with T2DM. T1DM is
associated with an increased risk of fracture that first becomes evident
in childhood and persists across the entire life span. This includes a
dramatically increased hip fracture risk in adults, ranging from two-­
to sevenfold higher than patients without diabetes, depending on the
population studied. Most, but not all, studies have shown T1DM to
be associated with low bone mineral density. This differs from T2DM,
where bone density is normal or even above average because of
increased mechanical loading in association with obesity. The deficits
in bone density do not appear to be sufficient to explain the degree of
increased fracture risk, leading to the hypothesis that bone quality may
be impaired as well. The mechanism(s) underlying diabetic-­related
osteopathy is poorly understood and presumed to be multifactorial.
Most, but not all, studies show an association between poor glycemic
control and adverse skeletal outcomes, suggesting a role for hyperglycemia and/or insulin deficiency. Chronic exposure to hyperglycemia
may weaken bone strength through the accumulation of advanced
glycation end products (AGEs) in bone. Other factors hypothesized to
impair bone health in diabetes include chronic inflammation, abnormalities in the growth hormone-­insulin-­like growth factor 1 (IGF-­1)
axis, and abnormalities in bone mineral metabolism including excess
urinary calcium loss. There are no standard guidelines for bone health
screening in children. Assessment of bone density by dual-­energy
x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA) and markers of bone mineral metabolism
is recommended in adults with fracture history and other risk factors
for osteoporosis. Dietary education should reinforce the importance
of meeting the recommended daily allowance (RDA) for calcium and
vitamin D intake from diet and supplements.

Other Complications

Mauriac syndrome is a rare complication related to chronic under-­
insulinization that is characterized by growth failure and hepatomegaly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3538 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
caused by excess glycogen accumulation in the liver. It has become
much less common since longer-­acting insulins have become available.
Clinical features of Mauriac syndrome include moon face, protuberant
abdomen, proximal muscle wasting, and enlarged liver from fat and
glycogen infiltration.
The syndrome of limited joint mobility is frequently associated
with the early development of diabetic microvascular complications,
such as retinopathy and nephropathy, which may appear before 18
years of age. The prevalence of limited joint mobility has significantly
decreased, which is attributed to the improved overall metabolic control of children and adolescents with T1DM.

PROGNOSIS

T1DM is a serious, chronic disease. It has been estimated that the average life span of individuals with diabetes is approximately 10 years
shorter than that of people without diabetes, but with improved care,
that figure is lessening consistently. Although most children with T1DM
eventually attain a height within the normal adult range, puberty may
be delayed, and the final height may be less than the genetic potential.
From studies in identical twins, it is apparent that despite seemingly
satisfactory control, the affected twin manifests delayed puberty and a
substantial reduction in height when the onset of disease occurs before
puberty. These observations indicate that, in the past, conventional criteria for judging control were inadequate and that adequate control of
T1DM was almost never achieved by routine means.
The changing pattern of metabolic control is having a profound
influence on reducing the incidence and the severity of certain complications. For example, after 20 years of diabetes, there was a decline
in the incidence of nephropathy in T1DM in Sweden among children
whose disease was diagnosed in 1971–1775 compared with in the preceding decade. In addition, in most patients with microalbuminuria in
whom it was possible to obtain good glycemic control, microalbuminuria disappeared. This improved prognosis is directly related to metabolic control.

PANCREAS AND ISLET TRANSPLANTATION AND
REGENERATION

In an attempt to cure T1DM, transplantation of a segment of the pancreas or of isolated islets has been performed in adults. These procedures are both technically demanding and associated with the risks of
disease recurrence and complications of rejection or its treatment by
immunosuppression. Long-­term complications of immunosuppression include the development of malignancy. Some antirejection drugs,
notably cyclosporine and tacrolimus, are toxic to the islets of Langerhans, impairing insulin secretion and even causing diabetes. Hence,
segmental pancreas transplantation is generally only performed in
association with transplantation of a kidney for a patient with ESRD
caused by diabetic nephropathy in which the immunosuppressive regimen is indicated for the renal transplantation. Several thousand such
transplants have been performed in adults. With experience and better
immunosuppressive agents, functional survival of the pancreatic graft
may be achieved for up to several years, during which time patients
may be in metabolic control with no or minimal exogenous insulin and
reversal of some of the microvascular complications. However, because
children and adolescents with DM are not likely to have ESRD from
their diabetes, pancreas transplantation as a primary treatment in children cannot be recommended.
Islet cell transplantation is challenging because of limited survival
of the transplanted cells and because of rejection. An islet transplantation strategy (Edmonton protocol) infused isolated pancreatic islets
into the portal vein of adults with T1DM, along with immunosuppressive medications that had lower side effect profiles than other drugs.
Although lasting insulin independence was initially low, engraftment and insulin independence have improved over the last decade,
and over a thousand patients have undergone the procedure. There
has been improved islet engraftment using improved induction and
maintenance immunosuppression. Still, in 5-­year follow-­up studies,
only ∼10% maintain insulin independence, with an average duration
of insulin independence of ∼15 months. Long-­term challenges remain

the toxicity of immunosuppression, the limited procurement of viable
tissue, and funding and limitations of engraftment itself.

629.3 Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
David R. Weber
Formerly known as non–insulin-­dependent diabetes or adult-­onset diabetes, T2DM is a heterogeneous disorder, characterized by peripheral
insulin resistance and failure of the β cell to keep up with increasing
insulin demand. Patients with T2DM have relative rather than absolute
insulin deficiency. Generally, they are not ketosis prone, but ketoacidosis
is the initial presentation in 5–10% of affected subjects (Table 629.12).

NATURAL HISTORY

T2DM is a heterogenous, polygenic disease aggravated by environmental factors, including low physical activity and excessive caloric
intake. Most patients are obese, although the disease can occasionally
be seen in normal-­weight individuals. People of Asian ancestry appear
to be at risk for T2DM at lower degrees of total adiposity. Obesity, in
particular central obesity, is associated with the development of insulin
resistance (Fig. 629.10). In addition, patients who are at risk for developing T2DM exhibit decreased glucose-­
induced insulin secretion.
Obesity does not lead to the same degree of insulin resistance in all
individuals, and even those who develop insulin resistance do not necessarily exhibit impaired β-­cell function. Thus many obese individuals
have some degree of insulin resistance but compensate for it by increasing insulin secretion.
Those individuals who are unable to adequately compensate for
insulin resistance by increasing insulin secretion develop IGT and IFG,
usually, although not always, in that order. Hepatic insulin resistance
leads to excessive hepatic glucose output (failure of insulin to suppress
hepatic glucose output), and skeletal muscle insulin resistance leads to
decreased glucose uptake in a major site of glucose disposal. Over time
hyperglycemia worsens, a phenomenon that has been attributed to the
deleterious effect of chronic hyperglycemia (glucotoxicity) or chronic
hyperlipidemia (lipotoxicity) on β-­cell function and is often accompanied by increased triglyceride content and decreased insulin gene
expression.
At some point, blood glucose elevation meets the criteria for a diagnosis of T2DM (see Table 629.2), but most patients with T2DM remain
asymptomatic for months to years after this point because hyperglycemia is moderate and symptoms are not as dramatic as the polyuria and
weight loss at presentation of T1DM. Weight gain may even continue.
The prolonged hyperglycemia may be accompanied by the development of microvascular and macrovascular complications. Among the
differences between T2DM in children and adults is a faster decline in
β-­cell function and insulin secretion, as well as faster development of
diabetes complications in children.
In T2DM, insulin deficiency is rarely absolute, so patients usually do
not need insulin to survive, at least early in the disease course. However, in some cases, the degree of hyperglycemia is such that exogenous
insulin therapy is needed. DKA is uncommon in patients with T2DM
but does occur and appears to be more common in children than in
adults. Although it is generally believed that autoimmune destruction
of pancreatic β-­cells does not occur in T2DM, autoimmune markers of
T1DM—namely, GAD, ICA512, and IAA—may be positive in ∼30%
of the cases of adolescent T2DM. The presence of these autoimmune
markers does not rule out T2DM in children and adolescents. At the
same time, because of the general increase in obesity, the presence
of obesity does not preclude the diagnosis of T1DM. Although most
newly diagnosed children and adolescents can be confidently assigned
a diagnosis of T1DM or T2DM, a few exhibit features of both types and
are difficult to classify.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The prevalence of T2DM in children (10-­19 years) has risen dramatically from 34 cases per 100,000 youth in 2001 to 67 cases per 100,000

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3539

Table 629.12  Characteristics at Presentation for Type 1, Type 2, and Monogenic Diabetes
TYPE 1 DIABETES

TYPE 2 DIABETES

MATURITY-­ONSET DIABETES OF
THE YOUNG

Age of onset during childhood and
adolescence

Any

Rarely before puberty

Any

Weight status

Any

Rarely with normal weight

Any

Symptomatic (polyuria, polydipsia, weight
loss)

Nearly universal

Two thirds

Common

Duration of symptoms before presentation

<1 mo

Frequently >1 mo

Any

Diabetic ketoacidosis at presentation

Common

Rare (6–11%)

—

Family history of diabetes before age 40

Uncommon

Strong family history for type 2
diabetes

Very strong family history, classically
in three generations

Acanthosis nigricans

Rare

Common (86%)

—

Ethnicity

Any

Predominantly Black or minority
ethnicity

Any

Diabetes-­associated antibodies (IA2,
glutamate decarboxylase, insulin)

Positive in majority

Negative (<10%)

Negative (<1%)

Pathogenic variants in HNF1A, GCK, or
HNF4A

Negative

Negative

Nearly universal

Complications at presentation

Very rare

Common

Rare

IA2, Tyrosine phosphatase-­related islet antigen 2.
From Viner R, White B, Christie D. Type 2 diabetes in adolescents: a severe phenotype posing major clinical challenges and public health burden. Lancet. 2017;389:2252–2260.

in 2017. Certain ethnic groups appear to be at higher risk; for example,
Native Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Black Americans (in that
order) have higher incidence rates than White Americans (Fig. 629.11).
Although most children presenting with diabetes have T1DM, the percentage of children presenting with T2DM is increasing and represents
up to 50% of the newly diagnosed children in some centers.

GENETICS

T2DM has a strong genetic component; concordance rates among
identical twins are in the 40–80% range, but there is not a simple mendelian pattern. Twinning itself increases the risk of T2DM (because
of intrauterine growth restriction), and this may distort estimates of
genetic risk. Monozygotic twins have a lifetime concordance of T2DM
of around 70%, indicating that shared environmental factors (including the prenatal environment) may have a role in the development of
T2DM; dizygotic twins have a lifetime concordance of around 20–30%.
The genetic basis for T2DM is complex and incompletely defined; no
single identified defect predominates. Genome-­wide association studies have identified certain genetic polymorphisms that are associated
with increased T2DM risk in most populations studied; the most consistently identified are variants of TCF7L2, which may have a role in
β-­cell function. Other identified risk alleles include variants in PPARG
and KCNJ11-­ABCC8. These variants only explain a small portion
(probably less than 20%) of the population risk of diabetes, and in
many cases the mechanism by which these polymorphisms confer risk
of T2DM is not clear.

EPIGENETICS AND FETAL PROGRAMMING

Low birthweight and intrauterine growth restriction are associated
with increased risk of T2DM. This risk appears to be higher in low-­
birthweight infants who gain weight more rapidly in the first few
years of life. These findings have led to the formulation of the thrifty
phenotype hypothesis, which postulates that poor fetal nutrition programs these children to maximize storage of nutrients and makes
them more prone to future weight gain and development of diabetes. Epigenetic modifications may play a role in this phenomenon,
given that so few of the known T2DM genes are associated with low
birthweight.

ENVIRONMENTAL AND LIFESTYLE-­RELATED RISK
FACTORS

Obesity is the most important lifestyle factor associated with development of T2DM. This, in turn, is associated with the intake of
high-­energy foods, physical inactivity, excess screen time, and low
socioeconomic status. Maternal smoking also increases the risk of
diabetes and obesity in the offspring. Increasingly, exposure to land
pollutants and air pollutants is demonstrated to contribute to insulin
resistance. The lipophilic nature of these organic pollutants and their
consequent storage in adipose tissue may promote obesity and insulin
resistance. In addition, sleep deprivation and psychosocial stress are
associated with increased risk of obesity in childhood and with IGT
in adults, possibly via overactivation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
adrenal axis. Many antipsychotics (especially the atypical antipsychotics like olanzapine and quetiapine) and antidepressants (both
tricyclic antidepressants and newer antidepressants like fluoxetine and
paroxetine) induce weight gain. In addition to the risk conferred by
increased obesity, some of these medications may also have a direct
role in causing insulin resistance, β-­cell dysfunction, leptin resistance,
and activation of inflammatory pathways.

CLINICAL FEATURES

In the United States, T2DM in children is more likely to be diagnosed in
Native American, Hispanic American, and Black American youth, with
the highest incidence being reported in Pima Indian youth. Although
cases may be seen as young as 4 years of age, most are diagnosed in adolescence; the incidence increases with increasing age. Family history of
T2DM is present in most cases. Patients are obese and present with
mild symptoms of polyuria and polydipsia or are asymptomatic and
T2DM is detected on screening tests. Presentation with DKA occurs in
∼10% of cases. Physical examination frequently reveals the presence of
acanthosis nigricans, most commonly on the neck and in other flexural
areas. Other findings may include striae and an increased waist-­to-­hip
ratio. Laboratory testing reveals elevated HbA1c levels. Hyperlipidemia
characterized by elevated triglycerides and low-­density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels is commonly seen in patients with T2DM at diagnosis. Lipid screening is indicated in all new cases of T2DM. The current
recommendation is that blood pressure measurement, random urine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pathophysiologic disease drivers

3540 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Hyperglycemia

β-cell function
Insulin resistance

Adiposopathy

Obesity

Prediabetes

Resolution of
metabolic
syndrome
Goals of therapy

Clinical disease state

Metabolic syndrome

Prevention of
comorbidities

Prevention of
prediabetes

Diabetes

Improvement in
metabolic
syndrome

Improvement in
metabolic
syndrome

Resolution of
prediabetes

Resolution of
diabetes

Prevention of
diabetes

Prevention of
complications

Microvascular
and
macrovascular
complications

Improvement in
diabetes
Resolution,
improvement, or
stabilization
of complications

Fig. 629.10 The disease continuum for weight-­related type 2 diabetes. (From Lingvay I, Sumithran P, Cohen RV, le Roux CW. Obesity management
as a primary treatment goal for type 2 diabetes: time to reframe the conversation. Lancet. 2022;399:394–404.)

Presentation

Characteristics
65–70% are female in all cohorts; ethnic minorities are predominantly affected, although ethnic groups vary by country

97% overweight or obese

Sex

Ethnicity (TODAY cohort, USA)
Asian
(2%)

Symptomatic at presentation

Male
(35%)

Black
(9%)

Other
t(5%)

White
(20%)
Female
(65%)

Symptoms of hyperglycemia in 67%

Ethnicity (NPDA cohort, USA)
Mixed
(8%)

Other
(6%)

Hispanic
(41%)

White
(43%)

Asian
(35%)

Black
(31%)

DKA in 6–11%
HSS in 2%

Family history of type 2
diabetes in 90%
Type 2 diabetes in nuclear family (60%); Type 2 diabetes in grandparents (30%)
Complications at diagnosis
Complications are common at diagnosis in adolescent type 2 diabetes
High triglycerides

10·2%

High LDL cholesterol

4·5%

86% with acanthosis nigricans
Low HDL cholesterol

80%

Hypertension

14%
13%

Microalbuminuria
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Fig. 629.11 Features of adolescent type 2 diabetes at diagnosis. DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis. HHS, hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome;
NPDA, National Diabetes Pediatric Audit; TODAY, Treatment Options for Type 2 Diabetes in Adolescents and Youth. (From Viner R, White B, Christie
D. Type 2 diabetes in adolescents: a severe phenotype posing major clinical challenges and public health burden. Lancet. 2017;389:2252–2260.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
albumin-­to-­creatinine ratio, and a dilated eye examination should be
performed at diagnosis.
Because hyperglycemia develops slowly and patients may be asymptomatic for months or years after they develop T2DM, screening is
recommended in high-­risk children (Table 629.13). All youth who are
overweight and have at least one other risk factor should be tested for
T2DM beginning at age 10 years or at the onset of puberty. Risk factors
include family history of T2DM in first-­or second-­degree relatives,
history of gestational diabetes in the mother, belonging to a high-­risk
racial or ethnic group (i.e., Native American, Black American, Hispanic, or Asian/Pacific Islander groups), and having signs of insulin
resistance (e.g., acanthosis nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia, or
polycystic ovary syndrome). The current recommendation is to use
the HbA1c the screening tool; fasting plasma glucose is also acceptable.
In borderline or asymptomatic cases, the diagnosis may be confirmed
using a standard OGTT, but this test is not required if typical symptoms are present or fasting plasma glucose or HbA1c is clearly elevated.

TREATMENT

T2DM is a progressive syndrome that gradually leads to complete insulin deficiency during the patient’s life. A systematic approach for the
treatment of T2DM should be implemented according to the natural
course of the disease, including adding insulin when hyperglycemia
cannot be controlled by lifestyle and noninsulin pharmacotherapy.
Lifestyle modification (diet and exercise) is an essential part of the
treatment regimen, and consultation with a dietitian is usually necessary (see Fig. 629.10). An oral agent monotherapy may not maintain
lasting glucose control in close to half of those with T2DM.
Recommendations are to implement a comprehensive lifestyle modification plan designed to induce weight loss of 7–10%. There is no specific dietary or exercise regimen that has been conclusively shown to be
superior, and practitioners recommend a low-­calorie, low-­fat diet and
30-­60 minutes of physical activity at least 5 times a week. Screen time
should be limited to 1-­2 hours a day. Education is provided to diminish
unhealthy habits such as skipping meals, heavy snacking, and excessive screen time. Adolescents may engage in non–appetite-­based eating (i.e., emotional eating, television-­cued eating, boredom) and cyclic
dieting (“yo-­yo” dieting). Treatment in these cases is frequently challenging and may not be successful unless the entire family buys into the
need to change their unhealthy lifestyle.
Pharmacologic therapy should be initiated at diagnosis of T2DM.
Noninsulin pharmacotherapies used in the treatment of T2DM are
shown in Table 629.14; most of these are not approved for use in patients
under the age of 18 years. Metformin is the first line of pharmacotherapy and should be started in all patients. Renal insufficiency and liver
disease are contraindications to metformin use and may increase the
risk of lactic acidosis. Patients with markedly elevated liver transaminases should undergo evaluation by a gastroenterologist/hepatologist
before initiating therapy. The starting dose is 500-­1000 mg/day, which

Table 629.13  Testing for Type 2 Diabetes in Children
• Criteria*
Overweight (body mass index >85th percentile for age and sex
Plus
One or more of the following risk factors:
Family history of type 2 diabetes in first-­or second-­degree
relative or gestational diabetes in the mother
High risk racial/ethnic background (Native American, Black
American, Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander)
Signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin
resistance (acanthosis nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia,
polycystic ovary syndrome)
• Age of initiation: age 10 yr or at onset of puberty if puberty
occurs at a younger age
• Frequency: every 1-­2 yr, based upon clinical suspicion
• Test: fasting glucose, HbA1c, or oral glucose tolerance teat
*Clinical judgment should be used to test for diabetes in high-­risk patients who do not
meet these criteria.

3541

should be increased over a few weeks to the full therapeutic dose of
2,000 mg daily. Patients who present with significant (HbA1c >8.5%)
or symptomatic (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia) hyperglycemia should be
started on basal insulin with a long-­acting insulin analog, typically at a
dose of 0.5 units/kg/day. Those presenting in DKA will require initial
treatment with insulin using protocols similar to those used for treating T1DM. Once blood glucose levels are under control, many cases
can be managed with hypoglycemic agents and lifestyle interventions,
but some patients will continue to require insulin therapy.
Ongoing care should include periodic review of weight and BMI,
diet, and physical activity; blood glucose monitoring; and monitoring
of HbA1c at 3-­month intervals. Frequency of home glucose monitoring
can range from 3-­4 times daily for those on multiple daily insulin injections to twice daily for those on a stable long-­acting insulin regimen
or metformin. Alternatively, blood glucose monitoring can be done by
CGM. Patients who fail to achieve glycemic targets (typically HbA1c
<7%) with lifestyle modification and metformin alone will require
escalation of therapy with the addition of basal insulin or liraglutide.
Liraglutide is an injectable glucagon-­like peptide-­1 (GLP-­1) analog
approved by the FDA for use in children ≥10 years. A potential benefit
of liraglutide over basal insulin is that it may promote weight loss. The
typical starting dose is 0.6 mg/daily, increased as tolerated by 0.6 mg/
day per week until a maximum dose of 1.8 mg is achieved. Gastrointestinal symptoms are the most common side effect. Liraglutide is
contraindicated in patients with a personal or family history of medullary thyroid cancer or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2),
based on animal data showing a dose-­and duration-­dependent effect
to promote thyroid C-­cell tumors in rodents.
Other agents such as thiazolidinediones, sulfonylureas, other GLP-­1
analogs, dipeptidyl peptidase-­4 inhibitors (DPP-­4 inhibitors), pramlintide, and sodium-­
glucose transport protein inhibitors (SGLT2
inhibitors) are used with variable frequency in adults but are infrequently used in children. Sulfonylureas cause insulin release by closing
the potassium channel (KATP) on β cells. They are occasionally used
when metformin monotherapy is unsuccessful or contraindicated for
some reason (use in certain forms of neonatal diabetes is discussed
in the relevant section). Thiazolidinediones increase insulin sensitivity via activation of the peroxisome proliferator-­activated receptor
pathway, but use is limited because of concerns about adverse cardiac
effects. Pramlintide is an analog of islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP),
which delays gastric emptying, suppresses glucagon, and possibly suppresses food intake. It is not approved for pediatric use and increases
the risk of hypoglycemia when used with insulin or other hypoglycemic agents.
Incretins are gut-­derived peptides like GLP-­1, GLP-­2, and GIP
(glucose-­dependent insulinotropic peptide, previously known as gastric inhibitory protein) that are secreted in response to meals and act to
enhance insulin secretion and action, suppress glucagon production,
and delay gastric emptying (among other actions). Other daily and
weekly forms of GLP-­1 agonists beyond liraglutide are commonly used
in adults. DPP-­4 inhibitors are oral agents that prolong the action of
GLP-­1 and are currently being studied for use in children. The SGLT-­2
inhibitors act by blocking glucose reabsorption in the proximal renal
tubule and are commonly used as second-­or third-­line agents in adults,
with specific benefits in improving cardiorenal outcomes in patients
with heart failure or declining renal function. SGLT-­2 inhibitors are
currently under evaluation for potential use in children. Adults with
T2DM have been treated with double incretion therapy (tirzepatide)
with the combination of a GLP-­1 agonist and GIP.
Further rises in HbA1c despite the addition of basal insulin and/or
liraglutide will necessitate addition of short-­acting insulin at mealtimes. Bariatric surgery is also used in adolescents with moderate to
severe obesity and frequently leads to complete remission of T2DM.
Guidelines for the routine use of bariatric surgery in adolescents continue to emerge, but expert opinion suggests that adolescents with BMI
≥35 or 120% of the 95th percentile for age and gender with a clinically
significant complication (including T2DM) are potential candidates,
provided there is access to a quality multidisciplinary center with pediatric experience.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3542 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.14  Noninsulin Pharmacotherapies Used to Treat T2DM
MEDICATIONS

CLASS

MECHANISM OF ACTION

ROUTE

FDA-­APPROVED AGE

Pramlintide

Amylin analogue

Increases satiety, slows gastric emptying,
and suppresses postprandial glucagon
secretion, resulting in decreased
postmeal glucose excursions

Subcutaneous
injection

>18 yr

Metformin

Biguanide

Improves hepatic insulin sensitivity.
Increases GLP-­1 and PYY

Oral

>10 yr

Alogliptin
Linagliptin
Saxagliptin
Sitagliptin

DPP-­4 inhibitors

Inhibits DPP-­4 from degrading GLP-­1 and
GIP

Oral

>18 yr

Albiglutide
Dulaglutide
Exenatide
Liraglutide
Lixisenatide
Semaglutide

Glucagon-­like
peptide agonists

Increase release of GLP-­1, which stimulates
release of insulin

Subcutaneous
injection

>8 yr, with exception of
liraglutide, which is >10 yr

Nateglinide
Repaglinide

Meglitinides

Causes rapid secretion of insulin by acting
Oral
on the ATP sensitive potassium channel of
pancreatic beta cells

>18 yr

Canagliflozin
Dapagliflozin
Empagliflozin
Ertugliflozin

Sodium-­glucose
co-transporter 2
inhibitors

Promotes renal excretion of glucose at the
level of the proximal tubule causing an
osmotic diuresis

Oral

>18 yr

Gliclazide
Glimepiride
Glipizide
Glyburide

Sulfonylureas

Increase insulin section via interaction with
the K-­ATP channel in β cells

Oral

>18 yr

Pioglitazone
Rosiglitazone

Thiazolidinediones

Increase insulin sensitivity at adipose and
muscle tissue

Oral

>18 yr

DPP-­4, Dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide; GLP-­1, glucagon-­like peptide 1 agonist; PYY, peptide YY.

COMPLICATIONS

In one study of diabetes in youth, 92% of the patients with T2DM had
two or more elements of metabolic syndrome (hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, decreased high-­density lipoprotein, increased waist
circumference), including 70% with hypertension. In addition, the
incidence of microalbuminuria and diabetic retinopathy appears to
be higher in T2DM than it is in T1DM. In long-­term follow-­up from
another study, the participants at a mean of age 26 years reported a
cumulative incidence of hypertension of 68%, dyslipidemia 52%, diabetic kidney disease 55%, and nerve disease 32%.
Given the extremely high risk of diabetes-­related comorbidities, routine screening for microalbuminuria, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and
retinopathy should commence shortly after diagnosis. Sleep apnea and
fatty liver disease are being diagnosed with increasing frequency and
may necessitate referral to the appropriate specialists. Complications
associated with all forms of diabetes and recommendations for screening are noted in Table 629.12; Table 629.15 lists conditions particularly
associated with T2DM.

PREVENTION

The difficulties in achieving good glucose control and preventing diabetes complications make prevention a compelling strategy. This is
particularly true for T2DM, which is linked to modifiable risk factors
(obesity, a sedentary lifestyle). The Diabetes Prevention Program demonstrated that intensified lifestyle or drug intervention in individuals
with IGT prevented or delayed the onset of T2DM. Lifestyle intervention reduced the diabetes incidence by 58%; metformin reduced the
incidence by 31% compared with placebo. Lifestyle interventions are
believed to have similar beneficial effects in obese adolescents with
IGT.

629.4 Other Specific Types of Diabetes
David R. Weber
Most cases of diabetes in children and adults fall into the two broad
categories of T1DM and T2DM, but between 1% and 10% of cases are
caused by single-­gene disorders. These disorders include hereditary
defects of β-­cell function and insulin action, as well as rare forms of
mitochondrial diabetes.

GENETIC DEFECTS OF β-­CELL FUNCTION
Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus

Neonatal diabetes is transient in approximately 50% of cases, but
after an interim period of normal glucose tolerance, 50–60% of these
patients develop permanent diabetes (at an average age of 14 years).
It remains to be determined whether this association of transient diabetes in the newborn followed much later in life by classic T1DM is a
chance occurrence or causally related (Fig. 629.12).
The syndrome of transient DM in the newborn infant has its onset
in the first week of life and persists several weeks to months before
spontaneous resolution. Median duration is 12 weeks. It occurs most
often in infants who are small for gestational age and is characterized
by hyperglycemia and pronounced glycosuria, resulting in severe dehydration and, at times, metabolic acidosis, but with only minimal or no
ketonemia or ketonuria. There may also be findings such as umbilical
hernia or large tongue. Insulin responses to glucose or tolbutamide are
low to absent; basal plasma insulin concentrations are normal. After
spontaneous recovery, the insulin responses to these same stimuli are
brisk and normal, implying a possible functional delay in β-­cell maturation with spontaneous resolution. Occurrence of the syndrome in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3543

Table 629.15  Monitoring for Complications and Comorbidities in T2DM
CONDITION

SCREENING TEST

Hypertension

Blood pressure

Fatty liver

Aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, possibly liver
ultrasound

Polycystic ovary syndrome

Menstrual history, assessment for androgen excess with free/total
testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate

Microalbuminuria

Urine albumin concentration and albumin-­to-­creatinine ratios

Dyslipidemia

Fasting lipid profile (total, low-­density lipoprotein, high-­density lipoprotein
cholesterol, triglycerides)

Sleep apnea

Polysomnography: Sleep study to assess overnight oxygen saturation,
airflow, heart rate, electromyography, and eye movements

consecutive siblings has been reported. About 70% of cases are the
result of abnormalities of an imprinted locus on chromosome 6q24,
resulting in overexpression of paternally expressed genes such as
PLAGL1/ZAC and HYMAI. Most of the remaining cases are caused by
pathogenic variants in KATP channels. Variants in KATP channels also
cause many cases of permanent neonatal diabetes, but there is practically no overlap between the variants that lead to transient neonatal
DM and those causing permanent neonatal DM. This syndrome of
transient neonatal DM should be distinguished from the severe hyperglycemia that may occur in hypertonic dehydration that usually occurs
in infants beyond the newborn period and responds promptly to rehydration with minimal or no requirement for insulin.
Administration of insulin is mandatory during the active phase of
DM in the newborn. Rehydration and IV insulin are usually required
initially; transition to subcutaneous insulin can occur once clinically
stable. A variety of regimens, including intermediate-­or long-­acting
insulin given in one to two daily doses or continuous insulin therapy
with an insulin pump, have been used successfully. The starting dose
is typically 1-­2 units/kg/day but will need to be adjusted based upon
blood glucose levels. Attempts at gradually reducing the dose of insulin
may be made as soon as recurrent hypoglycemia becomes manifested
or after 2 months of age.

Permanent Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus

Permanent DM in the newborn period is caused, in approximately 50%
of the cases, by pathogenic variants in the KCNJ11 and ABCC8 genes (see
Figs. 629.12 and 629.13). These genes code for the Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits of the adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium channel, which is
involved in an essential step in insulin secretion by the β cell. Some cases
are caused by pancreatic agenesis because of homozygous pathogenic
variants in IPF-­1 (where heterozygous variants cause MODY4); homozygous variants in the glucokinase gene (where heterozygous variants cause
MODY2); and variants in the insulin gene (see Tables 629.1 and 629.12).
Almost all these infants are small at birth because of the role of insulin as
an intrauterine growth factor. Instances of affected twins and families with
more than one affected infant have been reported. Infants with permanent
neonatal DM may be initially euglycemic and typically present between
birth and 6 months of life (mean age of presentation is 5 weeks), but rarely
can present up to 1 year of age. There is a spectrum of severity, and up to
20% have neurologic features. The most severely affected patients have the
syndrome of developmental delay, epilepsy, and neonatal diabetes (DEND
syndrome).
Activating pathogenic variants in the KCNJ11 gene (encoding the
adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium channel subunit Kir6.2)
are associated with both TND and PND, with variants associated with
each phenotype. More than 90% of these patients respond to sulfonylureas (at higher doses than those used in T2DM), but patients with
severe neurologic disease may be less responsive. Pathogenic variants
in ABCC8 (encoding the SUR1 subunit of this potassium channel)
were thought to be less likely to respond to sulfonylureas (because this
is the subunit that binds sulfonylurea drugs), but some of these variants

COMMENT

Obtain at diagnosis and every 2 yr

are reported to respond; patients have been successfully switched from
insulin to oral therapy. Several protocols for switching the patient from
insulin to glyburide are available, and patients are usually stabilized
on doses ranging from 1 to 2.5 mg/kg/day. Because approximately
50% of neonatal diabetics have potassium-­channel variants that can be
switched to sulfonylurea therapy, with dramatic improvement in glycemic control, neurologic outcomes, and quality of life, all patients with
diabetes diagnosed before 6 months of age (and perhaps even those
diagnosed before 12 months of age) in whom insulin dependence persists beyond 7-­10 days should have genetic testing (Fig. 629.14).

Maturity-­Onset Diabetes of Youth

Several forms of diabetes are associated with monogenic defects in β-­
cell function. Before these genetic defects were identified, this subset
was diagnosed on clinical grounds and described by the term MODY.
This subtype of DM consists of a group of heterogeneous clinical entities that are characterized by onset before 25 years, autosomal dominant
inheritance, and a primary defect in insulin secretion. Strict criteria
for the diagnosis of MODY include diabetes in at least three generations with autosomal dominant transmission and diagnosis before age
25 years in at least one affected subject. Pathogenic variants have been
found in at least 14 different genes, accounting for the dominantly inherited monogenic defects of insulin secretion, for which the term MODY is
used (Table 629.16). The ADA groups these disorders together under the
broader category of genetic defects of β-­cell function. Just three of them
(MODY2, MODY3, and MODY5) account for 90% of the cases in this
category in European populations, but the distribution may be different
in other ethnic groups. Except for MODY2 (which is caused by variants
in the enzyme glucokinase), all other forms are caused by genetic defects
in various transcription factors (see Table 629.16).

MODY2

This is the second most common form of MODY and accounts for
approximately 15–30% of all patients diagnosed. Glucokinase plays
an essential role in β-­cell glucose sensing, and heterozygous pathogenic variants in this gene lead to mild reductions in pancreatic β-­cell
response to glucose. Homozygotes with the same variants are completely unable to secrete insulin in response to glucose and develop
a form of PND. Patients with heterozygous variants have a higher
threshold for insulin release but are able to secrete insulin adequately
at higher blood glucose levels (typically 125 mg/dL [7 mmol/L] or
higher). This results in a relatively mild form of diabetes (HbA1c is
usually less than 7%), with mild fasting hyperglycemia and IGT in
most patients. MODY2 may be misdiagnosed as T1DM in children,
gestational diabetes in pregnant women, or well-­controlled T2DM in
adults (see Table 629.12). An accurate diagnosis is important because
most cases are not progressive, and except for gestational diabetes, may
not require treatment. When needed, they can usually be treated with
small doses of exogenously administered insulin. Treatment with oral
agents (sulfonylureas and related drugs) can be successful and may be
more acceptable to many patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3544 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
100%
KCNJ11 (n=240)
ABCC8 (n=150)

Diabetes remission
Unknown

90%

Unknown

6q24 (n=113)
ZFP57 (n=12)
80%
INS (n=110)

Exocrine insufficiency

Alternative treatment
of hyperglycemia
SLC19A2 (n=7)

Other

GCK

EIF2AK3

Other

70%

GCK (n=30)

PTF1A

GATA6
PTF1A

INS
60%

GCK
GATA6 (n=29)
GATA4 (n=4)

SLC2A2 (n=6)
HNF1B (n=1)

6q24
50%

Insulin treatment
40%

EIF2AK3
ABCC8

PDX1(n=6)

30%

PTF1A (n=22)

INS
20%

EIF2AK3 (n=76)
MNX1 (n=1)

Neurologic features

6q24

KCNJ11
10%

NEUROD1 (n=3)
NKX2-2 (n=2)
IER3IP1 (n=1)

ABCC8
KCNJ11

0%
Nonconsanguineous (%)

Consanguineous (%)

Fig. 629.13 Different genetic causes of neonatal diabetes in patients
FOXP3 (n=14)
GLIS3 (n=9)
NEUROG3 (n=2)
RFX6 (n=1)

Other features

Implications for
pancreatic phenotype
Development of
extrapancreatic features

Fig. 629.12 A genetic diagnosis guides clinical management. Sche-

matic representation of genetic causes of neonatal diabetes and the
implications of this genetic diagnosis. n indicates the number of patients identified with pathogenic variants in each of the genes in the
1,020 neonatal diabetes patient cohort. Solid arrows indicate implications for most pathogenic variants in the genes. Dashed arrows indicate
the implications for specific variants. (From De Franco E, Flanagan SE,
Houghton JAL, et al. The effect of early, comprehensive genomic testing on clinical care in neonatal diabetes: an international cohort study.
Lancet. 2015;386:957–963. Fig. 3.)

MODY3

Patients affected with pathogenic variants in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-­1α show abnormalities of carbohydrate
metabolism varying from IGT to severe diabetes and often progressing from a mild to a severe form over time. They are also prone to
the development of vascular complications. This is the most common
MODY subtype and accounts for 30–60% of all cases of MODY. These
patients are very sensitive to the action of sulfonylureas and can usually be treated with relatively low doses of these oral agents, at least
in the early stages of the disease. In children, this form of MODY is

born to nonconsanguineous and consanguineous parents. Comparison
of genetic causes of neonatal diabetes in nonconsanguineous (n = 790)
and consanguineous groups (n = 230). Consanguinity is defined by parents being second cousins or more closely related or by the presence of
1.56% or higher total homozygosity. Genes involved in less than 2.5%
of patients in both cohorts were grouped in the other category. (From
De Franco E, Flanagan SE, Houghton JAL, et al. The effect of early,
comprehensive genomic testing on clinical care in neonatal diabetes:
an international cohort study. Lancet. 2015;386:957–963. Fig. 2.)

sometimes misclassified as T1DM and treated with insulin. Evaluation of autoimmune markers helps to rule out T1DM; genetic testing
for MODY is available and is indicated in patients with relatively mild
diabetes and a family history suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance. Accurate diagnosis can lead to avoidance of unnecessary insulin
treatment and specific genetic counseling (see Fig. 629.14).

Less Common Forms of Monogenic Diabetes

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-­4α (MODY1), insulin promoter factor
(IPF)-­1, also known as (PDX-­1) (MODY4), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1β/TCF2 (MODY5), and NeuroD1 (MODY6) are all transcription factors that are involved in β-­cell development and function,
and mutations in these lead to various rare forms of MODY. In addition to diabetes, they can also have specific findings unrelated to
hyperglycemia; for example, MODY1 is associated with low triglyceride and lipoprotein levels, and MODY5 is associated with renal
cysts and renal dysfunction. In terms of treatment, MODY1 and
MODY4 may respond to oral sulfonylureas, but MODY5 does not
respond to oral agents and requires treatment with insulin. NeuroD1 defects are extremely rare and not much is known about their
natural history.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3545

Fasting PG ≥100 mg/dL, confirmed
No symptoms or signs of secondary diabetes
Signs suggestive of
syndromic DM: specific
genetic testing
(e.g., urogenital
malformations or chronic
renal failure: HNF1B;
early deafness: m3243A>G)

T1D autoantibodies testing
DM criteria
T1D autoAb positive

T1D autoAb negative

Onset > 6 mo

Onset < 12 mo

Onset:
adolescence

Onset:
adolescence

Onset > 6 mo

T1Da

Monogenic
autoimmune
diabetes
e.g.: FOXP3,
LRBA, other

Overweight,
T2D family
history, high
C-peptide

Lean,
high insulin/
C-peptide,
achanthosis

Autosomal
dominant
inheritance
(impaired β-cell
function)

Type A-SIR

T2D

Onset < 6 mo

MODY

NDM or
GCK/MODY

FPG ≤150 mg/dL

HbA1c < 7.3%

HbA1c > 7.3%

Screen GCK gene first

Screen HNF1A gene first

Fig. 629.14 Diagnostic algorithm of monogenic forms of diabetes. Negativity of genetic testing of two common subtypes of MODY in children
and adolescents implies that further testing is mandatory if the clinical diagnosis is robust. FPG, fasting plasma glucose; MODY, maturity onset diabetes of the young; NDM, neonatal diabetes mellius; SIR, severe insulin resistance. (From Barbetti F, D’Annunzio G. Genetic causes and treatment
of neonatal diabetes and early childhood diabetes. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018;32[4]:575-­591. Fig. 1.)

Primary or secondary defects in the glucose transporter-­2, which
is an insulin-­independent glucose transporter, may also be associated
with diabetes. Diabetes may also be a manifestation of a polymorphism
in the glycogen synthase gene. This enzyme is crucially important for
storage of glucose as glycogen in muscle. Patients with this defect are
notable for marked insulin resistance and hypertension, as well as a
strong family history of diabetes.
Another form of IDDM is Wolfram syndrome (Table 629.17).
Wolfram syndrome 1 is characterized by diabetes insipidus, DM, optic
atrophy, and deafness—thus the acronym DIDMOAD. Some patients
with diabetes appear to have severe insulinopenia, whereas others
have significant insulin secretion as judged by C-­peptide. The overall
prevalence is estimated at 1 in 770,000 live births. The sequence of
appearance of the stigmata is as follows: non-­autoimmune IDDM in
the first decade, central diabetes insipidus and sensorineural deafness
in ∼65–75% of the patients in the second decade, renal tract anomalies
in ∼50% of the patients in the third decade, and neurologic complications such as cerebellar ataxia and myoclonus in half to two thirds
of the patients in the fourth decade. Other features include primary
gonadal atrophy in most males and a progressive neurodegenerative
course with neurorespiratory death at a median age of 30 years. Some
cases are caused by pathogenic variants in WFS-­1. Wolfram syndrome
2 has early-­onset optic atrophy, DM, deafness, and a shortened life

span but no diabetes insipidus; the associated gene is CISD2. Other
forms of Wolfram syndrome may be caused by variants in mitochondrial DNA. Other syndromes associated with diabetes are noted in
Table 629.17.

Mitochondrial Gene Defects

Pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA are associated with maternally inherited DM and deafness. The most common mitochondrial
DNA variant in these cases is the variant m.3243A>G in the transfer
RNA leucine gene. This variant is identical to the variant in MELAS
(myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike syndrome),
but MELAS syndrome is not associated with diabetes; the phenotypic
expression of the same defect varies. Diabetes in most of these cases
presents insidiously, but approximately 20% of patients have an acute
presentation resembling T1DM. The mean age of diagnosis of diabetes
is 37 years, but cases have been reported as young as 11 years; not all
patients have deafness. This variant has been estimated to be present
in 1.5% of Japanese people with diabetes, which may be higher than
the prevalence in other ethnic groups. Metformin should be avoided in
these patients because of the theoretical risk of severe lactic acidosis in
the presence of mitochondrial dysfunction. Some children with mitochondrial DNA mutations affecting complex I and/or complex IV may
also develop diabetes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3546 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.16  Clinical Characteristics of Maturity-­Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) Genetic Subtypes
MODY TYPE

GENE NAME (LOCUS)

PREVALENCE (%)

OTHER FEATURES

TREATMENT

MODY 1

HNF4A (20ql2)

5–10

Neonatal hyperinsulinemia and
hypoglycemia with associated
macrosomia, low serum levels of
cholesterol

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 2

GCK (7pl3)

30–60

Mild fasting hyperglycemia throughout
life, often asymptomatic, gestational
diabetes, low birthweight (with
unaffected mother)

No treatment outside of
pregnancy

MODY 3

HNF1A (12q24.2)

30–60

Glycosuria

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 4

PDX1 (13ql2.1)

<1

Homozygote: pancreatic agenesis

Diet, OAD, or insulin

MODY 5

HNFIB (17q21)

5–10

Diabetes in association with renal and
genitourinary abnormalities

Insulin

MODY 6

NEUROD I (2q31.3)

<1

Obesity and insulin resistance

OAD or insulin

MODY 7

KLF11 (2p25)

<1

Impaired glucose tolerance to overt
diabetes

OAD or insulin

MODY 8

CEL (9p34)

<1

Diabetes and pancreatic exocrine
deficiency

OAD or insulin

MODY 9

PAX4 (7q32)

<1

Ketosis-­prone diabetes

Diet, OAD, or insulin

MODY 10

INS (llpl5.5)

<1

May result in neonatal diabetes, antibody-­
negative diabetes, and MODY

OAD or insulin

MODY 11

BLK (8p23)

<1

Obesity common

Diet, OAD, or insulin

MODY 12

ABCC8 (11pl5.1)

<1

Usually associated with neonatal diabetes,
rare cause of MODY

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 13

KCNJ11 (11p 15.13)

<1

Usually associated with neonatal diabetes,
rare cause of MODY

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 14

APPL1 (3pl4.3)

<1

Adult-­onset diabetes

Diet, OAD, or insulin

ABCC8, ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C (CFTR/MRP), member 8; APPL1, adaptor protein, phosphotyrosine interacting with PH domain and leucine zipper 1; BLK, B-­lymphocyte
kinase; CEL, carboxyl ester lipase enzyme; GCK, glucokinase; HNF1A, hepatocyte nuclear factor-­lα; HNF1B, hepatocyte nuclear factor-­lβ; INS, preproinsulin; KCNJ11, potassium
channel, inwardly rectifying subfamily J, member 11; KLF11, Kruppel-­like factor 11; NEUROD 1, neurogenic differentiation factor 1; OAD, oral antidiabetic; PAX4, paired box gene
4; PDX1, pancreas/duodenum homeobox protein 1.
Modified from Sanyoura M, Philipson LH, Naylor R. Monogenic diabetes in children and adolescents: recognition and treatment options. Curr Diab Rep. 2018;18:58. Table 1.

Abnormalities of the Insulin Gene

Diabetes of variable degrees may also result from pathogenic variants in the insulin gene that impair the effectiveness of insulin at the
receptor level. Insulin gene defects are exceedingly rare and may be
associated with relatively mild diabetes or even normal glucose tolerance. Diabetes may also develop in patients with faulty processing of
proinsulin to insulin (an autosomal dominant defect). These defects
are notable for the high concentration of insulin as measured by radioimmunoassay, whereas MODY and glucose transporter-­2 defects are
characterized by relative or absolute deficiency of insulin secretion for
the prevailing glucose concentrations.

GENETIC DEFECTS OF INSULIN ACTION

Various genetic variants in the insulin receptor can impair the action of
insulin at the insulin receptor or impair postreceptor signaling, leading
to insulin resistance. The mildest form of the syndrome with variants in
the insulin receptor was previously known as type A insulin resistance.
This condition is associated with hirsutism, hyperandrogenism, and
cystic ovaries in females, without obesity. Acanthosis nigricans may be
present, and life expectancy is not significantly impaired. More severe
forms of insulin resistance are seen in two variants in the insulin receptor gene that cause the pediatric syndromes of Donohue syndrome
(formerly called leprechaunism) and Rabson-­Mendenhall syndrome.

Donohue Syndrome

This is a syndrome characterized by intrauterine growth restriction,
fasting hypoglycemia, and postprandial hyperglycemia in association
with profound resistance to insulin; severe hyperinsulinemia is seen

during an OGTT. Various defects of the insulin receptor have been
described, thereby attesting to the important role of insulin and its
receptor in fetal growth and possibly in morphogenesis. Many of these
patients die in the first year of life. Potential treatments include high-­
dose insulin, metformin, and continuous IGF-­1 via insulin pump.

Rabson-­Mendenhall Syndrome

This entity is defined by clinical manifestations that appear to be intermediate between those of acanthosis nigricans with insulin resistance
type A and Donohue syndrome. The features include extreme insulin
resistance, acanthosis nigricans, abnormalities of the teeth and nails,
and pineal hyperplasia. It is not clear whether this syndrome is entirely
distinct from Donohue syndrome; however, by comparison, patients
with Rabson-­Mendenhall tend to live significantly longer. Therapies
with modest benefit have included IGF-­1 and leptin.

Lipoatrophic Diabetes

Various forms of lipodystrophy are associated with insulin resistance
and diabetes (Table 629.18). Familial partial lipoatrophy, or lipodystrophy, is associated with pathogenic variants in LMNA, encoding
nuclear envelope proteins lamin A and C. Severe congenital generalized lipoatrophy is associated with variants in the seipin and AGPAT2
genes, but the mechanism by which these variants lead to insulin resistance and diabetes is not known.

Stiff-­Person Syndrome

This is an extremely rare autoimmune CNS disorder that is characterized by progressive stiffness and painful spasms of the axial muscles

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3547

Table 629.17  Syndromic Forms of Diabetes that May Present in Childhood or Early Childhood
SYNDROME

GENE (LOCUS)

INHERITANCE

TYPE OF DIABETES

CLINICAL FEATURES

Diabetes and deafness

Mitochondria tRNA

Maternal

Insulin deficient

Adult-­onset diabetes, sensorineural
deafness

Wolfram syndrome 1

WFS1 (4p16)

AR/AD

Insulin deficient

Childhood-­onset diabetes, optic atrophy,
deafness, diabetes insipidus

Wolfram syndrome 2

CISD2 (4q24)

AR

Insulin deficient

Childhood-­onset, diabetes, optic atrophy,
deafness, and defective platelet
aggregation

Thiamine-­responsive
megaloblastic anemia
syndrome

SLC19A2 (1q23)

AR

Vitamin dependent

Childhood-­onset diabetes, megaloblastic
or sideroblastic anemia, sensorineural
deafness

Mitchell-­Riley syndrome

RFX6 (6q22)

AR

Insulin deficient

Rare cases with childhood-­onset,
pancreatic hypoplasia, intestinal atresia,
and gallbladder aplasia or hypoplasia

Alström syndrome

ALMS1 (2p13)

AR

Insulin resistant

Childhood to early adulthood,
pigmentary retinopathy, deafness,
obesity, dilated cardiomyopathy

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

BBS1–BBS21

AR/DR

Insulin resistant

Childhood to early adulthood,
developmental delay, pigmentary
retinopathy, polydactyly, obesity,
hypogonadism

Insulin resistance
syndrome type A

INSR (19p13)

AD/AR

Insulin resistant

Childhood to early adulthood, obesity,
diabetes, and acanthosis nigricans

ALMS1, Alström syndrome 1; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BBS, Bardet-­Biedl; CISD2, CDGSH iron sulfur domain 2; DR, digenic recessive; INSR, insulin
receptor; RFX6, regulatory factor X6; SLC19A2, solute carrier family 19 member 2; tRNA, transfer RNA; WFS1, wolframin.
Modified from Sanyoura M, Philipson LH, Naylor R. Monogenic diabetes in children and adolescents: recognition and treatment options. Curr Diab Rep. 18:58, 2018. Table 2.

Table 629.18  Clinical and Biochemical Features of Inherited Lipodystrophies
CONGENITAL GENERALIZED LIPODYSTROPHY

FAMILIAL PARTIAL LIPODYSTROPHY

SUBTYPE

BSCL1

BSCL2

FPLD2

FPLD3

DEFECTIVE GENE

AGPAT2

BSCL2

LMNA

PPARG

Clinical onset

Soon after birth

Soon after birth

Puberty

Usually puberty, but may
present in younger children

Fat distribution

Generalized absence

Generalized absence

Loss of limb and gluteal fat;
typically excess facial and
nuchal fat; trunk fat often
lost

Loss of limb and gluteal fat;
preserved facial and trunk
fat

Cutaneous features

Acanthosis nigricans and
skin tags; hirsutism
common in women

Acanthosis nigricans
and skin tags;
hirsutism common in
women

Acanthosis nigricans and skin
tags; hirsutism common in
women

Acanthosis nigricans and skin
tags; hirsutism common in
women

Musculoskeletal

Acromegaloid features
common

Acromegaloid features
common

Frequent muscle hypertrophy;
some have overlap features
of muscular dystrophy

Muscle hypertrophy

Nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease

Severe

Severe

Yes

Yes

Dyslipidemia

Severe; associated with
pancreatitis

Severe; associated with
pancreatitis

Yes, may be severe

Yes, may be severe

Insulin resistance

Severe; early onset

Severe; early onset

Severe

Severe; early onset in some

Diabetes onset

<20 yr

<20 yr

Variable; generally later in
men than women

Variable; generally later in
men than women

Hypertension

Common

Common

Common

Very common

Other

Mild mental retardation
possible

From Semple RK, Savage DB, Halsall DJ, O’Rahilly S. Syndromes of severe insulin resistance and/or lipodystrophy. In Weiss RE, Refetoff S, eds. Genetic Diagnosis of Endocrine
Disorders. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010: Table 4.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3548 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and very high titers of glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies. About
one third of patients also develop T1DM.

inadequate weight gain may benefit from the addition of basal insulin
even if they do not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of diabetes.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

Friedreich Ataxia

In rare cases, patients with systemic lupus erythematosus may develop
autoantibodies to the insulin receptor, leading to insulin resistance and
diabetes.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS–RELATED DIABETES

See Chapter 454.
As patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) live longer, an increasing
number are being diagnosed with cystic fibrosis–related diabetes
(CFRD); up to 20% of children and 50% of adults are affected with
CFRD. There is an association with pancreatic insufficiency, and there
may be a higher risk in patients with class I and class II CF transmembrane conductance regulator variants. Cross-­sectional studies indicate
that the prevalence of IGT may be significantly higher than this, and
up to 65% of children with CF have diminished first-­phase insulin
secretion, even when they have normal glucose tolerance. In Denmark, oral glucose tolerance screening of the entire CF population
demonstrated no diabetes in patients younger than 10 years, diabetes
in 12% of patients age 10-­19 years, and diabetes in 48% of adults age
20 years and older.
Patients with CFRD have features of both T1DM and T2DM. In
the pancreas, exocrine tissue is replaced by fibrosis and fat; many of
the pancreatic islets are destroyed. The remaining islets demonstrate
diminished numbers of β-­, α-­, and pancreatic polypeptide-­secreting
cells. Secretion of the islet hormones insulin, glucagon, and pancreatic
polypeptide is impaired in patients with CF in response to a variety
of secretagogues. This pancreatic damage leads to slowly progressive
insulin deficiency, of which the earliest manifestation is an impaired
first-­phase insulin response. When patients age, this response becomes
progressively delayed and less robust than normal. At the same time,
these patients develop insulin resistance because of chronic inflammation and the intermittent use of corticosteroids. Insulin deficiency and
insulin resistance lead to a gradual onset of IGT that eventually evolves
into diabetes. In some cases, diabetes may wax and wane with disease
exacerbations and the use of corticosteroids. The clinical presentation
is similar to that of T2DM in that the onset of the disease is insidious and the occurrence of ketoacidosis is rare. Islet antibody titers are
negative. Microvascular complications do develop but may do so at a
slower rate than in typical T1DM or T2DM. Macrovascular complications do not appear to be of concern in CFRD. Several factors unique
to CF influence the onset and the course of diabetes: (1) frequent infections are associated with waxing and waning of insulin resistance; (2)
energy needs are increased because of infection and pulmonary disease; (3) malabsorption is common, despite enzyme supplementation;
(4) nutrient absorption is altered by abnormal intestinal transit time;
(5) liver disease is frequently present; (6) anorexia and nausea are common; (7) there is a wide variation in daily food intake based on the
patient’s acute health status; and (8) both insulin and glucagon secretion are impaired (in contrast to autoimmune diabetes, in which only
insulin secretion is affected).
IGT and CFRD are associated with poor weight gain, and there is
evidence that treatment with insulin improves weight gain and slows
the rate of pulmonary deterioration. Because of these observations,
guidelines recommend that routine diabetes screening of all children
with CF begin at age 10 years. Despite debate over the ideal screening
modality, the recommendation is the 2-­hour OGTT, although growing
evidence suggests a role for mid-­OGTT hyperglycemia at the 1-­hour
mark as a clinically relevant finding. When hyperglycemia develops,
the accompanying metabolic derangements are usually mild, and relatively low doses of insulin usually suffice for adequate management.
Basal insulin may be started initially, but basal-­bolus therapy similar
to that used in T1DM will eventually be needed. Dietary restrictions
are minimal, as increased energy needs are present and weight gain
is usually desired. Ketoacidosis is uncommon but may occur with
progressive deterioration of islet cell function. IGT is not necessarily
an indication for treatment, but patients who have poor growth and

Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a multisystem neurodegenerative disorder resulting from alterations in FXN. Approximately 20% of patients
with FRDA will develop diabetes. Individuals with early-­onset diabetes
during childhood display a phenotype similar to T1DM characterized
by insufficient pancreatic insulin secretion, hyperglycemia, and ketosis. Insulin therapy is typically required from diagnosis. By contrast,
adults with FRDA who develop diabetes have a phenotype more similar to T2DM, where insulin resistance appears to play a role in the
pathogenesis.

DRUGS

High-­dose oral or parenteral steroid therapy usually results in significant insulin resistance leading to glucose intolerance and overt diabetes. The immunosuppressive agents cyclosporine and tacrolimus are
toxic to β cells, causing IDDM in a significant proportion of patients
treated with these agents. Their toxicity to pancreatic β cells was one of
the factors that limited their usefulness in arresting ongoing autoimmune destruction of β cells. Streptozotocin and the rodenticide Vacor
are also toxic to β cells, causing diabetes.
There are no consensus guidelines regarding treatment of steroid-­
induced hyperglycemia in children. Many patients on high-­dose steroids have elevated blood glucose during the day and evening but
become normoglycemic late at night and early in the morning. In general, significant hyperglycemia in an inpatient setting is treated with
short-­acting insulin on an as-­needed basis. Basal insulin may be added
when fasting hyperglycemia is significant. Outpatient treatment can be
more difficult, but when treatment is needed, protocols similar to the
basal-­bolus regimens used in T1DM are used.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors used to treat malignancies by blocking inhibitory immune receptors have been associated with the rare
development of DM and other autoimmune diseases. DM may develop
after one to two cycles of therapy and present with DKA. Some are
GAD antibody positive; all require insulin therapy.

GENETIC SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH
DIABETES MELLITUS

A number of rare genetic syndromes associated with IDDM or carbohydrate intolerance have been described (see Tables 629.1 and 629.17).
These syndromes represent a broad spectrum of diseases, ranging from
premature cellular aging, as in Werner and Cockayne syndromes
(see Chapter 109), to excessive obesity associated with hyperinsulinism, resistance to insulin action, and carbohydrate intolerance, as in
Prader-­Willi syndrome (see Chapters 97 and 98). Some of these syndromes are characterized by primary disturbances in the insulin receptor or in antibodies to the insulin receptor without any impairment
in insulin secretion. Although rare, these syndromes provide unique
models to understand the multiple causes of disturbed carbohydrate
metabolism from defective insulin secretion or from defective insulin
action at the cell receptor or postreceptor level.

AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH T1DM
IPEX Syndrome

IPEX (immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy, X-­linked) is a genetic syndrome leading to autoimmune disease.
In most patients with IPEX, pathogenic variants in FOXP3, a specific
marker of natural and adaptive regulatory T cells, leads to severe
immune dysregulation and rampant autoimmunity. Autoimmune diabetes develops in >90% of cases, usually within the first year of life,
and is accompanied by enteropathy, failure to thrive, and other autoimmune disorders.

Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndromes

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-­1, also known as
APCED) is a syndrome of multiple endocrinopathy related to pathogenic variants in AIRE. It typically first manifests in infancy with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
recurrent mucocutaneous candidiasis, followed variably by hypocalcemia (autoimmune hypoparathyroidism), adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), T1DM, hypothyroidism (Hashimoto disease), celiac
disease, and other autoimmune conditions. It is clear that any patient
with an autoimmune disease is at increased risk for the development of
T1DM (and any patient with T1DM is at increased risk of other autoimmune diseases) and should be counseled regarding the signs and
symptoms of new-­onset diabetes. See Table 629.11 for recommendations regarding screening tests to look for other autoimmune diseases
in patients with T1DM.
Chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis) is frequently associated with T1DM in children (see Chapter 604). About
20% of patients with insulin-­dependent diabetes have thyroid antibodies in their serum; the prevalence is 2-­20 times greater than in control
populations. Only a small proportion of these patients acquire clinical
hypothyroidism; the interval between diagnosis of diabetes and thyroid
disease averages about 5 years.
Celiac disease, which is caused by hypersensitivity to dietary gluten,
is another autoimmune disorder that occurs with significant frequency
in children with T1DM (see Chapter 384). It is estimated that approximately 7–15% of children with T1DM develop celiac disease within the
first 6 years of diagnosis, and the incidence of celiac disease is significantly

3549

higher in children younger than 4 years of age and in females. Young
children with T1DM and celiac disease can present with gastrointestinal
symptoms (abdominal cramping, diarrhea, constipation, gastroesophageal reflux), growth failure as a consequence of suboptimal weight gain,
unexplained hypoglycemic reactions because of nutrient malabsorption,
and less commonly hypocalcemia caused by severe vitamin D malabsorption; in some cases the disease can be asymptomatic.
When diabetes and thyroid disease coexist, the possibility of autoimmune adrenal insufficiency should be considered. It may be heralded
by decreasing insulin requirements, increasing pigmentation of the
skin and buccal mucosa, salt craving, weakness, asthenia and postural
hypotension, or even frank adrenal crisis. This syndrome is unusual
in the first decade of life, but it may become apparent in the second
decade or later.
Circulating antibodies to gastric parietal cells and to intrinsic factor
are 2-­3 times more common in patients with T1DM than in control
subjects. The presence of antibodies to gastric parietal cells is correlated
with atrophic gastritis, and antibodies to intrinsic factor are associated
with malabsorption of vitamin B12. However, megaloblastic anemia is
rare in children with T1DM.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Nervous System
Chapter 630

Neurologic Evaluation
Yolanda F. Holler-­Managan
HISTORY

A detailed history is the cornerstone of neurologic assessment.
Although parents may be the primary informants, most children older
than 3-­4 years can contribute to their history and should be questioned.
The history should begin with the chief complaint and its significance
in the context of normal development (see Chapters 21-­28). The latter step is critical because a 13-­month-­old who cannot walk may be
normal, whereas a 4-­year-­old who cannot walk might have a serious
neurologic condition.
Next, the history of the present illness should provide a chronological outline of the patient’s symptoms, with attention paid to location,
quality, intensity, duration, associated features, and alleviating or exacerbating factors. It is essential to perform a review of systems because
abnormalities of the central nervous system (CNS) often manifest with
vague, nonfocal symptoms that may be misattributed to other organ
systems (e.g., vomiting, constipation, urinary incontinence). A detailed
history might suggest that vomiting is a result of increased intracranial
pressure (ICP) rather than gastritis or that constipation and urinary
incontinence are caused by a spinal cord tumor rather than behavioral stool withholding. In addition, a systemic illness may produce
CNS manifestations, as do lupus erythematosus (seizures, psychosis, demyelination), mitochondrial disorders (developmental delay,
strokes, hypotonia), or celiac disease (headaches, seizures, peripheral
neuropathy).
After obtaining the chief complaint and history of the present illness,
the physician should obtain a complete birth history, particularly if a
congenital or perinatal disorder is suspected. The birth history should
begin with a review of the pregnancy, including specific questions
about common complications, such as pregnancy-­induced hypertension, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, vaginal bleeding, infections,
and falls. It is important to quantify any cigarette, alcohol, or drug (prescription, herbal, illicit) use. Inquiring about fetal movement might
provide clues to an underlying diagnosis, because decreased or absent
fetal activity can be associated with chromosomal anomalies and CNS
or neuromuscular disorders. Finally, any abnormal ultrasound or
amniocentesis results should be noted.
The mother’s labor history should address the gestational age at
birth and mode of delivery (spontaneous vaginal, vacuum-­or forceps-­
assisted, cesarean section) and should comment on the presence or
absence of fetal distress. If delivery was by cesarean section, it is essential to record the indication for surgery.
The birthweight, length, and head circumference provide useful
information about the duration of a given problem, as well as insights
into the uterine environment. Parents can usually provide a reliable history of their child’s postnatal course; however, if the patient was resuscitated or had a complicated hospital stay, it is often helpful to obtain
the hospital records. The physician should inquire about the infant’s
general well-­being, feeding and sleeping patterns, activity level, and the
nature of the infant’s cry. If the infant had jaundice, it is important to
determine both the degree of jaundice and how it was managed. Features of neurologic dysfunction at full term include inability to breathe
spontaneously; poor, uncoordinated suck; or the need for an inordinate
amount of time to feed or a requirement for gavage feeding. Again,

PART

XXV

it is important to consider the developmental context because all of
these issues would be expected in premature infants, particularly those
with a very low birthweight. Double-­checking the newborn screening
results may provide a clue to abnormal neurologic manifestations in
an infant.
A major component of the neurologic history is the developmental
assessment (see Chapters 21-­28). Careful evaluation of a child’s social,
cognitive, language, fine motor skills, and gross motor skills is required
to distinguish normal development from either an isolated or a global
(i.e., in two or more domains) developmental delay. A static abnormality in development from birth suggests a congenital, intrauterine,
or perinatal cause, but a loss of skills (regression) over time strongly
suggests an underlying degenerative disease of the CNS, such as an
inborn error of metabolism or genetic disorder. The ability of parents
to recall the precise timing of their child’s developmental milestones is
extremely variable. It is often helpful to request old photographs of the
child or to review the baby book, where the milestones may have been
dutifully recorded. In general, parents are aware when their child has
a developmental problem, and the physician should show appropriate
concern. Table 630.1 outlines the upper limits of normal for attaining
specific developmental milestones. Chapter 28 includes a comprehensive review of developmental screening tests and their interpretation.
Next, the family history must be reviewed. Most parents are cooperative in securing medical information about family members, particularly if it might have relevance for their child. The history should
document the age and history of neurologic disease, including developmental delay, epilepsy, migraine, stroke, and inherited disorders,
for all first-­and second-­degree relatives. It is important to inquire
directly about miscarriages or fetal deaths and to document the sex
of the relevant embryo or fetus, as well as the gestational age at the
time of demise. When available, the results of postmortem examinations should be obtained, because they can have a direct bearing on
the patient’s condition. The parents should be questioned about their
ethnic backgrounds because some genetic disorders occur more commonly within specific populations (e.g., Tay-­Sachs disease in the Ashkenazi Jewish population). They should also be asked if there is any
chance that they could be related to each other, because the incidence
of metabolic and degenerative disorders of the CNS is increased significantly in children of consanguineous marriages.
The social history should detail the child’s current living environment
and the child’s relationship with other family members. It is important
to inquire about recent stressors, such as divorce, remarriage, birth of
a sibling, or death of a loved one, because they can affect the child’s
behavior. If the child is in daycare or school, one should document the
child’s academic and social performance, paying particular attention to
any abrupt changes. Academic performance can be assessed by asking
about the child’s latest report card, and peer relationships can be evaluated by having the child name his or her best friends. Any child who
is unable to name at least two or three playmates might have abnormal social development. In some cases, discussions with the daycare
worker or teacher provide useful ancillary data.

NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION

The neurologic examination begins during the interview. Indirect
observation of the child’s appearance and movements can yield valuable information about the presence of an underlying disorder. For
instance, it may be obvious that the child has dysmorphic facies, an
unusual posture, or an abnormality of motor function manifested by a
hemiparesis or gait disturbance. The child’s behavior while playing and
interacting with his or her parents may also be telling. A normal child
usually plays independently early in the visit but then engages in the
interview process. A child with attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder

3550
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation

3551

Table 630.1  Screening Scheme for Developmental Delay: Upper Range
AGE (MO)

GROSS MOTOR

FINE MOTOR

SOCIAL SKILLS

LANGUAGE

3

Supports weight on forearms

Opens hands spontaneously

Smiles appropriately

Coos, laughs

6

Sits momentarily

Transfers objects

Shows likes and dislikes

Babbles

9

Pulls to stand

Pincer grasp

Plays pat-­a-­cake, peek-­a-­boo

Imitates sounds

12

Walks with one hand held

Releases an object on command

Comes when called

One to two meaningful words

18

Walks upstairs with assistance

Feeds self from a spoon

Mimics actions of others

At least six words

24

Runs

Builds a tower of six blocks

Plays with others

Two-­to three-­word sentences

might display impulsive behavior in the examining room, and a child
with neurologic impairment might exhibit complete lack of awareness
of the environment. Finally, note should be made of any unusual odors
about the patient, because some metabolic disorders produce characteristic scents (e.g., the musty smell of phenylketonuria or the sweaty
feet smell of isovaleric acidemia; see Chapter 104). If such an odor is
present, it is important to determine whether it is persistent or transient, occurring only with illnesses.
The examination should be conducted in a nonthreatening, child-­
friendly setting. The child should be allowed to sit where the child is
most comfortable, whether it be on a parent’s lap or on the floor of
the examination room. The physician should approach the child slowly,
reserving any invasive, painful, or discomforting tests for the end of the
examination (e.g., measurement of head circumference, gag reflex). In
the end, the more that the examination seems like a game, the more the
child will cooperate. Because the neurologic examination of an infant
requires a somewhat modified approach from that of an older child,
these two groups are considered separately (see Chapters 21-­23 and
115 vs Chapters 24-­27).

Mental State

Age aside, the neurologic examination should include an assessment
of the patient’s mental state in terms of both the level of arousal and
the interaction with the environment. Premature infants born at <28
weeks of gestation do not have consistent periods of alertness, whereas
slightly older infants arouse from sleep with gentle physical stimulation. Sleep–wake patterns are well developed at term. Because the level
of alertness of a neonate depends on many factors, including the time
of the last feeding, room temperature, and gestational age, serial examinations are critical when evaluating for changes in neurologic function.
An older child’s mental state can be assessed by watching the child play.
Having the child tell a story, draw a picture, or complete a puzzle can
also be helpful in assessing cognitive function. Memory can be evaluated informally as patients recount their personal information, as well
as more formally by asking them to register and recall three objects or
perform a digit span.

Head

Correct measurement of the head circumference is important. It
should be performed at every visit for patients younger than 3 years
and should be recorded on a suitable head growth chart. To measure, a
nondistensible plastic measuring tape is placed over the mid-­forehead
and extended circumferentially to include the most prominent portion of the occiput. If the patient’s head circumference is abnormal, it
is important to document the head circumferences of the parents and
siblings. Errors in the measurement of a newborn skull are common
because of scalp edema, overriding sutures, and the presence of cephalohematomas. The average rate of head growth in a healthy premature
infant is 0.5 cm in the first 2 weeks, 0.75 cm in the third week, and 1.0
cm in the fourth week and every week thereafter until the fortieth week
of development. The head circumference of an average term infant
measures 34-­35 cm at birth, 44 cm at 6 months, and 47 cm at 1 year of
age (see Chapters 21 and 22).
If the brain is not growing, the skull will not grow; therefore a small
head frequently reflects a small brain, or microcephaly. Microcephaly

Fig. 630.1 Congenital hydrocephalus. Note the enlarged cranium
and prominent scalp veins.

may develop in utero or postnatally and may, for example, be related
to intrauterine infection or drug exposure or to perinatal or postnatal
injury. Conversely, a large head may be associated with a large brain,
or macrocephaly, which is most commonly familial but may be from
a disturbance of growth (Sotos syndrome), neurocutaneous disorder
(e.g., neurofibromatosis), chromosomal defect (e.g., Klinefelter syndrome), or lysosomal storage disorder. Alternatively, the head size may
be increased secondary to hydrocephalus (Fig. 630.1) or chronic subdural hemorrhages. In the latter case, the skull tends to assume a square
or boxlike shape, because the long-­standing presence of fluid in the
subdural space causes enlargement of the middle fossa.
The shape of the head should be documented carefully. Plagiocephaly, or flattening of the skull, can be seen in normal infants but may
be particularly prominent in hypotonic or weak infants, who are less
mobile. A variety of abnormal head shapes can be seen when cranial
sutures fuse prematurely, as in the various forms of inherited craniosynostosis (see Chapter 631.10).
An infant has two fontanels at birth: a diamond-­shaped anterior
fontanel at the junction of the frontal and parietal bones that is open at
birth, and a triangular posterior fontanel at the junction of the parietal
and occipital bones that can admit the tip of a finger or may be closed
at birth. If the posterior fontanel is open at birth, it should close over
the ensuing 6-­8 weeks; its persistence suggests underlying hydrocephalus or congenital hypothyroidism. The anterior fontanel varies greatly
in size, but it usually measures approximately 2 × 2 cm. The average
time of closure is 18 months, but the fontanel can close normally as
early as 9 months. A very small or absent anterior fontanel at birth
might indicate craniosynostosis or microcephaly, whereas a very large
fontanel can signify a variety of problems. The fontanel is normally
slightly depressed and pulsatile and is best evaluated by holding the
infant upright while the infant is asleep or feeding. A bulging fontanel
is a potential indicator of increased ICP, but vigorous crying can cause
a protuberant fontanel in a normal infant.
Inspection of the head should include observation of the venous
pattern, because increased ICP and thrombosis of the superior sagittal
sinus can produce marked venous distention. Dysmorphic facial features can indicate a neurodevelopmental aberration. Likewise, cutaneous abnormalities, such as cutis aplasia or abnormal hair whorls, can
suggest an underlying brain malformation or genetic disorder.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3552 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Palpation of a newborn’s skull characteristically reveals molding
of the skull accompanied by overriding sutures—a result of the pressures exerted on the skull during its descent through the pelvis. Marked
overriding of the sutures beyond the early neonatal period is cause for
alarm, because it suggests an underlying brain abnormality. Palpation
additionally might reveal bony bridges between sutures (craniosynostosis), cranial defects, or, in premature infants, softening of the parietal
bones (craniotabes).
Auscultation of the skull is an important adjunct to the neurologic
examination. Cranial bruits may be noted over the anterior fontanel,
temporal region, or orbits and are best heard using the diaphragm of
the stethoscope. Soft symmetric bruits may be discovered in normal
children younger than 4 years of age or in association with a febrile
illness. Demonstration of a loud or localized bruit is usually significant and warrants further investigation because it may be associated
with severe anemia, increased ICP, or arteriovenous malformations of
the middle cerebral artery or vein of Galen. It is important to exclude
murmurs arising from the heart or great vessels, because they may be
transmitted to the cranium.

Cranial Nerves
Olfactory Nerve (Cranial Nerve I)

Anosmia, or loss of smell, most commonly occurs as a transient
abnormality in association with an upper respiratory tract infection
or allergies. Permanent causes of anosmia include head trauma with
damage to the ethmoid bone or shearing of the olfactory nerve fibers
as they cross the cribriform plate, tumors of the frontal lobe, intranasal
drug use, and exposure to toxins (acrylates, methacrylates, cadmium).
Occasionally, a child who recovers from purulent meningitis or develops hydrocephalus has a diminished sense of smell. Rarely, anosmia is
congenital, in which case it can occur as an isolated deficit or as part
of Kallmann syndrome, a familial disorder characterized by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and congenital anosmia. Although not

a routine component of the examination, smell can be tested reliably
as early as the 32nd week of gestation by presenting a stimulus and
observing for an alerting response or withdrawal, or both. Care should
be taken to use appropriate stimuli, such as coffee or peppermint, as
opposed to strongly aromatic substances (e.g., ammonia inhalants)
that stimulate the trigeminal nerve. Each nostril should be tested individually by pinching shut the opposite side.

Optic Nerve (Cranial Nerve II; see also Part XXVII)

Assessment of the optic disc and retina (see Chapters 659, 670, and 671)
is a critical component of the neurologic examination. Although the retina is best visualized by dilating the pupil, most physicians do not have
ready access to mydriatic agents at the bedside; therefore it may be necessary to consult an ophthalmologist in some cases. Mydriatics should
not be administered to patients whose pupillary responses are being
followed as a marker for impending cerebral herniation or to patients
with glaucoma or cataracts. When mydriatics are used, both eyes should
be dilated, because unilateral papillary fixation and dilation can cause
confusion and worry in later examiners unaware of the pharmacologic
intervention. Examination of an infant’s retina may be facilitated by providing a nipple or soother and by turning the head to one side. The physician gently strokes the patient to maintain arousal while examining the
closer eye. An older child should be placed in the parent’s lap and should
be distracted by bright objects or toys. The color of the optic nerve is
salmon-­pink in a child but may be gray-­white in a newborn, particularly
if the newborn has fair coloring. This normal finding can cause confusion and can lead to the improper diagnosis of optic atrophy.
Disc edema refers to swelling of the optic disc, and papilledema
specifically refers to swelling that is secondary to increased ICP. Papilledema rarely occurs in infancy because the skull sutures can separate to
accommodate the expanding brain. In older children, papilledema may
be graded according to the Frisen scale (Fig. 630.2). Disc edema must
be differentiated from papillitis, or inflammation of the optic nerve.

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 630.2 Stages of papilledema (Frisen scale). A, Stage 0: Normal optic disc. B, Stage 1: Very early papilledema with obscuration of the nasal

border of the disc only, without elevation of the disc borders. C, Stage 2: Early papilledema showing obscuration of all borders, elevation of the nasal
border, and a complete peripapillary halo. D, Stage 3: Moderate papilledema with elevation of all borders, increased diameter of the optic nerve
head, obscuration of vessels at the disc margin, and a peripapillary halo with finger-­like extensions. E, Stage 4: Marked papilledema characterized
by elevation of the entire nerve head and total obscuration of a segment of a major blood vessel on the disc. F, Stage 5: Severe papilledema with
obscuration of all vessels and obliteration of the optic cup. Note also the nerve fiber layer hemorrhages and macular exudate. (A-­C courtesy Dr.
Deborah Friedman; D-­F courtesy Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation
Both conditions manifest with enlargement of the blind spot, but visual
acuity and color vision tend to be spared in early papilledema in contrast to what occurs in optic neuritis.
Retinal hemorrhages occur in 30–40% of all full-­term newborn
infants. The hemorrhages are more common after vaginal delivery than
after cesarean section and are not associated with birth injury or with
neurologic complications. They disappear spontaneously by 1-­2 weeks
of age. The presence of retinal hemorrhages beyond the early neonatal
period should raise a concern for nonaccidental trauma.

Vision

A full description of the age-­appropriate evaluation of vision can be
found in Chapter 659. Evaluation of vision in the premature infant presents unique challenges. At 28 weeks of corrected gestational age, a premature infant blinks in response to a bright light, and at 32 weeks, the
infant maintains eye closure until the light source is removed. The pupil
reacts to light by 29-­32 weeks of corrected gestational age; however,
the pupillary response is often difficult to evaluate, because premature
infants resist eye opening and have poorly pigmented irises. A normal
37-­week infant turns the head and eyes toward a soft light, and a term
infant is able to fix on and follow a target, such as the examiner’s face.

Oculomotor (Cranial Nerve III), Trochlear (Cranial
Nerve IV), and Abducens (Cranial Nerve VI) Nerves

The globe is moved by six extraocular muscles, which are innervated
by the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves. These muscles and
nerves can be assessed by having the patient follow an interesting toy or
the examiner’s finger in the six cardinal directions of gaze. The physician observes the range and nature (conjugate vs dysconjugate, smooth
vs choppy or saccadic) of the eye movements, particularly noting the
presence and direction of any abnormal eye movements. Premature
infants older than 25 weeks of gestational age and comatose patients
can be evaluated using the oculocephalic (doll’s eye) maneuver, in
which the patient’s head is quickly rotated to evoke reflex eye movements. If the brainstem is intact, rotating the patient’s head to the right
causes the eyes to move to the left and vice versa. Similarly, rapid flexion and extension of the head elicits vertical eye movement.
Dysconjugate gaze can result from extraocular muscle weakness;
cranial nerve (CN) III, IV, or VI palsies; or brainstem lesions that disrupt the medial longitudinal fasciculus. Infants who are younger than 2
months can have a slightly dysconjugate gaze at rest, with one eye horizontally displaced from the other by 1 or 2 mm (strabismus). Vertical
displacement of the eyes requires investigation because it can indicate
trochlear nerve (CN IV) palsy or skew deviation (supranuclear ocular malalignment that is often associated with lesions of the posterior
fossa). Strabismus is discussed further in Chapter 663.
The oculomotor nerve innervates the superior, inferior, and medial
recti, as well as the inferior oblique and levator palpebrae superioris
muscles. Complete paralysis of the oculomotor nerve causes ptosis,
dilation of the pupil, displacement of the eye outward and downward,
and impairment of adduction and elevation. The trochlear nerve supplies the superior oblique muscle, which depresses and internally
rotates the globe during activities such as reading and walking down
stairs. Patients with an isolated paralysis of the trochlear nerve often
have a compensatory head tilt away from the affected side, which helps
to alleviate their diplopia. The abducens nerve innervates the lateral
rectus muscle; its paralysis causes medial deviation of the eye with an
inability to abduct beyond the midline. Patients with increased ICP
often respond positively when questioned about double vision (diplopia) and exhibit incomplete abduction of the eyes on lateral gaze as
a result of partial palsies of nerve VI. This false-­localizing sign occurs
because CN VI has a long intracranial course, making it particularly
susceptible to being stretched. Internuclear ophthalmoplegia, caused
by a lesion in the medial longitudinal fasciculus of the brainstem which
functionally serves the conjugate gaze by connecting CN VI on one
side to CN III on the other, results in paralysis of the medial rectus
function in the adducting eye and nystagmus in the abducting eye.
When there is a subtle eye movement abnormality, the red glass test
may be helpful in localizing the lesion. To perform this test, a red glass

3553

is placed over one of the patient’s eyes and the patient is instructed to
follow a white light in all directions of gaze. The child sees one red/
white light in the direction of normal muscle function but notes a separation of the red and white images that is greatest in the plane of action
of the affected muscle.
In addition to gaze palsies, the examiner might encounter a variety
of adventitious movements. Nystagmus is an involuntary, rapid movement of the eye that may be subclassified as being pendular, in which
the two phases have equal amplitude and velocity, or jerk, in which
there is a fast and a slow phase. Jerk nystagmus can be further characterized by the direction of its fast phase, which may be left-­, right-­, up-­,
or downbeating; rotatory; or mixed. Many patients have a few beats
of nystagmus with extreme lateral gaze (end-­gaze nystagmus), which
is of no consequence. Pathologic horizontal nystagmus is most often
congenital, drug-­induced (e.g., alcohol, anticonvulsants), or a result of
vestibular system dysfunction. By contrast, vertical nystagmus is often
associated with structural abnormalities of the brainstem and cerebellum. Ocular bobbing is characterized by a downward jerk followed by
a slow drift back to primary position and is associated with pontine
lesions. Opsoclonus describes involuntary, chaotic, conjugate oscillations of the eyes, which are often seen in the setting of neuroblastoma
or viral infection.

Trigeminal Nerve (Cranial Nerve V)

The three divisions of the trigeminal nerve—ophthalmic, maxillary,
and mandibular—convey information about facial protopathic (pain,
temperature) and epicritic (vibration, proprioception) sensation.
Each modality should be tested and compared with the contralateral
side. In patients who are uncooperative or comatose, the integrity of
the trigeminal nerve can be assessed by the corneal reflex, elicited by
touching the cornea with a small pledget of cotton and observing for
symmetric eye closure, and nasal tickle, obtained by stimulating the
nasal passage with a cotton swab and observing for symmetric grimace.
An absent reflex may be because of a sensory defect (trigeminal nerve)
or a motor deficit (facial nerve). The motor division of the trigeminal
nerve can be tested by examining the masseter, pterygoid, and temporalis muscles during mastication and by evaluation of the jaw jerk.

Facial Nerve (Cranial Nerve VII)

The facial nerve is a predominantly motor nerve that innervates the
muscles of facial expression—the buccinator, platysma, stapedius, and
stylohyoid muscles—and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. It
also has a separate division, called the chorda tympani, that contains
sensory, special sensory (taste), and parasympathetic fibers. Because
the portion of the facial nucleus that innervates the upper face receives
bilateral cortical input, lesions of the motor cortex or corticobulbar
tract have little effect on upper face strength. Rather, such lesions manifest with flattening of the contralateral nasolabial fold or drooping of
the corner of the mouth. Conversely, lower motor neuron or facial
nerve lesions tend to involve upper and lower facial muscles equally.
Facial strength can be evaluated by observing the patient’s spontaneous
movements and by asking the patient to mimic a series of facial movements (e.g., smiling, raising the eyebrows, inflating the cheeks). A facial
nerve palsy may be congenital; idiopathic (Bell palsy); or secondary
to trauma, demyelination (Guillain-­Barré syndrome), infection (Lyme
disease, herpes simplex virus, HIV), granulomatous disease, neoplasm,
or meningeal inflammation or infiltration. Facial nerve lesions that
are proximal to the junction with the chorda tympani will result in an
inability to taste substances with the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
If necessary, taste can be tested by placing a solution of saline or glucose on one side of the extended tongue. Normal children can identify
the test substance in <10 seconds. Other findings that may be associated with facial nerve palsy include hyperacusis, resulting from stapedius muscle involvement, and impaired tearing.

Vestibulocochlear Nerve (Cranial Nerve VIII)

The vestibulocochlear nerve has two components within a single
trunk: the vestibular nerve, which innervates the semicircular canals
of the inner ear and is involved with equilibrium, coordination, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3554 Part XXV u The Nervous System
orientation in space, and the cochlear nerve, which innervates the
cochlea and carries auditory sensory information.
Dysfunction of the vestibular system results in vertigo, the sensation of environmental motion. On examination, patients with vestibular nerve dysfunction typically have nystagmus, in which the
fast component is directed away from the affected nerve. With their
arms outstretched and eyes closed, their limbs tend to drift toward the
injured side. Likewise, if they march in place, they slowly pivot toward
the lesion (Fukuda stepping test). On Romberg and tandem gait testing, they tend to fall toward the abnormal ear. Vestibular function can
be further evaluated with caloric testing. Before testing, the tympanic
membrane should be visualized to ensure that it is intact and unobstructed. In an obtunded or comatose patient, 30-­50 mL of ice water
is then delivered by syringe into the external auditory canal with the
patient’s head elevated 30 degrees. If the brainstem is intact, the eyes
deviate toward the irrigated side. A much smaller quantity of ice water
(2 mL) is used in awake, alert patients to avoid inducing nausea. In normal subjects, introduction of ice water produces eye deviation toward
the stimulated labyrinth followed by nystagmus, with the fast component away from the stimulated labyrinth.
Because hearing is integral to normal language development, the
physician should inquire directly about hearing problems. The parents’
concern is often a reliable indicator of hearing impairment and warrants a formal audiologic assessment with either audiometry or brainstem auditory evoked potential testing (see Chapter 677). Even in the
absence of parents’ concern, formal testing is recommended in all newborns with the goal for all infants to be tested within the first month
of life. Children at risk for hearing problems include those with a family history of early-­life or syndromic deafness or a personal history of
prematurity, severe asphyxia, exposure to ototoxic drugs, hyperbilirubinemia, congenital anomalies of the head or neck, bacterial meningitis, and congenital TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other infections, rubella,
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus) infections. For all other infants
and children, a simple bedside assessment of hearing is usually sufficient. Newborns might have subtle responses to auditory stimuli,
such as changes in breathing, cessation of movement, or opening of the
eyes and/or mouth. If the same stimulus is presented repeatedly, normal neonates cease to respond, a phenomenon known as habituation.
By 3-­4 months of age, infants begin to orient to the source of sound.
Hearing-­impaired toddlers are visually alert and appropriately responsive to physical stimuli but might have more frequent temper tantrums
and abnormal speech and language development.

Glossopharyngeal Nerve (Cranial Nerve IX)

The glossopharyngeal nerve conveys motor fibers to the stylopharyngeus muscle; general sensory fibers from the posterior third of the
tongue, pharynx, tonsil, internal surface of the tympanic membrane,
and skin of the external ear; special sensory (taste) fibers from the posterior third of the tongue; parasympathetic fibers to the parotid gland;
and general visceral sensory fibers from the carotid bodies. The nerve
is tested by stimulating one side of the lateral oropharynx or soft palate
with a tongue blade and observing for symmetric elevation of the palate (gag reflex). An isolated lesion of CN IX is rare because it runs in
close proximity to CN X. Potential causes of injury and/or dysfunction
include birth trauma, ischemia, mass lesions, motor neuron disease,
retropharyngeal abscess, and Guillain-­Barré syndrome.

Vagus Nerve (Cranial Nerve X)

The vagus nerve has 10 terminal branches: meningeal, auricular, pharyngeal, carotid body, superior laryngeal, recurrent laryngeal, cardiac,
pulmonary, esophageal, and gastrointestinal. The pharyngeal, superior
laryngeal, and recurrent laryngeal branches contain motor fibers that
innervate all of the muscles of the pharynx and larynx, with the exception of the stylopharyngeus (CN IX) and tensor veli palatini (CN V)
muscles. Thus unilateral injury of the vagus nerve results in weakness
of the ipsilateral soft palate and a hoarse voice; bilateral lesions can
produce respiratory distress as a result of vocal cord paralysis, as well
as nasal regurgitation of fluids, pooling of secretions, and an immobile, low-­lying soft palate. Isolated lesions to the vagus nerve may be a

complication of thoracotomies or may be seen in neonates with type II
Chiari malformations. If such a lesion is suspected, it is important to
visualize the vocal cords. In addition to motor information, the vagus
nerve carries somatic afferents from the pharynx, larynx, ear canal,
external surface of the tympanic membrane, and meninges of the posterior fossa; visceral afferents; taste fibers from the posterior pharynx;
and preganglionic parasympathetics.

Accessory Nerve (Cranial Nerve XI)

The accessory nerve innervates the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) and
trapezius muscles. The left SCM acts to turn the head to the right side
and vice versa; acting together, the SCMs flex the neck. The trapezius
acts to elevate the shoulder. Lesions to the accessory nerve result in
atrophy and paralysis of the ipsilateral SCM and trapezius muscles,
with resultant depression of the shoulder. Because several cervical
muscles are involved in head rotation, unilateral SCM paresis might
not be evident unless the patient is asked to rotate the head against
resistance. Skull base fractures or lesions, motor neuron disease, myotonic dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis commonly produce atrophy
and weakness of these muscles; congenital torticollis is associated with
SCM hypertrophy.

Hypoglossal Nerve (Cranial Nerve XII)

The hypoglossal nerve innervates the tongue. Examination of the
tongue includes assessment of its bulk and strength, as well as observation for adventitious movements. Malfunction of the hypoglossal
nucleus or nerve produces atrophy, weakness, and fasciculations of the
tongue. If the injury is unilateral, the tongue deviates toward the side
of the injury; if it is bilateral, tongue protrusion is not possible, and the
patient can have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Werdnig-­Hoffmann
disease (infantile spinal muscular atrophy, or spinal muscular atrophy
type 1) and congenital anomalies in the region of the foramen magnum
are the principal causes of hypoglossal nerve dysfunction.

Motor Examination

The motor examination includes assessment of muscle bulk, tone, and
strength, as well as observation for involuntary movements that might
indicate central or peripheral nervous system pathology.

Bulk

Decreased muscle bulk (atrophy) may be secondary to disuse or to
diseases of the lower motor neuron, nerve root, peripheral nerve, or
muscle. In most cases, neurogenic atrophy is more severe than myogenic atrophy. Increased muscle bulk (hypertrophy) is usually physiologic (e.g., body builders). Pseudohypertrophy refers to muscle tissue
that has been replaced by fat and connective tissue, giving it a bulky
appearance with a paradoxical reduction in strength, as in Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.

Tone

Muscle tone, which is generated by an unconscious, continuous, partial contraction of muscle, creates resistance to passive movement of a
joint. Tone varies greatly based on a patient’s age and state. At 28 weeks
of gestation, all four extremities are extended and there is little resistance to passive movement. Flexor tone is visible in the lower extremities at 32 weeks and is palpable in the upper extremities at 36 weeks.
A normal term infant’s posture is characterized by flexion of all four
extremities.
There are three key tests for assessing postural tone in neonates: the
traction response, vertical suspension, and horizontal suspension (Fig.
630.3; see Chapters 115 and 122). To evaluate the traction response,
the physician grasps the infant’s hands and gently pulls the infant to
a sitting position. Normally, the infant’s head lags slightly behind the
infant’s body and then falls forward upon reaching the sitting position.
To test vertical suspension, the physician holds the infant by the axillae without gripping the thorax. The infant should remain suspended
with the infant’s lower extremities held in flexion; a hypotonic infant
will slip through the physician’s hands. With horizontal suspension,
the physician holds the infant prone by placing a hand under the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation

A

B

C

3555

D

Fig. 630.3 Normal tone in a full-­term neonate. A, Flexed resting posture. B, Traction response. C, Vertical suspension. D, Horizontal suspension.
infant’s abdomen. The head should rise and the limbs should flex, but
a hypotonic infant will drape over the physician’s hand, forming a U
shape. Assessing tone in the extremities is accomplished by observing the infant’s resting position and passively manipulating the infant’s
limbs. When the upper extremity of a normal term infant is pulled gently across the chest, the elbow does not quite reach the mid-­sternum
(scarf sign), whereas the elbow of a hypotonic infant extends beyond
the midline with ease. Measurement of the popliteal angle is a useful
method for documenting tone in the lower extremities. The examiner
flexes the hip and extends the knee. Normal term infants allow extension of the knee to approximately 80 degrees. Similarly, tone can be
evaluated by flexing the hip and knee to 90 degrees and then internally
rotating the leg, in which case the heel should not pass the umbilicus.
Abnormalities of tone include spasticity, rigidity, and hypotonia.
Spasticity is characterized by an initial resistance to passive movement,
followed by a sudden release, referred to as the clasp-­knife phenomenon. Because spasticity results from upper motor neuron dysfunction,
it disproportionately affects the upper-­extremity flexors and lower-­
extremity extensors and tends to occur in conjunction with disuse
atrophy, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, and extensor plantar reflexes
(Babinski sign). In infants, spasticity of the lower extremities results
in scissoring of the legs upon vertical suspension. Older children can
present with prolonged commando crawling or toe-­walking. Rigidity,
seen with lesions of the basal ganglia, is characterized by resistance to
passive movement that is equal in the flexors and extensors regardless
of the velocity of movement (lead pipe). Patients with either spasticity
or rigidity might exhibit opisthotonos, defined as severe hyperextension of the spine caused by hypertonia of the paraspinal muscles (Fig.
630.4), although similar posturing can be seen in patients with Sandifer syndrome (gastroesophageal reflux or hiatal hernia associated with
torsional dystonia). Hypotonia refers to abnormally diminished tone
and is the most common abnormality of tone in neurologically compromised neonates. A hypotonic infant is floppy and often assumes a
frog-­leg posture at rest. Hypotonia can reflect pathology of the cerebral
hemispheres, cerebellum, spinal cord, anterior horn cell, peripheral
nerve, neuromuscular junction, or muscle.

Strength

Older children are usually able to cooperate with formal strength testing, in which case muscle power is graded on a scale of 0-­5 as follows:
0 = no contraction; 1 = flicker or trace of contraction; 2 = active movement with gravity eliminated; 3 = active movement against gravity; 4 =
active movement against gravity and resistance; and 5 = normal power.
An examination of muscle power should include all muscle groups,
including the neck flexors and extensors and the muscles of respiration.
It is important not only to assess individual muscle groups but also to
determine the pattern of weakness (i.e., proximal vs distal; segmental
vs regional). Testing for pronator drift can be helpful in localizing the
lesion in a patient with weakness. This test is accomplished by having
the patient extend his or her arms away from the body with the palms
facing upward and the eyes closed. Together, pronation and downward
drift of an arm indicate a lesion of the contralateral corticospinal tract.
Because infants and young children are not able to participate in formal strength testing, they are best assessed with functional measures.
Proximal and distal strength of the upper extremities can be tested by

Fig. 630.4 Opisthotonos in a brain-­injured infant.
having the child reach overhead for a toy and by watching the child
manipulate small objects. In infants younger than 2 months, the physician can also take advantage of the palmar grasp reflex in assessing
distal power and the Moro reflex in assessing proximal power. Infants
with decreased strength in the lower extremities tend to have diminished spontaneous activity in their legs and are unable to support their
body weight when held upright. Older children may have difficulty
climbing or descending steps, jumping, or hopping. They might also
use their hands to climb up their legs when asked to rise from a prone
position, a maneuver called Gowers sign (Fig. 630.5).

Involuntary Movements

Patients with lower motor neuron or peripheral nervous system lesions
might have fasciculations, which are small, involuntary muscle contractions that result from the spontaneous discharge of a single motor
unit and create the illusion of a bag of worms under the skin. Because
most infants have abundant body fat, muscle fasciculations are best
observed in the tongue in this age-­group.
Most other involuntary movements, including tics, dystonia, chorea,
and athetosis, stem from disorders of the basal ganglia. Tremor seems
to be an exception, as it is thought to be mediated by cerebellothalamocortical pathways. Further detail on the individual movement disorders is provided in Chapter 637.

Sensory Examination

The sensory examination is difficult to perform on an infant or uncooperative child and has a relatively low yield in terms of the information that it provides. A gross assessment of sensory function can be
achieved by distracting the patient with an interesting toy and then
touching the patient with a cotton swab in different locations. Normal
infants and children indicate an awareness of the stimulus by crying,
withdrawing the extremity, or pausing briefly; however, with repeated
testing, they lose interest in the stimulus and begin to ignore the examiner. It is therefore critical that any areas of concern are tested efficiently
and, if necessary, reexamined at an appropriate time.
Fortunately, isolated disorders of the sensory system are less common
in the very young pediatric population than in the adult population, so

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3556 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

D

Fig. 630.5 A-­D, Gowers sign in a child with hip girdle weakness because of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. When asked to rise from a prone position, the patient uses his hands to walk up his legs to compensate for proximal lower extremity weakness.

Table 630.2  Timing of Selected Primitive Reflexes
REFLEX

ONSET

FULLY DEVELOPED

DURATION

Palmar grasp

28 wk gestation

32 wk gestation

2-­3 mo postnatal

Rooting

32 wk gestation

36 wk gestation

4-6 mo postnatal

Moro

28-­32 wk gestation

37 wk gestation

5-­6 mo postnatal

Tonic neck

35 wk gestation

1 mo postnatal

6-­7 mo postnatal

Parachute

7-­8 mo postnatal

10-­11 mo postnatal

Remains throughout life

detailed sensory testing is rarely warranted. Furthermore, most patients
who are old enough to voice a sensory complaint are also old enough to
cooperate with formal testing of light touch, pain, temperature, vibration, proprioception, and cortical sensation (e.g., stereognosis, two-­
point discrimination, extinction to double simultaneous stimulation).
A notable exception is when the physician suspects a spinal cord lesion
in an infant or young child and needs to identify a sensory level. In
such situations, observation might suggest a difference in color, temperature, or perspiration, with the skin cool and dry below the level of
injury. Lightly touching the skin above the level can evoke a squirming
movement or physical withdrawal. Other signs of spinal cord injury
include decreased anal sphincter tone and strength and absence of the
superficial abdominal, anal wink, and cremasteric reflexes.

Reflexes
Deep Tendon Reflexes and the Plantar Response

Deep tendon reflexes are readily elicited in most infants and children.
In infants, it is important to position the head in the midline when
assessing reflexes, because turning the head to one side can alter reflex
tone. Reflexes are graded from 0 (absent) to 4+ (markedly hyperactive), with 2+ being normal. Reflexes that are 1+ or 3+ can be normal
as long as they are symmetric. Sustained clonus is always pathologic,
but infants younger than 3 months old can have 5-­10 beats of clonus,
and older children can have 1-­2 beats of clonus, provided that it is
symmetric.
The ankle jerk is hardest to elicit, but it can usually be obtained by
passively dorsiflexing the foot and then tapping on either the Achilles
tendon or the ball of the foot. The knee jerk is evoked by tapping the
patellar tendon. If this reflex is exaggerated, extension of the knee may
be accompanied by contraction of the contralateral adductors (crossed

adductor response). Hypoactive reflexes generally reflect lower motor
neuron or cerebellar dysfunction, whereas hyperactive reflexes are
consistent with upper motor neuron disease, although acute upper
motor neuron injury can result in hypoactive or absent deep tendon
reflexes. The plantar response is obtained by stimulation of the lateral
aspect of the sole of the foot, beginning at the heel and extending to the
base of the toes. The Babinski sign, indicating an upper motor neuron
lesion, is characterized by extension of the great toe and fanning of
the remaining toes. Too vigorous stimulation may produce withdrawal,
which may be misinterpreted as a Babinski sign. Plantar responses have
limited diagnostic utility in neonates because they are mediated by several competing reflexes and can be either flexor or extensor, depending
on how the foot is positioned. Asymmetry of the reflexes or plantar
response is a useful lateralizing sign in infants and children.

Primitive Reflexes

Primitive reflexes appear and disappear at specific times during development (Table 630.2), and their absence or persistence beyond those
times signifies CNS dysfunction. Although many primitive reflexes have
been described, the Moro, grasp, tonic neck, and parachute reflexes are
the most clinically relevant. The Moro reflex is elicited by supporting
the infant in a semierect position and then allowing the infant’s head to
fall backward onto the examiner’s hand. A normal response consists of
symmetric extension and abduction of the fingers and upper extremities, followed by flexion of the upper extremities and an audible cry. An
asymmetric response can signify a fractured clavicle, brachial plexus
injury, or hemiparesis. Absence of the Moro reflex in a term newborn
is ominous, suggesting significant dysfunction of the CNS. The grasp
response is elicited by placing a finger in the open palm of each hand;
by 37 weeks of gestation, the reflex is strong enough that the examiner

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation
can lift the infant from the bed with gentle traction. The tonic neck
reflex is produced by manually rotating the infant’s head to one side
and observing for the characteristic fencing posture (extension of the
arm on the side to which the face is rotated and flexion of the contralateral arm). An obligatory tonic neck response, in which the infant
becomes stuck in the fencing posture, is always abnormal and implies
a CNS disorder. The parachute reflex, which occurs in slightly older
infants, can be evoked by holding the infant’s trunk and then suddenly
lowering the infant as if he or she were falling. The arms will spontaneously extend to break the infant’s fall, making this reflex a prerequisite
to walking (Fig. 630.6).

Coordination

Ataxia refers to a disturbance in the smooth performance of voluntary
motor acts and is usually the result of cerebellar dysfunction. Lesions
to the cerebellar vermis result in unsteadiness while sitting or standing (truncal ataxia). Affected patients might have a wide-­based gait or
may be unable to perform tandem gait testing. Lesions of the cerebellar hemispheres cause appendicular ataxia, which may be apparent as
the patient reaches for objects and performs finger-­to-­nose and heel-­
to-­shin movements. Other features of cerebellar dysfunction include
errors in judging distance (dysmetria), inability to inhibit a muscular
action (rebound), impaired performance of rapid alternating movements (dysdiadochokinesia), intention tremor, nystagmus, scanning
dysarthria, hypotonia, and decreased deep tendon reflexes. Acute
ataxia suggests an infectious or postinfectious, endocrinologic, toxic,
traumatic, vascular, or psychogenic process, and chronic symptoms
suggest a metabolic, neoplastic, or degenerative process.

Station and Gait

Observation of a child’s station and gait is an important aspect of the
neurologic examination. Normal children can stand with their feet
close together without swaying; however, children who are unsteady
may sway or even fall. On gait testing, the heels should strike either
side of an imaginary line, but children with poor balance tend to walk
with their legs farther apart to create a more stable base. Tandem gait
testing forces patients to have a narrow base, which highlights subtle
balance difficulties.
There are a variety of abnormal gaits, many of which are associated
with a specific underlying etiology. Patients with a spastic gait appear
stiff-­legged like a soldier. They may walk on tiptoe as a result of tightness or contractures of the Achilles tendons, and their legs may scissor
as they walk. A hemiparetic gait is associated with spasticity and circumduction of the leg, as well as decreased arm swing on the affected
side. Cerebellar ataxia results in a wide-­based, reeling gait like that of
a drunk person, whereas sensory ataxia results in a wide-­based steppage gait, in which the patient lifts the legs up higher than usual in the

Fig. 630.6 Infant in the parachute reflex position. This primitive reflex

develops later in infancy (around 6 mo), and its absence can signal delayed walking. It is elicited by holding the infant face down and rapidly
lowering the infant, causing the infant to extend out the arms.

3557

swing phase and then slaps the foot down. A myopathic, or waddling,
gait is associated with hip girdle weakness. Affected children often
develop a compensatory lordosis and have other signs of proximal
muscle weakness, such as difficulty climbing stairs. During gait testing, the examiner might also note hypotonia or weakness of the lower
extremities; extrapyramidal movements, such as dystonia or chorea; or
orthopedic deformities, such as pelvic tilt, genu recurvatum, varus or
valgus deformities of the knee, pes cavus (high arches) or pes planus
(flat feet), and scoliosis.

GENERAL EXAMINATION

Examination of other organ systems is essential because myriad systemic diseases affect the nervous system. Dysmorphic features can
indicate a genetic syndrome (see Chapter 95). Heart murmurs may be
associated with rheumatic fever (Sydenham chorea), cardiac rhabdomyoma (tuberous sclerosis), cyanotic heart disease (cerebral abscess or
thrombosis), and endocarditis (cerebral vascular occlusion). Hepatosplenomegaly can suggest an inborn error of metabolism, storage disease, HIV infection, or malignancy. Cutaneous lesions may be a feature
of a neurocutaneous syndrome (see Chapter 636).

SPECIAL DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Lumbar Puncture and Cerebrospinal Fluid
Examination

Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and measurement of the
pressure it creates in the subarachnoid space is essential in confirming the diagnosis of meningitis, encephalitis (autoimmune, infectious),
and idiopathic intracranial hypertension (previously referred to as
pseudotumor cerebri), and it is often helpful in assessing subarachnoid
hemorrhage; demyelinating, degenerative, and collagen vascular diseases; and intracranial neoplasms. Having an experienced assistant
who can position, restrain, and comfort the patient is critical to the
success of the procedure.
The patient should be situated in a lateral decubitus or seated position with the neck and legs flexed to enlarge the intervertebral spaces.
As a rule, sick neonates should be maintained in a seated position to
prevent problems with ventilation and perfusion. Regardless of the
position chosen, it is important to make sure that the patient’s shoulders and hips are straight to prevent rotating the spine.
Once the patient is situated, the physician identifies the appropriate
interspace by drawing an imaginary line from the iliac crest downward
perpendicular to the vertebral column. In adults, lumbar punctures are
usually performed in the L3-­L4 or L4-­L5 interspaces. Next, the physician dons a mask, gown, and sterile gloves. The skin is thoroughly
prepared with a cleansing agent, and sterile drapes are applied. The
skin and underlying tissues are anesthetized by injecting a local anesthetic (e.g., 1% lidocaine) at the time of the procedure or by applying a eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine (EMLA) to the skin
30 minutes before the procedure. A 22-­gauge, 1.5-­to 3.0-­inch, sharp,
beveled spinal needle with a properly fitting stylet is introduced in the
midsagittal plane and directed slightly cephalad. The physician should
pause frequently, remove the stylet, and assess for CSF flow. Although a
pop can occur as the needle penetrates the dura, it is more common to
experience a subtle change in resistance.
Once CSF has been detected, a manometer and three-­way stopcock
can be attached to the spinal needle to obtain an opening pressure. If
the patient was seated as the spinal needle was introduced, the patient
should be moved carefully to a lateral decubitus position with the
head and legs extended before the manometer is attached. In children
between 1 and 18 years of age, the reference range parameter for abnormally elevated opening pressure, determined as the 90th percentile for
all patients in the reference population, is 28 cm of water. The threshold
for an abnormally reduced pressure in the 10th percentile is 11.5 cm of
water. The most common cause of an elevated opening pressure is an
agitated patient. Sedation and a high body mass index can also increase
the opening pressure (see Chapter 645).
Contraindications to performing a lumbar puncture include suspected mass lesion of the brain, especially in the posterior fossa or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3558 Part XXV u The Nervous System
above the tentorium and causing shift of the midline; suspected mass
lesion of the spinal cord; symptoms and signs of impending cerebral
herniation in a child with probable meningitis; critical illness (on rare
occasions); skin infection at the site of the lumbar puncture; and thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of <20 × 109/L. If optic disc edema or
focal findings suggest a mass lesion, a rapid CT scan of the head should
be obtained before proceeding with lumbar puncture to prevent uncal
or cerebellar herniation as the CSF is removed. In the absence of these
findings, routine head imaging is not warranted. The physician should
also be alert to clinical signs of impending herniation, including alterations in the respiratory pattern (e.g., hyperventilation, Cheyne-­Stokes
respirations, ataxic respirations, respiratory arrest), abnormalities of
pupil size and reactivity, loss of brainstem reflexes, and decorticate or
decerebrate posturing. If any of these signs are present or the child is
so ill that the lumbar puncture might induce cardiorespiratory arrest,
blood cultures should be drawn and supportive care, including antibiotics, should be initiated. Once the patient has stabilized, it may be
possible to perform a lumbar puncture safely.
Normal CSF contains up to 5/mm3 white blood cells, and a newborn can have as many as 15/mm3. Polymorphonuclear cells are always
abnormal in a child, but 1-­2/mm3 may be present in a normal neonate.
An elevated polymorphonuclear count suggests bacterial meningitis
or the early phase of aseptic meningitis (see Chapter 643). CSF lymphocytosis can be seen in aseptic, tuberculous, or fungal meningitis;
demyelinating diseases; brain or spinal cord tumor; immunologic disorders, including collagen vascular diseases; and chemical irritation
(after myelogram, intrathecal methotrexate).
Normal CSF contains no red blood cells; thus their presence indicates a traumatic tap or a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Progressive
clearing of the blood between the first and last samples indicates a
traumatic tap. Bloody CSF should be centrifuged immediately. A
clear supernatant is consistent with a bloody tap, whereas xanthochromia (yellow color that results from the degradation of hemoglobin) suggests a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Xanthochromia may be
absent in bleeds <12 hours old, particularly when laboratories rely on
visual inspection rather than spectroscopy. Xanthochromia can also
occur in the setting of hyperbilirubinemia, carotenemia, and markedly elevated CSF protein.
The normal CSF protein is 10-­40 mg/dL in a child and as high as
120 mg/dL in a neonate. The CSF protein falls to the normal childhood
range by 3 months of age. The CSF protein may be elevated in many
processes, including infectious, immunologic, vascular, and degenerative diseases; blockage of CSF flow; as well as tumors of the brain (primary CNS tumors, systemic tumors metastatic to the CNS, infiltrative
acute lymphoblastic leukemia) and spinal cord. With a traumatic tap,
the CSF protein is increased by approximately 1 mg/dL for every 1,000
red blood cells/mm3. Elevation of CSF immunoglobulin G, which normally represents approximately 10% of the total protein, is observed in
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, in postinfectious encephalomyelitis, and in some cases of multiple sclerosis. If the diagnosis of multiple
sclerosis is suspected, the CSF should be tested for the presence of oligoclonal bands.
The CSF glucose content is approximately 60% of the blood glucose in a healthy child. To prevent a spuriously elevated blood:CSF
glucose ratio in a case of suspected meningitis, it is advisable to collect the blood glucose before the lumbar puncture when the child is
relatively calm. Hypoglycorrhachia is found in association with diffuse
meningeal disease, particularly bacterial and tubercular meningitis.
Widespread neoplastic involvement of the meninges, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, disorders involving the glucose transporter protein type 1
(e.g., GLUT1 deficiency), fungal meningitis, and, occasionally, aseptic
meningitis can produce low CSF glucose as well.
A Gram stain of the CSF is essential if there is a suspicion for bacterial meningitis; an acid-­fast stain and India ink preparation can be
used to assess for tuberculous and fungal meningitis, respectively.
CSF is then plated on different culture media depending on the
suspected pathogen. When indicated by the clinical presentation, it
can also be helpful to assess for the presence of specific antigens or

polymerase chain reaction studies (e.g., Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae type b, or Streptococcus pneumoniae) or to obtain
antibody or polymerase chain reaction studies (e.g., herpes simplex
virus 1 and 2, West Nile virus, Zika, enteroviruses). In noninfectious
cases, levels of CSF metabolites, such as lactate, amino acids, and
autoimmune encephalitis panel, can provide clues to the underlying
metabolic disease.

Neuroradiologic Procedures

Skull x-­rays have limited diagnostic utility. They can demonstrate
fractures, bony defects, intracranial calcifications, or indirect evidence of increased ICP. Acutely increased ICP causes separation of the
sutures, whereas chronically increased ICP is associated with erosion
of the posterior clinoid processes, enlargement of the sella turcica, and
increased convolutional markings.
Cranial ultrasonography is the imaging method of choice for
detecting intracranial hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, and
hydrocephalus in infants younger than 6 months with patent anterior
fontanels. Ultrasound is less sensitive than either cranial CT scanning
or MRI for detecting hypoxic-­ischemic injury, but the use of color
Doppler or power Doppler sonography, both of which show changes in
regional cerebral blood flow velocity, improve its sensitivity. In general,
ultrasound is not a useful technique in older children, although it can
be helpful intraoperatively when placing shunts, locating small tumors,
and performing needle biopsies.
Cranial CT is a valuable diagnostic tool in the evaluation of many
neurologic emergencies and in some nonemergent conditions. It is a
noninvasive, rapid procedure that can usually be performed without
sedation. CT scans use conventional x-­ray techniques, meaning that
they produce ionizing radiation. Because children younger than 10
years of age are several times more sensitive to radiation than adults, it
is important to consider whether imaging is actually indicated and, if it
is, whether an ultrasound or MRI might be the more appropriate study.
In the emergency setting, a noncontrast CT scan can demonstrate
skull fractures, pneumocephalus, intracranial hemorrhages, hydrocephalus, and impending herniation. If the noncontrast scan reveals
an abnormality and an MRI cannot be performed in a timely fashion,
nonionic contrast should be used to highlight areas of breakdown in
the blood-­brain barrier (e.g., abscesses, tumors) and/or collections of
abnormal blood vessels (e.g., arteriovenous malformations). CT is less
useful for diagnosing acute infarcts in children because radiographic
changes might not be apparent for up to 24 hours. Some subtle signs of
early (<24 hours) infarction include sulcal effacement, blurring of the
gray-­white junction, and the hyperdense middle cerebral artery sign
(increased attenuation in the middle cerebral artery that is often associated with thrombosis). In the routine setting, CT imaging can be used
to demonstrate intracranial calcifications or, with the addition of three-­
dimensional reformatting, to evaluate patients with craniofacial abnormalities or craniosynostosis. Although other pathologic processes may
be visible on CT scan, MR is generally preferred because it provides a
more detailed view of the anatomy without exposing the patient to ionizing radiation (Table 630.3).
Cranial CT angiography is a useful tool for visualizing vascular structures and is accomplished by administering a tight bolus of
iodinated contrast through a large-­bore intravenous catheter and then
acquiring CT images as the contrast passes through the arteries.
Brain MRI is a noninvasive procedure that is well suited for detecting a variety of abnormalities, including those of the posterior fossa
and spinal cord. MR scans are highly susceptible to patient motion
artifact; consequently, many children younger than age 8 years require
sedation to ensure an adequate study. The need for sedation has
decreased in some centers as MRI technology improves and allows
for faster performance of studies and as visual distraction techniques
are better designed to be used by a child while in the MRI scanner.
Because the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that
infants be kept nothing by mouth (NPO) for 4 hours or longer and
older children for 6 hours or longer before deep sedation, it is often
difficult to obtain an MRI on an infant or young child in the acute

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation

3559

Table 630.3  Preferred Imaging Procedures in Neurologic Diseases
ISCHEMIC INFARCTION OR TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACK
CT/CTA (head and neck) ± CT perfusion for patients who are
unstable or are potential candidates for tissue plasminogen
activator or other acute interventions
Otherwise, MRI/MRA (head and neck) with and without gadolinium
and with diffusion-­weighted images
If the examination findings localize to the anterior circulation, carotid
ultrasound should be performed rather than neck CTA or MRA
Obtain an MRV if the infarct does not follow an arterial distribution
CT or MRI can detect infarcts more than 24 hours old, although MRI
is generally preferred to avoid exposure to ionizing radiation
INTRAPARENCHYMAL HEMORRHAGE
CT if <24 hr; MRI if >24 hr
MRI and MRA to assess for underlying vascular malformation, tumor,
and so on
Catheter angiography if MRA is nondiagnostic
ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
CT for acute hemorrhage; MRI and MRA with and without
gadolinium as early as possible
Catheter angiography if noninvasive imaging is nondiagnostic
CEREBRAL ANEURYSM
CT without contrast for acute subarachnoid hemorrhage
MRA or CTA to identify the aneurysm
Catheter angiography may be necessary in some cases
TCD to detect vasospasm
HYPOXIC-­ISCHEMIC BRAIN INJURY
Ultrasound in infants
If ultrasound is negative or there is a discrepancy between the
clinical course and the sonogram, obtain an MRI
In older children, CT if unstable; otherwise, MRI
MRS can show a lactate peak even in the absence of structural
abnormalities and can be useful for prognostication purposes
METABOLIC DISORDERS
MRI, particularly T2-­weighted and FLAIR images
Diffusion-­weighted images may be useful in distinguishing acute and
chronic changes
MRS, SPECT, and PET may be useful in certain disorders
HYDROCEPHALUS
Ultrasound (in infants), CT with and without contrast, or MR with and
without gadolinium for diagnosis of communicating hydrocephalus
MR with and without gadolinium for diagnosis of noncommunicating
hydrocephalus
Ultrasound (in infants) or CT to follow ventricular size in response to
treatment

HEADACHE
CT with and without contrast or MRI with and without gadolinium if
a structural disorder is suspected (MRI is preferred in nonemergent
situations because it does not involve ionizing radiation and
provides a better view of the parenchyma)
HEAD TRAUMA
CT without contrast initially
MRI after initial assessment and treatment if clinically indicated;
diffusion tensor imaging and/or diffusion kurtosis sequences may
be useful to detect subtle white matter abnormalities
EPILEPSY
MRI with and without gadolinium; thin slices through the mesial
temporal lobes may be helpful if a temporal focus is suspected
PET
Interictal SPECT
BRAIN TUMOR
MRI with and without gadolinium
MRS
PET
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
MRI with and without gadolinium
Obtain sagittal FLAIR images
MENINGITIS OR ENCEPHALITIS
CT without and with contrast before lumbar puncture if there are
signs of increased ICP on examination
MRI with and without gadolinium after initial assessment and
treatment for patients with complicated meningitis or encephalitis
BRAIN ABSCESS
MRI with and without gadolinium
Diffusion-­weighted images and MRS can help to differentiate
abscess from necrotic tumor
If the patient is unstable, CT with and without contrast followed by
MRI with and without contrast when feasible
MOVEMENT DISORDERS
MRI with and without gadolinium
PET
DaTscan (SPECT scan using ioflupane iodine-­123 as the contrast
agent for detecting dopamine transporters in suspected
parkinsonian syndromes)

CTA, computed tomographic angiography; FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; ICP, intracranial pressure; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; MRS, magnetic resonance
spectroscopy; MRV, magnetic resonance venography; PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-­photon emission computed tomography; TCD, transcranial Doppler
ultrasonography.

setting. MRI can be used to evaluate for congenital or acquired brain
lesions, migrational defects, dysmyelination or demyelination, posttraumatic gliosis, neoplasms, cerebral edema, and acute stroke (see
Table 630.3). Paramagnetic MR contrast agents (e.g., gadolinium-­
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid [DTPA]) are efficacious in identifying areas of disruption in the blood-­brain barrier, such as those
occurring in primary and metastatic brain tumors, meningitis, cerebritis, abscesses, and active demyelination. MR angiography and MR
venography provide detailed images of major intracranial vasculature structures and assist in the diagnosis of conditions such as stroke,
vascular malformations, and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. MR
angiography is the procedure of choice for infants and young children
because of the lack of ionizing radiation and contrast; however, CT
angiography may be preferable in older children because it is faster
and can eliminate the need for sedation; it is particularly useful for
looking at blood vessels in the neck, where there is less interference
from bone artifact than in the skull-­encased brain.

Functional MRI is a noninvasive technique used to map neuronal
activity during specific cognitive states and/or sensorimotor functions.
Data are usually based on blood oxygenation, although they can also be
based on local cerebral blood volume or flow. Functional MRI is useful for presurgical localization of critical brain functions and has several advantages over other functional imaging techniques. Specifically,
functional MRI produces high-­resolution images without exposure to
ionizing radiation or contrast, and it allows coregistration of functional
and structural images.
Proton MR spectroscopy (MRS) is a molecular imaging technique in which the unique neurochemical profile of a preselected
brain region is displayed in the form of a spectrum. Many metabolites can be detected, the most common of which are N-­acetylaspartate,
creatine and phosphocreatine, choline, myoinositol, and lactate.
Changes in the spectral pattern of a given area can yield clues to the
underlying pathology, making MRS useful in the diagnosis of inborn
errors of metabolism, as well as the preoperative and posttherapeutic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3560 Part XXV u The Nervous System
assessment of intracranial tumors. MRS can also detect areas of cortical
dysplasia in patients with epilepsy because these patients have low N-­
acetylaspartate:creatine ratios. Finally, MRS may be useful in detecting
hypoxic-­ischemic injury in newborns in the first day of life because the
lactate peak enlarges and the N-­acetylaspartate peak diminishes before
MRI sequences become abnormal.
Catheter angiography is the gold standard for diagnosing vascular
disorders of the CNS, such as arteriovenous malformations, aneurysms,
arterial occlusions, and vasculitis. A four-­vessel study is accomplished
by introducing a catheter into the femoral artery and then injecting
contrast media into each of the internal carotid and vertebral arteries.
Because catheter angiography is invasive and requires general anesthesia, it is typically reserved for treatment planning of endovascular or
open procedures and for cases in which noninvasive imaging results
are not diagnostic.
Positron emission tomography (PET) provides unique information on brain metabolism and perfusion by measuring blood flow,
oxygen uptake, and/or glucose consumption. PET is an expensive
technique that is most often used in the context of epilepsy surgery
programs. Single-­photon emission CT using 99mTc hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime is a sensitive and inexpensive technique to study
regional cerebral blood flow. Single-­photon emission CT is particularly
useful in assessing for vasculitis, herpes encephalitis, dysplastic cortex, and recurrent brain tumors. PET-­MRI is only available in a few
pediatric centers in the United States; it provides better resolution and
tissue definition than single-­photon emission CT. This emerging clinical modality is of particular use in epilepsy surgery evaluation and
neuro-­oncology.

Electroencephalography

An electroencephalogram (EEG) provides a continuous recording of electrical activity between reference electrodes placed on the
scalp. Although the genesis of the electrical activity is not certain,
it likely originates from postsynaptic potentials in the dendrites of
cortical neurons. Even with amplification of the electrical activity, not
all potentials are recorded because there is a buffering effect of the
scalp, muscles, bone, vessels, and subarachnoid fluid. EEG waves are
classified according to their frequency as delta (1-­3 Hz), theta (4-­7
Hz), alpha (8-­12 Hz), and beta (13-­20 Hz). These waves are altered
by many factors, including age, level of alertness, eye closure, drugs,
and disease states.
The normal waking EEG is characterized by the posterior dominant
rhythm—a sinusoidal, 8-­to 12-­Hz rhythm that is most prominent
over the occipital region in a state of relaxed wakefulness with the eyes
closed. This rhythm first becomes apparent at 3-­4 months of age, and
most children have achieved the adult frequency of 8-­12 Hz by age 8
years.
Normal sleep is divided into three stages of non–rapid eye movement sleep—designated N1, N2, and N3—and rapid eye movement
sleep. N1 corresponds to drowsiness, and N3 represents deep, restorative, slow-­wave sleep. Rapid eye movement sleep is rarely captured
during a routine EEG but may be seen on an overnight recording. The
American Electroencephalography Society Guideline and Technical
Standards states that “sleep recordings should be obtained whenever
possible”; however, it appears that sleep deprivation—not sleep during the EEG—is what increases the yield of the study, particularly in
children with one or more clinically diagnosed seizures and in children
older than 3 years of age.
EEG abnormalities can be divided into two general categories: epileptiform discharges and slowing. Epileptiform discharges are paroxysmal spikes or sharp waves, often followed by slow waves, which
interrupt the background activity. They may be focal, multifocal, or
generalized. Focal discharges are often associated with cerebral dysgenesis or irritative lesions, such as cysts, slow-­growing tumors, or
glial scar tissue; generalized discharges typically occur in children with
structurally normal brains. Generalized discharges can occur as an

epilepsy trait in children who have never had a seizure and, by themselves, are not an indication for treatment. Epileptiform activity may
be enhanced by activation procedures, including hyperventilation and
photic stimulation.
As with epileptiform discharges, slowing can be either focal or
diffuse. Focal slowing should raise a concern for an underlying
functional or structural abnormality, such as an infarct, hematoma, or tumor. Diffuse slowing is the hallmark of encephalopathy
and is usually secondary to a widespread disease process or toxic-­
metabolic insult.
Long-­term video EEG monitoring provides a precise characterization of seizure types, which allows specific medical or surgical management. It facilitates more accurate differentiation of epileptic seizures
from paroxysmal events that mimic epilepsy, including recurrent psychogenic seizure-­like attacks. Long-­term EEG monitoring can also be
useful during medication adjustments.

Evoked Potentials

An evoked potential is an electrical signal recorded from the CNS
after the presentation of a specific visual, auditory, or sensory
stimulus. Stimulation of the visual system by a flash or patterned
stimulus, such as a black-­and-­white checkerboard, produces visual
evoked potentials (VEPs), which are recorded over the occiput and
averaged in a computer. Abnormal VEPs can result from lesions to
the visual pathway anywhere from the retina to the visual cortex.
Many demyelinating disorders and neurodegenerative diseases,
such as Tay-­Sachs, Krabbe, or Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher disease, or
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses show characteristic VEP abnormalities. Flash VEPs can also be helpful in evaluating infants who have
sustained an anoxic injury; however, detection of an evoked potential does not necessarily mean that the infant will have functional
vision.
Brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) provide an objective measure of hearing and are particularly useful in neonates and
in children who have failed, or are uncooperative with, audiometric
testing. BAERs are abnormal in many neurodegenerative diseases
of childhood and are an important tool in evaluating patients with
suspected tumors of the cerebellopontine angle. BAERs can be helpful in assessing brainstem function in comatose patients because the
waveforms are unaffected by drugs or by the level of consciousness;
however, they are not accurate in predicting neurologic recovery and
outcome.
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) are obtained by stimulating a peripheral nerve (peroneal, median) and then recording the
electrical response over the cervical region and contralateral parietal
somatosensory cortex. SSEPs determine the functional integrity of the
dorsal column-­medial lemniscal system and are useful in monitoring
spinal cord function during operative procedures for scoliosis, aortic
coarctation, and myelomeningocele repair. SSEPs are abnormal in
many neurodegenerative disorders and are the most accurate evoked
potential in the assessment of neurologic outcome after a severe CNS
insult.

Specific and General Genetic and Metabolic Testing

Children with intellectual disability or developmental delay are often
evaluated with metabolic and/or genetic testing. Newborn screening
study results should be rechecked before new studies are done. Specific
accompanying features of the child’s history and physical examination
may point to a particular disorder or group of disorders, allowing for
specific genetic or metabolic testing or for chromosomal studies to be
fruitful. Whole exome sequencing is often used in situations in which
these studies are negative or there are no distinguishing features of the
child’s history or physical examination that point to a particular subgroup of diagnoses.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

Chapter 631

Congenital Anomalies
of the Central Nervous
System
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis

631.1 Neural Tube Defects
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Neural tube defects (NTDs) account for the largest proportion of
congenital anomalies of the CNS and result from failure of the
neural tube to close properly during development. The etiology
of NTDs appears to be multifactorial and remains incompletely
understood. There is evidence for various environmental risk
factors, including hyperthermia, teratogens (e.g., valproic acid,
dolutegravir), maternal malnutrition, suboptimal folate levels, and
maternal obesity or diabetes. Genetic determinants also play a role;
studies have revealed relatively few monogenic causes and suggest
a polygenic mode of inheritance. Genes associated with NTDs are
also linked to known environmental risk factors (maternal obesity/
diabetes and folate metabolism). NTDs vary widely in type and
severity, depending on when and how the developmental process
is disrupted.
The human nervous system originates from the primitive ectoderm,
which, along with the endoderm and mesoderm, form the three primary germ layers (Fig. 631.1). During primary neurulation (3-­4 weeks
postgestation), the dorsal neural ectoderm differentiates into the neural plate. The neural plate then begins to invaginate as the edges fold
upward, forming the neural tube, the structure that will ultimately give
rise to the brain and spinal cord. Initial closure of the neural tube is
accomplished in the area corresponding to the future junction of the
spinal cord and medulla and moves rapidly both caudally and rostrally.
As the neural tube is closing, a conglomerate of cells from the dorsal
tube differentiates into the neural crest, which forms the peripheral
nervous system, leptomeninges, and Schwann cells. The surrounding
mesoderm gives rise to the dura and vertebrae. Defects in primary neurulation lead to open NTDs, in which neural tissue is exposed. Failure
of the neural tube to close allows excretion of fetal substances (e.g., α-­
fetoprotein [AFP], acetylcholinesterase) into the amniotic fluid. Fetal
ultrasonography has a higher sensitivity to detect NTDs and has largely
replaced prenatal screening of maternal serum for AFP in the 16th to
18th wk of gestation; both can be used to identify pregnancies at risk
for fetuses with NTDs in utero. The type of open NTD depends on
the location of the defect. Anterior NTDs affect the brain (anencephaly, encephalocele), whereas posterior lesions affect the spinal cord
(myelomeningocele).
Secondary neurulation occurs after completion of primary neurulation during weeks 5-­6 of gestation and refers to the formation of the
caudal neural tube. Defects in secondary neurulation are thought to
underlie closed NTDs (occult spinal dysraphism), in which the neural
tissue is covered by skin and not exposed. Relative to the severity of
open NTDs, closed NTDs usually present with relatively mild, if any,
neurologic deficits.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3561

631.2 Myelomeningocele
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Myelomeningocele is the most common NTD and results from incomplete closure of the posterior neural tube, leading to protrusion of neural tissue through a defect in the vertebra. This is also known as an open
NTD because the neural tissue is exposed to the environment.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of myelomeningocele remains incompletely understood,
but as with all neural tube closure defects, a genetic predisposition
exists. The risk of recurrence after one affected child is 3–4% and
increases to 10% with two prior affected children. Both epidemiologic
evidence and the familial aggregation studies indicate polygenic risk
factors contribute to the etiology of NTDs.
Nutritional and environmental factors have a role in the etiology of
myelomeningocele as well. In particular, folate is intricately involved in
the prevention and etiology of NTDs. Folate coenzymes are involved
in DNA synthesis, purine synthesis, and amino acid interconversion—
specifically, the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. Pathogenic
variants in the genes encoding the enzymes involved in homocysteine
metabolism may play a role in the pathogenesis of meningomyelocele. These enzymes include 5,10-­methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (encoded by MTHFR), cystathionine β-­synthase, and methionine
synthase. An association between a thermolabile variant of MTHFR
and mothers of children with NTDs might account for up to 15% of
preventable NTDs.

PREVENTION

See also Chapter 67.6.
Maternal periconceptional use of folic acid supplementation reduces
the incidence of NTDs in pregnancies at risk by at least 50%. The US
Public Health Service recommends that all women of childbearing age who can become pregnant take 0.4-­0.8 mg of folic acid daily.
To be effective, folic acid supplementation should be initiated before
conception and continued until at least the 12th week of gestation,
when neurulation is complete. If a pregnancy is planned in high-­risk
women (previously affected child), supplementation should be started
with 4 mg of folic acid daily, beginning 1 month before the time of the
planned conception.
The modern diet provides about half the daily requirement of folic
acid. To increase folic acid intake, fortification of flour, pasta, rice, and
cornmeal with 0.15 mg folic acid per 100 g was mandated in the United
States and Canada in 1998. Although this decreased the incidence of
NTDs, the added folic acid is insufficient to maximize the prevention
of preventable NTDs, and it is believed that many women may still have
suboptimal folate levels, estimated as a red blood cell folate level less
than 900-­1,000 nmol/L. Therefore informative educational programs
and folic acid vitamin supplementation remain essential for women
planning a pregnancy and possibly for all women of childbearing age.
In addition, certain drugs, including drugs that antagonize folic acid,
such as trimethoprim and some anticonvulsants (valproic acid, carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and primidone), increase the
risk of myelomeningocele. The anticonvulsant valproic acid causes
NTDs in approximately 1–2% of pregnancies when administered during pregnancy, prompting some epilepsy clinicians to recommend that
all female patients of childbearing potential who take anticonvulsant
medications also receive folic acid supplements.
Diagnosis is usually made prenatally by fetal ultrasonography (see
Chapter 117.7). Measurement of maternal serum AFP is an alternative
screening test, although it has been shown to have a lower sensitivity than second-­trimester ultrasonography. Early diagnosis allows time
for prenatal counseling, further testing, and early treatment options,
including fetal surgery. When a prenatal diagnosis is made, it is helpful to look for other associated anomalies. Genetic testing, particularly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3562 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Surface ectoderm

Neural groove
Neural fold
Neural plate

Intraembryonic Notochordal
plate
mesoderm
Yolk sac

Neural
groove

A

Rostral
neuropore
Neural groove
Somites
Neural crest

Somite

B

Notochord
Caudal
neuropore

Developing
epidermis

Neural tube

C

Developing
spinal ganglion

D

Neural canal
Mantle zone
Central canal
Ventricular zone

Marginal zone

E
Fig. 631.1 Diagrammatic illustration of the developing nervous sys-

tem. A, Transverse sections of the neural plate during the third wk. B,
Formation of the neural groove and the neural crest. C, The neural tube
is developed. D, Longitudinal drawing showing the initial closure of the
neural tube in the central region. E, Cross-­sectional drawing of the embryonic neural tube (primitive spinal cord).

chromosomal microarray, can be considered because chromosomal
abnormalities are found at higher rates in fetuses with NTDs, particularly in the setting of other associated anomalies. Current cell-­free
fetal DNA prenatal tests only detect trisomies and sex aneuploidies as
screening tests and are not diagnostic and do not detect NTDs.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Neurologic deficits are hypothesized to be caused in part by neurodegeneration of the exposed area of the spinal cord secondary to contact
with amniotic fluid in utero. The extent and degree of the neurologic
deficit depend largely on the location of the myelomeningocele and any
associated intracranial abnormalities.

Although a myelomeningocele may be located anywhere along the
neuraxis, the lumbosacral region accounts for ∼75% of the cases. The
majority of patients with myelomeningocele have bowel and bladder
incontinence. Ambulation and motor control over the lower extremities depend greatly on the level of the lesion. Generally, patients with
a lesion in the low sacral region are ambulatory, in contrast to patients
with lesions above L2, who are usually nonambulatory; those with
intermediate lesions may walk with assistive devices (crutches, braces).
Cervical myelomeningoceles are rare and differ in their anatomy from
other myelomeningoceles because the spinal cord structure is usually
close to normal and the neural tissue itself is covered by skin (i.e., a
closed NTD). Therefore patients with these lesions generally have
a more favorable prognosis, although they can have bowel/bladder
dysfunction.
On exam, the myelomeningocele is generally readily apparent as a
saclike cystic structure covered by a thin layer of partially epithelialized tissue or an exposed flat neural placode without overlying tissues
(Fig. 631.2C). When a cyst or membrane is present, remnants of neural
tissue are visible beneath the membrane, which occasionally ruptures
and leaks CSF.
Examination of the infant generally shows a flaccid paralysis of the
lower extremities, an absence of deep tendon reflexes, a lack of response
to touch and pain, and a high incidence of lower-­extremity deformities
(clubfeet, ankle and/or knee contractures, and subluxation of the hips).
Some children have constant urinary dribbling and a relaxed anal
sphincter. Other children do not leak urine and in fact have a high-­
pressure bladder and sphincter dyssynergy. Myelomeningocele above
the midlumbar region tends to produce lower motor neuron signs
because of abnormalities and disruption of the conus medullaris and
higher spinal cord structures.
Most children with a myelomeningocele also have displacement of
the cerebellum and brainstem down through the foramen magnum,
which is termed a Chiari II malformation (see Fig. 631.2A). Because
this malformation can lead to obstruction of CSF outflow, hydrocephalus is a common complication, particularly if surgical repair is
not pursued early. Therefore there should be a low threshold for consideration of hydrocephalus, which can present with classic signs of
increased intracranial pressure (ICP), including a bulging anterior fontanel, dilated scalp veins, setting-­sun appearance of the eyes, irritability, and vomiting in association with an increased head circumference.
Older children may also have headache, emesis, and lethargy. Additionally, approximately 15% of infants with hydrocephalus and Chiari
II malformation develop symptoms of hindbrain (brainstem) dysfunction, including difficulty feeding, choking, stridor, apnea, vocal cord
paralysis, pooling of secretions, and spasticity of the upper extremities,
which, if untreated, can lead to death. This Chiari crisis is caused by
downward herniation of the medulla and cerebellar tonsils through the
foramen magnum, as well as endogenous malformations in the cerebellum and brainstem.
Other CNS anomalies are associated with myelomeningocele,
including cortical dysplasias, polymicrogyria, callosal abnormalities,
and cerebellar abnormalities. Long-­term complications include tethered cord, usually secondary to scar tissue at the surgical repair site,
and hydromyelia, which is CSF buildup in the central canal of the spinal cord caused by worsening hydrocephalus.

TREATMENT (SEE ALSO CHAPTER 754)

Management and supervision of a child and family with a myelomeningocele require a multidisciplinary team approach, including surgeons, other physicians, and therapists, with one individual (often a
pediatrician) acting as the advocate and coordinator of the treatment
program.
Surgery to close the lesion is usually performed prenatally or within
the first 72 hours of life (see Chapters 117 and 118). After repair of a
myelomeningocele (especially postnatal repair), most infants require a
shunting procedure for hydrocephalus. If symptoms or signs of hindbrain dysfunction appear, early surgical decompression of the posterior fossa is indicated. Clubfeet can require taping or casting. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3563

B

A

B

*

*

C

Fig. 631.2 Typical MRI imaging and physical exam findings of a lumbosacral myelomeningocele. A, Single-­shot sagittal T2-­weighted image of a
fetus at 28 wk gestation demonstrates a lumbosacral spinal defect with protruding myelomeningocele sac (asterisk) and herniation of the brainstem/
cerebellum into the upper spinal canal, a Chiari II malformation (arrow). B, Single-­shot axial T2-­weighted images of the same fetus at the level of the
myelomeningocele demonstrates a neural placode (arrow) at the base of the myelomeningocele sac (asterisk). Urinary bladder marked with B. C, A
lumbar myelomeningocele is covered by a thin layer of skin.

Management of Myelomeningocele Study (MoMS) has demonstrated
the success of in utero surgical closure (see Chapters 117.7 and 118)
with a lower incidence of hindbrain abnormalities and hydrocephalus (fewer shunts). Long-­term follow-­up of prenatal treatment into the
school-­age years demonstrates improved motor outcomes, although
there are no differences in cognitive functioning. This suggests that
some deficits may be progressive in utero and that prenatal closure
might prevent the development of further loss of function.
Careful evaluation and reassessment of the genitourinary system is
an important component of management. Teaching the parents and,
ultimately, the patient, to regularly catheterize a neurogenic bladder is
a crucial step in maintaining a low residual volume and bladder pressure that prevents urinary tract infections and reflux, which can lead to
pyelonephritis, hydronephrosis, and bladder damage. Latex-­free catheters and gloves must be used to prevent development of latex allergy.
Periodic urine cultures and assessment of renal function, including
serum electrolytes and creatinine as well as renal scans, vesiculourethrograms, renal ultrasonograms, and cystometrograms, are obtained
according to the risk status and progress of the patient and the results of
the physical examination. This approach to urinary tract management
has greatly reduced the need for urologic diversionary procedures and
has decreased the morbidity and mortality associated with progressive
renal disease in these patients. Some children can become continent
with bladder augmentation at a later age.
Incontinence of fecal matter is common and distressing to patients
and families; occasionally, fecal impaction and/or megacolon may
develop. Many children can be bowel-­trained with a regimen of timed
enemas or suppositories that allows evacuation at a predetermined
time once or twice a day. Special attention to low anorectal tone and
enema administration and retention is often required. Appendicostomy for antegrade enemas may also be helpful.
Functional ambulation may be possible, depending on the level of
the lesion and on intact function of the iliopsoas muscles (see Chapter 754). Most children with a sacral or lumbosacral lesion obtain
functional ambulation; approximately half the children with higher
defects ambulate with the use of braces, other orthotic devices, and
canes. Ambulation is often more difficult as adolescence approaches
and when body mass increases. Deterioration of ambulatory function,
particularly during earlier years, should prompt referral for evaluation of
tethered spinal cord, shunt malfunction, hydromyelia, and other neurosurgical issues.

PROGNOSIS

For a child who is born with a myelomeningocele and who is treated
aggressively, the mortality rate is 10–15%, and most deaths occur before
age 4 years, often the result of hydrocephalus, infections, and cardiac/
respiratory complications. However, life-­
threatening complications

occur at all ages, and renal dysfunction is one of the most important
determinants of mortality. At least 70% of individuals (nonsyndromic,
no associated anomalies) have no intellectual disability, but learning
problems and seizure disorders are more common than in the general population. Previous episodes of meningitis (shunt infections) or
ventriculitis may adversely affect intellectual and cognitive function.
Because myelomeningocele is a chronic disabling condition, periodic
and consistent multidisciplinary follow-­up is required for life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.3 Occult Spinal Dysraphism
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Occult spinal dysraphisms, often called spina bifida occulta, are a closed
NTD that consist of a midline defect of the vertebral bodies without
protrusion of the spinal cord or meninges. The most common type only
affects the vertebra, which are often asymptomatic and lack neurologic
signs. Other clinically more significant forms of closed spinal cord malformations can be associated with developmental abnormalities of the
spinal cord, including syringomyelia, diastematomyelia, lipoma, fatty
filum, dermal sinus, and/or a tethered cord. In most of these cases,
there are overlying cutaneous manifestations such as a hemangioma,
discoloration of the skin, pit, lump, dermal sinus, or hairy patch (Figs.
631.3 and 631.4). A spine x-­ray in simple spina bifida occulta shows a
defect in closure of the posterior vertebral arches and laminae, typically
involving L5 and S1; there is no abnormality of the meninges, spinal
cord, or nerve roots. However, a spine x-­ray in cases with spinal cord
involvement might show bone defects or may be normal. All cases of
occult spinal dysraphism are best investigated with MRI (Fig. 631.5 and
see Fig. 631.4). Initial screening in the neonate may include ultrasonography, but MRI is more accurate at any age.
A meningocele is formed when the meninges herniate through a
defect in the posterior vertebral arches or the anterior sacrum. The spinal cord is usually normal and assumes a normal position in the spinal
canal; therefore neurologic outcome is often normal. However, there
may be tethering of the cord, syringomyelia, or diastematomyelia, so
careful neurologic examination and follow-­up are necessary. Orthopedic and urologic examination should also be considered. In asymptomatic children with normal neurologic findings and full-­thickness
skin covering the meningocele, surgery may be delayed. Given the high
rate of association between meningocele and tethered cord syndrome,
exploration of the spinal canal is necessary to potentially release the
associated tethered cord.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3564 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

C

B

D

Fig. 631.3 Clinical aspects of congenital median lumbosacral cutaneous lesions. A, Midline sacral hemangioma in a patient with an occult lipo-

myelomeningocele. B, Capillary malformation with a subtle patch of hypertrichosis in a patient with a dermal sinus. C, Human tail with underlying
lipoma in an infant with lipomyelomeningocele. D, Midline area of hypertrichosis (faun tail) overlying a patch of hyperpigmentation. (A-­C from Kos L,
Drolet BA. Developmental abnormalities. In: Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB, eds. Neonatal Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
2008; D from Tay VS, Kornberg A, Cook M. Spine and spinal cord: developmental disorders. In: Schapira AH, ed. Neurology and Clinical Neuroscience. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2007, Fig. 38-­11C.)

631.4 Encephalocele
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis

A

B

C

D

Fig. 631.4 A, Lumbosacral ulcerative plaque with surrounding red vas-

cular rim was noted on initial examination. B, Midline sagittal contrast-­
enhanced, T1-­weighted, fat-­saturated image of the lumbosacral spine
at presentation reveals low-­lying conus at the L4 vertebral level suggestive of tethered cord. C, Recurrence of lumbosacral hemangioma
after discontinuation of oral propranolol. D, Midline sagittal contrast-­
enhanced, T1-­weighted, fat-­saturated image of the lumbosacral spine
at 6 mo of age shows new nodular enhancing lesion at the lower end of
the conus (arrow) compatible with intrathecal hemangioma. In addition,
there is a large hemangioma in the epidural space in the sacral spinal
canal (asterisks) with presacral extension (arrowheads). (From Yu J, Maheshwari M, Foy AB, et al. Neonatal lumbosacral ulceration masking
lumbosacral and intraspinal hemangiomas associated with occult spinal
dysraphism. J Pediat. 2016;175:211–215.)

A congenital dermal sinus is a tract between the skin and the spinal
cord, sometimes indicated at the skin surface by protruding hairs, a
hairy patch, or a vascular nevus. Dermal sinuses occur in the midline at
the sites where meningoceles or encephaloceles can occur: the lumbosacral region or occiput, respectively, and occasionally in the cervical
or thoracic area. Dermal sinus tracts can pass through the dura, acting
as a conduit for the spread of infection. Recurrent meningitis of occult
origin should prompt careful examination for a small sinus tract in the
posterior midline region, including the back of the head. Lumbosacral sinuses are usually above the gluteal fold and are directed cephalad.
Tethered spinal cord syndrome may also be an associated problem.
Diastematomyelia is when the spinal cord is split, or bifid, and commonly has bony abnormalities that require surgical intervention along
with untethering of the spinal cord.
An approach to imaging of the spine in patients with cutaneous
lesions is noted in Table 631.1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Two major forms of dysraphism affect the skull, resulting in protrusion
of tissue through a bony midline defect, called cranium bifidum. A
cranial meningocele consists of a CSF-­filled meningeal sac only. Cranial
encephalocele contains the sac plus cerebral cortex, cerebellum, or portions of the brainstem (Fig. 631.6). These abnormalities are one tenth
as common as neural tube closure defects involving the spine. Microscopic examination of the neural tissue within an encephalocele often
reveals abnormalities, but not always, which has led to speculation that
the primary problem is not abnormal neurulation, but rather abnormal mesodermal development leading to skull anomalies. The cranial
defect occurs most commonly in the occipital region at or below the
inion. However, in certain parts of the world, frontal or nasofrontal
encephaloceles (transethmoidal, sphenoethmoidal, sphenomaxillary,
sphenoorbital, transsphenoidal) are more common. Some frontal
lesions are associated with a cleft lip and palate.
Cranial encephalocele is often part of a larger syndrome. One of
the more commonly associated genetic syndromes is Meckel-­Gruber
syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive condition caused by pathogenic
variants in multiple genes involved in cilia function. This syndrome is
characterized by an occipital encephalocele, cleft lip or palate, microcephaly, microphthalmia, abnormal genitalia, polycystic kidneys, and
polydactyly. Other associated syndromes include muscular dystrophy–dystroglycanopathy type A1 (Walker-­Warburg syndrome, due to
pathogenic variants in POMT) and Knobloch syndrome (due to pathogenic variants in COL18A).
Determination of maternal serum AFP levels and ultrasound measurement of the biparietal diameter, as well as identification of the
encephalocele itself, can diagnose encephaloceles in utero. Fetal MRI
can help define the extent of associated CNS anomalies and the degree
of brain herniated into the encephalocele.
Infants with a cranial encephalocele are at increased risk for developing hydrocephalus because of aqueductal stenosis, Chiari malformation, or Dandy-­Walker syndrome. Examination might show a
small sac with a pedunculated stalk or a large cystlike structure that can
exceed the size of the cranium. The lesion may be completely covered
with skin, but areas of denuded lesion can occur and require urgent
surgical management. Transillumination of the sac can indicate the
presence of neural tissue. A plain x-­ray of the skull and cervical spine is
indicated to define the anatomy of the cranium and vertebrae. Ultrasonography is most helpful in determining the contents of the sac. MRI
or CT further helps define the spectrum of the lesion. Children with a
cranial meningocele generally have a good prognosis, whereas patients
with an encephalocele are at risk for vision problems, microcephaly,
intellectual disability, and seizures. Generally, children with neural

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3565

*

B

A

C

D

Fig. 631.5 Clinical features and imaging findings associated with occult spinal dysraphism. A, Lumbosacral lipoma. The subcutaneous lipoma is in

continuity with the spinal cord via a defect in the underlying muscles, bone, and dura. B, Sagittal T1-­weighted image shows a huge intradural lipoma
merging with the conus medullaris superiorly. C, Lipoma and central dermal sinus. D, A sagittal T2-­weighted MRI of the lumbar spine demonstrates a
dermal sinus (black arrow) looping underneath the lowest lamina before ascending to the low-­lying conus medullaris, which it tethers. The intradural
portion of the sinus tract (white arrow) is encircled by intradural lipoma (asterisk). (A from Thompson DNP. Spinal dysraphic anomalies: classification,
presentation and management. Paed Child Health. 2014;24:431–438. Fig. 4; B from Rossi A, Biancheri R, Cama A, et al. Imaging in spine and spinal
cord malformations. Eur J Radiol. 2004;50[2]:177–200, Fig. 9a; C, From Jaiswal AK, Garg A, Mahapatra AK. Spinal ossifying lipoma. J Clin Neurosci.
2005;12:714–717, Fig. 1.)

Table 631.1  Cutaneous Lesions Associated with Occult
Spinal Dysraphism
IMAGING INDICATED
Subcutaneous mass or lipoma
Hairy patch
Dermal sinus or cyst
Atypical dimples (deep, >5 mm, >25 mm from anal verge)
Vascular lesion (e.g., hemangioma or telangiectasia)
Skin appendages or polypoid lesions (e.g., skin tags, tail-­like
appendages)
Scarlike lesions (aplasia cutis)
IMAGING UNCERTAIN
Hyperpigmented patches
Deviation of the gluteal fold
IMAGING NOT REQUIRED
Simple dimples (<5 mm, <25 mm from anal verge)
Coccygeal pits
From Williams H. Spinal sinuses, dimples, pits and patches: what lies beneath? Arch Dis
Child Educ Pract Ed. 2006;91:ep75–80.

tissue within the sac and associated hydrocephalus have the least favorable prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.5 Anencephaly
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
An anencephalic infant presents with a large defect of the calvarium,
meninges, and scalp associated with a rudimentary brain. Anencephaly
is a result of failure of closure of the rostral neuropore, the opening
of the anterior neural tube. The opened neural tube leads to failure of
the development of the skull vault. The embryologic precursor stages
of anencephaly start with acrania (absence of the skull), followed by
exencephaly (cerebral tissue protruding without an overlying skull),
and ultimately the cerebral tissue degenerates because of prolonged
exposure to the amniotic fluid.
In anencephaly, the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum are usually absent, and only a residue of the brainstem can be identified

Fig. 631.6 Occipital encephalocele. Sagittal T2-­weighted MRI of a

newborn with prenatally diagnosed cephalocele demonstrates encephalomalacic brain protruding through an occipital skull defect with
entrapped CSF in the cephalocele sac representing a mixture of subarachnoid (deep) and subdural (superficial) fluid. Note that the intracranial subarachnoid spaces (e.g., basal cistern) are contracted because of
the large extracranial CSF reservoir.

(Fig. 631.7). The pituitary gland is hypoplastic, and the spinal cord
pyramidal tracts are missing because of the absence of the cerebral cortex. Additional anomalies, including folding of the ears, cleft palate,
and congenital heart defects, occur in 10–20% of cases. Most anencephalic infants are stillborn or die within several days of birth.
The incidence of anencephaly in the United States has been decreasing since the 1990s and approximates 0.2-­0.3 in 1,000 live births; this
varies across the world. As with myelomeningoceles, the recurrence
risk is approximately 4% and increases to 10% if a couple has had two
previously affected pregnancies. Environmental factors in addition
to genetics are implicated as a cause of anencephaly, including low
socioeconomic status, nutritional and vitamin deficiencies, as well as
certain exposures. It is very likely that several noxious stimuli interact on a genetically susceptible host to produce anencephaly. Approximately 50% of cases of anencephaly have associated polyhydramnios.
Couples who have had an anencephalic infant should have successive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3566 Part XXV u The Nervous System
migration and organization may also present with associated abnormalities in brain size, but this is not always present. These disorders often
present clinically with either seizures and/or developmental delays and
are best diagnosed by identification of the specific cortical malformation
by brain MRI. Although many brain malformations can be apparent
from early in life (even on fetal MRI), some more subtle malformations
(e.g., focal cortical dysplasias) may not be clearly visible until myelination is largely completed (around 2 years of age). Genetic testing is
indicated given the increasing number of identifiable genetic causes of
brain malformations (Table 631.2). Somatic variants have been found
to cause some disorders of migration/organization. Somatic variants
are genetic changes that occur after conception and do not affect the
germ cells. Mosaicism from somatic variants is often not detected by
standard clinical genetic testing.

MICROCEPHALY

Microcephaly is defined as a head circumference that measures more
than 2-­3 standard deviations (SD) below the mean for age and sex.
Microcephaly may be subdivided into two main groups: primary
(genetic) microcephaly, thought to be caused by defects in neuronal
proliferation, and secondary (nongenetic) microcephaly, generally
associated with destructive events after initial neuronal proliferation
(e.g., hypoxic-­ischemic injury, infection). A precise diagnosis is important for genetic counseling and for prediction of future pregnancies.

ETIOLOGY

Fig. 631.7 Anencephaly. On this sagittal MR image of an

18-­wk-­gestational-­age fetus, there is abrupt truncation of the neuraxis
above the brainstem (arrow), no cerebral tissue, and an open skull defect exposed to amniotic fluid consistent with anencephaly.

pregnancies monitored, including with amniocentesis, determination
of AFP levels, and ultrasound examination, between the 14th and 16th
weeks of gestation. Prenatal folic acid supplementation decreases the
risk of this condition.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.6 Malformations of Cortical
Development
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Disorders of neuronal proliferation, migration, and organization can
cause a spectrum of abnormalities of CNS structure and/or function.
Often these present with developmental delays/intellectual disability
and/or epilepsy; less severe cases may be detected as incidental findings on a brain MRI.
The major period for neuronal proliferation in the developing
human brain occurs between 8 and 15 weeks of gestation. Neural progenitor cells and radial glial cells (which generate both neurons and
glial cells) proliferate in the ventricular and subventricular zones. The
radial glial cells then play a critical role in the control of neuronal
migration, as they form the radial glial fiber system that guides cortical
projection neurons to their proper sites. Migrating neurons attach to
the radial glial fiber and disembark at predetermined sites to form the
precisely designed six-­layered cerebral cortex by 28 weeks of gestation.
Another important mechanism is the tangential migration of progenitor neurons destined to become cortical interneurons. The severity and
the extent of a disorder of neuronal proliferation, migration, and/or
organization depend on numerous factors, including the timing of a
particular insult and a host of environmental and genetic contributors.
Disorders of neuronal proliferation generally present with abnormal brain size (microcephaly, megalencephaly). Disorders of neuronal

Primary microcephaly refers to a group of conditions that follow a
mendelian pattern of inheritance or are associated with a specific
genetic syndrome and is generally thought to be secondary to a disruption in neuronal proliferation. Affected infants are usually identified
prenatally or at birth because of a small head circumference. Microcephaly vera refers to a group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by isolated microcephaly, with 16 genetic loci implicated to
date. Many of the causative genes at those loci have been identified,
including several involved in normal mitosis (e.g., CDK5RAP2, ASPM,
CENPJ). The genetic causes of microcephaly also include autosomal
dominant and X-­linked recessive disorders, as well as a series of chromosomal syndromes (Table 631.3); some of these are associated with
other malformations of cortical development. Secondary microcephaly can result from a number of noxious agents that affect early neurodevelopment; these include irradiation, maternal alcohol or cocaine
use, maternal hyperphenylalaninemia, and infections (rubella, cytomegalovirus, HIV, Zika virus).
Acquired microcephaly, which develops postnatally, can be seen as
a result of parenchymal injury (e.g., hypoxic ischemic injury), as well
as various genetic conditions, including Rett, Seckel, and Angelman
syndromes and developmental epileptic encephalopathy syndromes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

A thorough family history should be taken, seeking additional cases
of microcephaly or disorders affecting the nervous system. It is important to measure a patient’s head circumference at birth to diagnose
microcephaly as early as possible. A very small head circumference
implies a process that began early in embryonic or fetal development.
An insult to the brain that occurs later in life, particularly beyond the
age of 2 years, is less likely to produce severe microcephaly. Serial head
circumference measurements are more meaningful than a single measurement, particularly when the measurement is borderline or if the
microcephaly is progressive. The head circumference of each parent
and any siblings should be recorded. The timing and progression of
microcephaly, along with familial measurements, may help narrow the
differential diagnosis.
Laboratory investigation of a microcephalic child is determined by
the history and physical examination. If the cause of the microcephaly
is unknown, the mother’s serum phenylalanine level should be determined. High phenylalanine serum levels in an asymptomatic mother
can produce marked brain damage in an otherwise normal nonphenylketonuric infant. Newborn screening in the United States will
detect most of these cases. Array comparative genomic hybridization

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3567

Table 631.2  Malformations of Cortical Development
CLASSIFICATION

CLINICAL FINDING

GENETIC/METABOLIC ETIOLOGY

Disorders primarily of
neuronal proliferation

Microcephaly

Primary microcephaly (MCPH 1-­18)*: MCPH1, WDR62, CDK5RAP2, CASC5, ASPM,
CENPJ, STIL, CEP135, CEP152, ZNF335, PHC1, CDK6, CENPE, SASS6, MFSD2A,
ANKLE2, CIT, WDFY3
Syndromic microcephaly
Acquired microcephaly

Macrocephaly†

Metabolic:
• Organic acid disorders (e.g., glutaric aciduria – GCDH)
• Lysosomal storage disorders (e.g., Tay-­Sachs disease – HEXA)
• Leukoencephalopathies (e.g., Alexander disease – GFAP)
Somatic overgrowth: NSD1, GPC3, GPC4, FMR1, EZH2, PTEN
Neurocutaneous: NF1, NF2, TSC1, TSC2
More than 300 listed conditions in OMIM

Disorders primarily of
neuronal migration

Lissencephaly-­pachygyria
spectrum

Isolated: PAFAH1B1 (LIS1)
Miller-­Dieker syndrome: 17p13.3 deletion (PAFAH1B1, YWHAE)
Subcortical band heterotopia: DCX (female)
X-­linked: DCX (male), ARX
Tubulinopathies: TUBA1A, TUBB2A, TUBB2B
Cobblestone: POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1, FKTN, FKRP, LARGE
More than 50 listed conditions in OMIM (e.g., RELN, VDLR)

Neuronal heterotopias

Isolated periventricular nodular heterotopias: FLNA (female)
Also seen in association with other malformations, more than 10 listed conditions in
OMIM

Disorders primarily of
neuronal organization

Polymicrogyria

Over 200 listed conditions in OMIM (also see Table 631.4)

Schizencephaly

In utero injury/infection

Mixed disorders

Hemimegalencephaly

AKT1, AKT3, DEPDC5, MTOR, PIK3CA, PIK3R2, PTEN, TSC1, TSC2

Focal cortical dysplasia

DEPDC5, MTOR, NPRL2, NPRL3, PIK3CA, TSC1, TSC2

For most cases, unclear genetic etiology; few cases associated with COL4A1, SHH, SIX3

*See Jayaraman D, Bae BI, Walsh CA. The genetics of primary microcephaly. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2018;19:177–200 for comprehensive review.
†See Winden KD, Yuskaitis CJ, Poduri A. Megalencephaly and macrocephaly. Semin Neurol. 2015;35(3):277–287 for comprehensive review.

(chromosome microarray) study and/or karyotype is obtained if a chromosomal syndrome is suspected or if the child has abnormal facies, short
stature, or any additional congenital anomalies. Whole exome sequencing or gene panel testing should also be considered, as pathogenic genetic
variants can also cause primary microcephaly and syndromic microcephaly. MRI is useful in identifying any associated structural abnormalities of the brain, such as lissencephaly, pachygyria, and polymicrogyria.
CT scanning is useful to detect intracerebral calcification. Additional
studies include a fasting plasma and urine amino acid and organic acid
analysis; serum ammonia determination; toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex (TORCH) titers; HIV testing of the
mother and child; and a urine sample for the culture of cytomegalovirus. Zika virus–specific testing is also indicated when the infant is
born in a high-­risk environment or if a parent has a history of travel to
endemic areas.

MACROCEPHALY AND MEGALENCEPHALY

Megalencephaly is an anatomic disorder of brain growth defined as a
brain weight:volume ratio of more than the 98th percentile for age (or
≥2 SD above the mean) that is usually accompanied by macrocephaly
(an occipitofrontal circumference >98th percentile). Macrocephaly can
also be secondary to enlarged skull bones, hydrocephalus/ventriculomegaly, and enlarged extraaxial spaces.
Megalencephaly can be categorized as anatomic or metabolic.
Although metabolic diseases can present with microcephaly as well,
there are certain syndromes (e.g., Alexander disease, Canavan disease,

megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts) that
classically present with macrocephaly and should be considered in the
differential diagnosis.
The most common cause of anatomic megalencephaly is benign
familial macrocephaly. This condition is easily diagnosed by a careful
family history and measurement of the parents’ head circumferences
(occipitofrontal circumferences). Other common megalencephaly-­
associated macrocephaly syndromes include syndromes with prenatal
and/or postnatal somatic overgrowth, such as Sotos (NSD1), Simpson-­
Golabi-­Behmel (GPC3 and GPC4), fragile X (FMR1), Weaver (EZH2),
and macrocephaly–cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita syndromes. Multiple somatic overgrowth syndromes are associated with
macrocephaly and pathogenic variants in PTEN, including Bannayan-­
Ruvalcaba-­Riley, Cowden, and Proteus-­like syndromes. PTEN has also
been commonly implicated in patients with autism spectrum disorder
and macrocephaly.
Additionally, many of the neurocutaneous syndromes, including neurofibromatosis (NF1 and NF2), Sturge-­Weber syndrome, and
tuberous sclerosis, can present with macrocephaly. Tuberous sclerosis results from pathogenic variants in TSC1 or TSC2, encoding the
proteins hamartin and tuberin, which act in the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, a pathway known to be critical
to regulating cell growth and proliferation. Indeed, variants in many
genes in the mTOR signaling pathway have emerged as important
causes of cortical malformations (Fig. 631.8) (see Hemimegalencephaly and Focal Cortical Dysplasia).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3568 Part XXV u The Nervous System
HEMIMEGALENCEPAHLY

Table 631.3  Causes of Microcephaly
PRIMARY MICROCEPHALY
Isolated
Microcephaly vera (autosomal recessive
microcephaly
microcephaly)
Autosomal dominant microcephaly
X-­linked microcephaly
Syndromic
microcephaly

Chromosomal abnormalities
• Trisomy 13
• Trisomy 18
• Trisomy 21
Chromosomal deletions
• 4p deletion (Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome)
• 5p deletion (Cri-­du-­chat syndrome)
• 7q11.23 deletion (Williams syndrome)
• 17p13.3 deletion (Miller-­Dieker syndrome)
Over 1000 other syndromes listed in OMIM,
including:
• Feingold syndrome (MYCN, MIR17HG)
• Cornelia de Lange syndrome (NIPBL,
SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, HDAC8)
• Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (DHCR7)
• Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome (CREBBP, EP300)

ACQUIRED MICROCEPHALY
Genetic acquired
Rett syndrome (MECP2)
microcephaly
Angelman syndrome (UBE3A)
Developmental epileptic encephalopathies
Intrauterine
infection

Toxoplasmosis
Cytomegalovirus
Rubella
Zika virus

Teratogens

Alcohol
Hydantoin
Radiation

Other exposures/
injury

Maternal hyperphenylalaninemia
Maternal diabetes mellitus
Hypoxic-­ischemic injury

Adapted from Abuelo D. Microcephaly syndromes. Semin Pediatr Neurol.
2007;14(3):118–127.

Hemimegalencephaly, or unilateral macrocephaly, appears to result
from a more focal aberrancy in neuronal proliferation during development, which also results in abnormal neuronal migration and
organization (see Fig. 631.8). These patients generally present with
early-­onset refractory epilepsy and developmental delays. Various syndromes are associated with hemimegalencephaly, including epidermal
nevus syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and hypomelanosis of Ito. As with
other malformations of cortical development (see Macrocephaly and
Megalencephaly and Focal Cortical Dysplasias), the mTOR signaling
pathway appears to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of hemimegalencephaly, with many cases resulting from variants in genes
involved in this pathway, including AKT1 in Proteus syndrome.

FOCAL CORTICAL DYSPLASIAS

Focal cortical dysplasias consist of abnormal cortical lamination in
a discrete area of cortex and are thought to be disorders of neuronal
proliferation, migration, and organization. These can be difficult to
detect, particularly in younger children with immature myelination.
Therefore high-­resolution, thin-­section MRI can be useful, particularly
in patients with refractory epilepsy undergoing consideration for surgery (see Fig. 631.8). Increasingly, germline and somatic pathogenic
variants in genes involved in the mTOR pathway (DEPDC5, NPRL2,
NPRL3, AKT3, others) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of
focal cortical dysplasias.

LISSENCEPHALY-­PACHYGYRIA

Lissencephaly, or agyria, is a rare disorder that is characterized by the
absence of cerebral convolutions and a poorly formed sylvian fissure,
giving the appearance of a 3-­to 4-­month-­old fetal brain. The condition
is probably a result of faulty neuronal migration during early embryonic life. The cortical layering of a lissencephalic brain is disrupted
and results in a two-­to four-­layered cortex, rather than the usual six-­
layered one. A unique form of lissencephaly is subcortical band heterotopia, or double-­cortex syndrome, in which a thick band of gray matter
is located deep to the cortex, which may appear normal. Pachygyria is
on the milder end of the lissencephaly spectrum, with some gyri present, although these are abnormal and markedly reduced in number.
Infants with lissencephaly-­
pachygyria present with failure to
thrive, progressive microcephaly, marked developmental delay, and

*

A

B

C

Fig. 631.8 Spectrum of mTOR-­related cortical malformations on brain MRI. A, An axial T2-­weighted image of a 4-­mo-­old female with hemimega-

lencephaly caused by a somatic mTOR variant demonstrates diffuse enlargement of the left hemisphere, cortical thickening, and white matter T2
hypointensity consistent with some combination of accelerated myelination and heterotopic neurons. B, Axial FLAIR imaging of a 6-­yr-­old female
with intractable epilepsy demonstrates a transmantle region of signal abnormality (arrow), which fans out as it extends centrifugally from the periventricular white matter to the cortex, a typical appearance of focal cortical dysplasia type IIB. C, By comparison, an axial FLAIR image of a 4-­yr-­old
male with tuberous sclerosis demonstrates a multiplicity of transmantle signs consistent with tubers (largest right occipital focus denoted by an
arrow) as well as subependymal nodules lining the lateral ventricles and a subependymal giant cell tumor at the left caudothalamic groove (asterisk).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System
often refractory epilepsy. Various genetic causes of lissencephaly have
been identified, including pathogenic variants in PAFAH1B1 (LIS1)
on chromosome 17p13.3 (Fig. 631.9); larger deletions at this locus
(encompassing the YWHAE gene in addition to the PAFAH1B1 gene)
are linked to Miller-­Dieker syndrome, characterized by lissencephaly and other features, including distinctive facies (a prominent forehead, bitemporal hollowing, anteverted nostrils, a prominent upper
lip, and micrognathia), and cardiac and genital anomalies. DCX is on
the X chromosome, with genetic disruption leading to lissencephaly
in males and subcortical band heterotopia in females (see Fig. 631.9).
Pathogenic variants in ARX are a rarer cause of X-­linked lissencephaly in males. The tubulinopathies (related to variants in TUBA1A,
TUBB2A, TUBB2B, and others) are another important cause of lissencephaly. Certain disorders (e.g., Walker-­
Warburg syndrome,
Fukuyama congenial muscular dystrophy, and muscle-­
eye-­
brain
disease) present with a cobblestone lissencephaly, an overmigration
disorder, with a bumpy cortical surface composed of groups of heterotopic neurons and altered myelination (see Fig. 631.9).

When the clefts are bilateral, many patients are severely intellectually challenged, with seizures that are difficult to control and
microcephaly with spastic quadriparesis. Some cases of bilateral
schizencephaly are associated with septo-­optic dysplasia and
endocrinologic disorders. Unilateral schizencephaly is a common
cause of congenital hemiparesis. Schizencephaly is associated with
fetal cytomegalovirus infection. It can also be secondary to in utero
vascular injury, sometimes in the setting of pathogenic variants
in COL4A1, a gene associated with increased risk of intracranial
hemorrhage. Some reports have suggested the involvement of the
sonic hedgehog signaling pathway, but most cases remain without a
clearly defined genetic etiology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.7 Disorders with Midline Defects
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis

NEURONAL HETEROTOPIAS

Subtypes of neuronal heterotopias include periventricular nodular
heterotopias, subcortical heterotopia (including band type), and
marginal glioneuronal heterotopias. Intractable seizures are a common
feature. Several genes have been identified that are a cause of these
conditions, including most commonly the X-­linked FLNA gene, which
causes bilateral periventricular nodular heterotopia in affected females
(Fig. 631.10).

POLYMICROGYRIA AND SCHIZENCEPHALY

Polymicrogyria is characterized by an augmentation of small convolutions separated by shallow enlarged sulci (Fig. 631.11). Polymicrogyria is commonly seen in the temporal lobes in the perisylvian
region. Pathogenic variants in numerous genes have been associated
with polymicrogyria, as noted in Table 631.4. Epilepsy, including drug-­
resistant forms, and oromotor discoordination are common features.
Schizencephaly is the presence of unilateral or bilateral clefts within
the cerebral hemispheres caused by an abnormality of morphogenesis
(see Fig. 631.11). The cleft may be fused or unfused and, if unilateral
and large, may be confused with a porencephalic cyst. Not infrequently,
the borders of the cleft are surrounded by abnormal brain, particularly
polymicrogyria.

A

B

3569

HOLOPROSENCEPHALY

Holoprosencephaly encompasses a group of developmental disorders that result from defective prosencephalic cleavage. These disorders span a spectrum of severity and are classified into three groups,
alobar, semilobar, and lobar, depending on the degree of the cleavage abnormality (Fig. 631.12). Alobar holoprosencephaly is the
most severe form, with complete fusion of the cerebral hemispheres
and deep nuclei and complete absence of the corpus callosum and
olfactory bulbs and tracts. Semilobar holoprosencephaly presents
with fusion of the anterior cerebral hemispheres and absence of
the anterior corpus callosum. Lobar holoprosencephaly, the least
severe form, generally presents with full separation between the
cerebral hemispheres, partial or full separation between the deeper
nuclei, and full development of the posterior corpus callosum, with
some underdevelopment of the anterior corpus callosum. A fourth
type, the middle interhemispheric variant, or syntelencephaly,
involves a segmental area of nonseparation of the posterior frontal
and parietal lobes. Facial abnormalities, including cyclopia, synophthalmia, cebocephaly, single nostril, choanal atresia, solitary

C

D

Fig. 631.9 Pachygyria and subcortical band heterotopia spectrum on brain MRI. A, An axial T1-­weighted image of an 18-­mo-­old male demon-

strates thickening of the cortex and attenuation of gyration, hallmarks of pachygyria. In this patient with a pathogenic DCX variant, there is greater
severity of the pachygyria anteriorly, which is typically the case for pachygyria caused by mutations in this gene. B, By contrast, an axial T1-­weighted
sequence of a 10-­yr-­old female demonstrates a normal-­thickness cortical ribbon with a subjacent layer of gray matter signal, consistent with subcortical band heterotopia. This patient also has a pathogenic DCX variant but has an attenuated phenotype because of X-­linked inactivation and mosaic
expression of the disease-­causing variant. C, An axial T2-­weighted image of a 4-­yr-­old female demonstrates marked cortical thickening and severe
posterior predominant agyria (lissencephaly), the latter being a classic manifestation of the patient’s LIS1 variant. D, An axial T2-­weighted image
of cobblestone malformation (previously called type II lissencephaly) from a 3-­mo-­old female with infantile spasms, occipital cephalocele, developmental delay, and elevated creatine kinase levels. Note the centrifugal streaks of gray matter extending to a smooth thickened cortex. Although
superficially reminiscent of lissencephaly like that in the prior case, a key distinguishing feature is the nodularity of the gray-­white matter interface
and the centrifugal islands of gray matter (e.g., arrowed right occipital foci). The islands of gray matter represent migration of neurons through the
pial limiting membrane into the subarachnoid space, a typical feature of cobblestone malformation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3570 Part XXV u The Nervous System
central incisor tooth, and premaxillary agenesis, are common in
severe cases, because the prechordal mesoderm that induces the
ventral prosencephalon is also responsible for induction of the
median facial structures. Milder facial abnormalities, such as ocular
hypotelorism, can be seen in milder forms.
Affected children with the severe alobar type have a high mortality
rate within the first year of life, but some can live for years. Mortality
and morbidity with milder types are more variable, with neurologic
symptoms generally correlating with the severity of the underlying abnormality. In addition to neurologic symptoms, patients with
impaired hypothalamic cleavage can also have various endocrinopathies. The incidence of holoprosencephaly is 1 in 10,000 live births.
A prenatal diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasonography after the
10th week of gestation for more severe types, but fetal MRI at later
gestational ages gives far greater anatomic, and therefore diagnostic,
precision.
Genetic and environmental factors both play a role in the development of holoprosencephaly. Chromosomal abnormalities account
for approximately 60% of all cases, of which trisomy 13 is the most
common. Other associated chromosomal abnormalities include trisomy 18 and deletions or trisomies of chromosomes 2, 3, 7, and 21.
Diagnosis with a chromosomal abnormality in the setting of holoprosencephaly is a negative prognostic factor, with most patients
not surviving past the first year of life. Monogenic syndromic
causes include CHARGE syndrome (CHD), Pallister-­Hall (GLI3),
Rubenstein-­Taybi (CREB-­BP), and Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz (DHCR7)
syndromes. Genetic variants, particularly in the sonic hedgehog
signaling pathway (SHH, SIX3), have also been implicated in nonsyndromic holoprosencephaly. Environmental factors, particularly
maternal diabetes, are risk factors for holoprosencephaly.

Fig. 631.10 Periventricular nodular heterotopia. An axial T1-­weighted
brain MR image of a 16-­yr-­old female with valvular heart disease and
joint laxity demonstrates confluent subependymal nodules of gray matter signal consistent with periventricular nodular heterotopia (marked
with dashed oval). The patient was ultimately found to have a pathogenic FLNA variant.

A

B

C

D

*
E

F

G

H

Fig. 631.11 Polymicrogyria spectrum by brain MRI. Axial (A) and sagittal (B) T1-­weighted images of a 17-­yr-­old male with 22q11 deletion syn-

drome demonstrate diffusely increased gyral frequency and a bumpy surface contour of the cerebral cortex consistent with polymicrogyria, with
some sparing of the frontal poles and occipital lobes. Axial (C) and sagittal (D) T1-­weighted images of a 23-­yr-­old male demonstrate a unilateral
area of right perisylvian polymicrogyria (dashed ovals) with reduced underlying white matter volume. Axial T2-­weighted (E) and sagittal T1-­weighted
(F) sequences demonstrate diffuse polymicrogyria in a 28-­mo-­old with hearing loss, developmental delay, and congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV)
exposure. Although the calcifications associated with TORCH infections are frequently not evident on MRI, clues to CMV as the etiology for polymicrogyria include microcephaly on clinical evaluation and subependymal cysts, the latter evident in this patient at the classic temporal horn location
(asterisk) where it is separated from the remaining ventricular system by a thin membrane (arrow, F). Axial (G) and sagittal (H) T1-­weighted images
of a 17-­yr-­old male demonstrate an absent septum pellucidum and an apposed gray matter lined cleft through the left frontal lobe consistent with
closed-­lip schizencephaly (arrow, G). As is invariably the case in schizencephaly, the schizencephalic cleft is marginated by polymicrogyria (ovals, G
and H).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3571

Table 631.4  Genes Associated with Polymicrogyria
HEAD SIZE2

PATHWAY/
PATHOLOGY

GENE1

MAC

mTORopathies

AKT3

x

CCND2

x

MTOR

x

DEPDC5

x

MIC

PI4KA

Tubulinopathies

N/MS

x

PIK3CA

x

PIK3R2

x

PTEN

x

DYNC1H1

BRAIN FINDINGS

DISORDER NAME

MOI

Bilateral perisylvian PMG

MPPH syndrome

AD

Smith-­Kingsmore syndrome

AD

Diffuse, focal, or multifocal
PMG (less common than
FCD)

AD

Perisylvian PMG

AR

Bilateral perisylvian PMG

x

KIF5C

MCAP syndrome

See footnote 4

MPPH syndrome

AD

Diffuse, focal, or multifocal
PMG

AD

x

Frontal or diffuse PMG

AD

x

Perisylvian PMG

AD

x

Diffuse, focal, or multifocal
PMG; bilateral, asymmetric,
perisylvian PMG

TUBA1A

x

Lissencephaly 3

AD

TUBB

x

PMG

AD

TUBB2A

x

AD

TUBB2B

x

x

Bilateral, asymmetric, anterior
predominant PMG

TUBB3

x

x

Frontoparietal PMG

AD

Cobblestone
dysplasia –
alpha
dystroglycan-­
opathies

FKTN

x

Diffuse (cerebral and
cerebellar) PMG

AR

POMGNT1

x

PMG

AR

POMT2

x

PMG

AR

Cobblestone
dysplasia – other
(laminopathies
and congenital
disorders of
glycosylation)

ADGRG1 (GPR56)

x

Bilateral frontoparietal PMG

AR

x

Diffuse cobblestone cortex;
PMG A > P

AR

x

Frontoparietal PMG

Autosomal recessive cutis
laxa type 2A

AR

x

Occipital PMG; white-­matter
signal abnormalities

Muscular dystrophy,
congenital
merosin-­deficient, 1A

AR

x

Porencephaly; cobblestone
lissencephaly P > A

Lissencephaly 5

AR

x

Occipital PMG

AR

Perisylvian or diffuse PMG

AR

COL3A1

x

ATP6V0A2

x

LAMA2

LAMB1

x

LAMC3
SNAP29
SRD5A3

x
x

Frontal PMG

SRD5A3-­CDG (CDG-­Iq)

AR
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3572 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 631.4  Genes Associated with Polymicrogyria—cont’d
HEAD SIZE2

PATHWAY/
PATHOLOGY

GENE1

Other

BICD2

MAC

MIC

COL18A1
DDX3X

EML1

x

Perisylvian PMG

x

Frontal PMG

Knobloch syndrome 1

AR

x

Frontoparietal or diffuse PMG

DDX3X-­related
neurodevelopmental
disorder

XL

x
x

FIG4
GPSM2

BRAIN FINDINGS

x

x

EOMES (TBR2)
EZH2

N/MS

x

x
x

GRIN2B

x

KIFBP (KIAA1279)

x

x

NDE1

x

NEDD4L

x

OCLN
OFD1

PAX6

Metabolic
disorders

Bilateral perisylvian or diffuse
PMG

AR

x
x

x

Weaver syndrome

Bilateral or temporo-­occipital
PMG

AR
Chudley-­McCollough
syndrome

x

x

RAB3GAP1

x

x

RAB3GAP2

x

x

RTTN

x

AR
AD

Diffuse PMG

AD
Goldberg-­Shprintzen
syndrome

AR

Perisylvian PMG; PNH

AD

Diffuse PMG

AR

Bilateral perisylvian PMG;
PNH

AD

Bandlike calcifications with
diffuse PMG

Pseudo-­TORCH syndrome 1

AR

Frontal and parietal PMG

Joubert syndrome (XLR);
orofaciodigital syndrome
1 (XLD)

XL

Variable temporal PMG

RAB18

AD

Extensive bilateral PMG

Diffuse PMG

MAP1B

AD

AR

Parasagittal PMG; ACC

GRIN1

MOI

Ribbon-­like heterotopia with
overlying PMG; ACC

Bilateral perisylvian PMG
x

DISORDER NAME

Diffuse or frontal PMG

AR
RAB18 deficiency3

Variable diffuse, asymmetric
PMG

AR

AR

TBC1D20

x

Diffuse or bilateral frontal
PMG

RAB18 deficiency3

AR

TCTN1

x

Frontal PMG

Joubert syndrome

AR

TMEM216

x

Variable PMG

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome,
Joubert syndrome

AR

WDR62

x

± Diffuse or asymmetric PMG

FH

x

Variable PMG

Fumeric aciduria

AR

PEX genes

x

Perisylvian PMG

Zellweger spectrum
disorders

AR

x

AR

1Genes are in alphabetic order.
2Head size:

N/MS = normal/mildly small (i.e., head circumference >3 SD and <97%)
MIC = severe microcephaly (i.e., birth head circumference <3 SD or earliest HC <4 SD)
MAC = macrocephaly (i.e., head circumference >97%)
3RAB18 deficiency is a spectrum that includes Warburg microsyndrome (at the severe end) and Martsolf syndrome (at the mild end). Additional findings are eye involvement (bilateral
congenital cataracts, microphthalmia, and microcornea); severe-­to-­profound intellectual disability; and hypogonadism.
4De novo germline pathogenic variants in PIK3CA are reported; however, most affected individuals with MCAP reported had somatic mosaicism for pathogenic variants in PIK3CA,
suggesting that the mutation occurred post fertilization in one cell of the multicellular embryo.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/glossary/def-­item/de-­novo/
A, Anterior; ACC, absence of the corpus callosum; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CDG, congenital disorder of glycosylation; FCD, focal cortical dysplasia; MCAP,
megalencephaly-­capillary malformation-­PMG; MOI, mode of inheritance; MPPH, megalencephaly-­polymicrogyria-­polydactyly-­hydrocephalus; P, posterior; PNH, periventricular
nodular heterotopia; XL, X-­linked; XLD, X-­linked dominant; XLR, X-­linked recessive
Adapted from Stutterd CA, Dobyns WB, Jansen A, et al. Polymicrogyria overview. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews. Seattle, WA: University of
Washington; 2005.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3573

C
AC

A

C

E

*

*

*

C

AC

B

D

F

Fig. 631.12 Gradations of severity in holoprosencephaly. Holoprosencephaly results from incomplete cleavage of the cerebral hemispheres early

in embryogenesis. As illustrated in these pairs of brain MRI sagittal T1-­weighted (A, C, and E) and axial T2-­weighted images (B, D, and F), severity ranges from mildly affected patients with lobar holoprosencephaly (A, B), to more severely affected patients with semilobar holoprosencephaly
(C, D), to the most severely affected patients with alobar holoprosencephaly (E, F). More mildly affected holoprosencephaly patients have greater
separation of the cerebral hemispheres, particularly anteriorly and ventrally (e.g., less deep gray matter structure fusion marked with asterisks in B,
D, and F). Milder holoprosencephaly also demonstrates greater formation of the corpus callosum (arrows in A, C) which is absent in alobar holoprosencephaly (E). Unlike alobar holoprosencephaly, which typically demonstrates a monoventricle with or without a dorsal cyst (C in E, F), semilobar
and lobar holoprosencephaly demonstrate partial to complete formation of the lateral ventricles (e.g., frontal/temporal horns). The shown case of
semilobar holoprosencephaly (C, D) has an arachnoid cyst (AC), but it is not in communication with the ventricular system.

AGENESIS OF THE CORPUS CALLOSUM

Agenesis of the corpus callosum consists of a heterogeneous group of
disorders that result from defective midline prosencephalic development. These disorders vary in clinical presentation from patients with
severe intellectual deficits and neurologic abnormalities to the asymptomatic and normally intelligent patient (Fig. 631.13). In addition,
patients may experience hypethermia or hypothermia and hyperhidrosis (Shapiro syndrome).
When agenesis of the corpus callosum is an isolated phenomenon,
the patient may be asymptomatic. When it is accompanied by associated brain anomalies, such as heterotopias, polymicrogyria, and pachygyria (broad, wide gyri), and/or other syndromic or genetic disorders,
patients often have significant neurologic abnormalities, including intellectual disability, microcephaly, hemiparesis or diplegia, and seizures.
The anatomic features of agenesis of the corpus callosum are best
depicted on MRI and include widely separated frontal horns with an
abnormally high position of the third ventricle between the lateral ventricles. MRI precisely outlines the extent of the corpus callosum defect.
Colpocephaly refers to an abnormal enlargement of the occipital horns
of the ventricular system and can be identified as early as the fetal period.
It is often associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum, but it can occur
in isolation. There are numerous genetic causes of agenesis of the corpus
callosum, including chromosomal abnormalities, syndromic genetic disorders, and nonsyndromic monogenetic disorders (Table 631.5).
Aicardi syndrome is one syndrome that presents with partial or complete agenesis of the corpus callosum, as well as other brain abnormalities

(e.g., cortical dysplasias, periventricular nodular heterotopias, intracranial cysts) and distinctive chorioretinal lacunae. Patients are almost all
female, suggesting that the genetic abnormality is X-­linked dominant.
Seizures, including infantile spasms, are common and are typically resistant to anticonvulsants. An electroencephalogram shows independent
activity recorded from both hemispheres as a result of the absent corpus
callosum and often shows hemihypsarrhythmia. All patients have severe
intellectual disability and can have abnormal vertebrae that may be fused
or only partially developed (hemivertebra).

ABSENCE OF THE SEPTUM PELLUCIDUM

Absence of the septum pellucidum is another developmental midline
defect that is almost always associated with other brain anomalies,
particularly schizencephaly, although it can also be seen with holoprosencephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and septo-­optic dysplasia. It can also result through destruction of the septum pellucidum,
secondary to hydrocephalus or ischemic injury. Therefore the clinical
presentation of patients with absence of the septum pellucidum largely
depends on the etiology, associated brain anomalies, and any underlying chromosomal and/or genetic diagnosis. Cavum septum pellucidum
refers to the cavity between the two septal leaflets; although this is normal in the fetal brain, the septal leaflets generally fuse during development. A persistent cavum septum pellucidum is generally considered
to be a normal variant (Fig. 631.14).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3574 Part XXV u The Nervous System

*

A

B

C

Fig. 631.13 Complete corpus callosum (callosal) agenesis by brain MRI. A, Sagittal T1-­weighted sequence of a newborn with callosal agenesis

demonstrates lack of a normal corpus callosum (dashed arrows along expected course) with multiple sulci radiating without interruption from the
third ventricle (asterisk). B, An axial T2-­weighted image of this patient demonstrates a parallel rather than curved course of the lateral ventricles
(missing callosal genu and rostrum denoted by dashed arrows). C, Redirection of white matter tracts (Probst bundles) can be directly visualized in
callosal agenesis using colored fractional anisotropy maps, where green denotes anteroposterior fiber tracts running parallel to the lateral ventricles
rather than crossing the midline.

Table 631.5  Disorders Associated with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum*
DISORDER

SALIENT FEATURES

WITH IDENTIFIED GENES†
Andermann syndrome (KCC3)

ACC, progressive neuropathy, and dementia

Donnai-­Barrow syndrome (LRP2)

Diaphragmatic hernia, exomphalos, ACC, deafness

Frontonasal dysplasia (ALX1)

ACC, bilateral extreme microphthalmia, bilateral oblique facial cleft

XLAG (ARX)

Lissencephaly, ACC, intractable epilepsy

Microcephaly (TBR2)

ACC, polymicrogyria

Microcephaly with simplified gyral pattern and ACC (WDR62)

ACC, other brain malformations

Mowat-­Wilson syndrome (ZFHX1B)

Hirschsprung disease, ACC

Pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy (ALDH7A1)

ACC, seizures, other brain malformations

Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (PDHA1, PDHB, PDHX)

ACC with other brain changes

ACC with fatal lactic acidosis (MRPS16)

Complexes I and IV deficiency, ACC, brain malformations

HSAS/MASA syndromes (L1CAM)

Hydrocephalus, adducted thumbs, ACC, MR

ACC SEEN CONSISTENTLY (NO GENE YET IDENTIFIED)
Acrocallosal syndrome

ACC, polydactyly, craniofacial changes, MR

Aicardi syndrome

ACC, chorioretinal lacunae, infantile spasms, MR

Chudley-­McCullough syndrome

Hearing loss, hydrocephalus, ACC, colpocephaly

FG syndrome

MR, ACC, craniofacial changes, macrocephaly

Genitopatellar syndrome

Absent patellae, urogenital malformations, ACC

Temtamy syndrome

ACC, optic coloboma, craniofacial changes, MR

Toriello-­Carey syndrome

ACC, craniofacial changes, cardiac defects, MR

Vici syndrome

ACC, albinism, recurrent infections, MR

ACC SEEN OCCASIONALLY (PARTIAL LIST)‡
ACC with spastic paraparesis (SPG11, SPG15)

Progressive spasticity and neuropathy, thin corpus callosum

Craniofrontonasal syndrome

Coronal craniosynostosis, facial asymmetry, bifid nose

Fryns syndrome

CDH, pulmonary hypoplasia, craniofacial changes

Marden-­Walker syndrome

Blepharophimosis, micrognathia, contractures, ACC

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

Encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic kidneys

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3575

Table 631.5  Disorders Associated with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum*—cont’d
DISORDER

SALIENT FEATURES

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (GLDC, GCST, GCSH)

ACC, cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, myoclonus, progressive
encephalopathy

Microphthalmia with linear skin defects

Microphthalmia, linear skin markings, seizures

Opitz G syndrome

Pharyngeal cleft, craniofacial changes, ACC, MR

Orofaciodigital syndrome

Tongue hamartoma, microretrognathia, clinodactyly

Pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency

Lactic acidosis, seizures, severe MR and spasticity

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

Broad thumbs and great toes, MR, microcephaly

Septooptic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome)

Hypoplasia of septum pellucidum and optic chiasm

Sotos syndrome

Physical overgrowth, MR, craniofacial changes

Warburg micro syndrome

Microcephaly, microphthalmia, microgenitalia, MR

Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome

Microcephaly, seizures, cardiac defects, 4p−

*Reliable incidence data are unavailable for these very rare syndromes.
†Gene symbols in parentheses.
‡Many of these also may consistently have a thin dysplastic corpus callosum, such as Sotos syndrome or agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) with spastic paraparesis (SPG11). The
overlap between ACC and these conditions is still under investigation. Other gene symbols are omitted from this section.
4p−, Deletion of the terminal region of the short arm of chromosome 4, defines the genotype for Wolf-­Hirschhorn patients; ACC, agenesis of the corpus callosum; ARX, Aristaless-­
related homeobox gene; CDH, congenital diaphragmatic hernia; HSAS/MASA, X-­linked hydrocephalus/mental retardation, aphasia, shuffling gait, and adducted thumbs; KCC3,
KCl co-transporter 3; L1CAM, L1 cell adhesion molecule; MR, mental retardation; MRPS16, mitochondrial ribosomal protein S16; SPG11, spastic paraplegia 11; XLAG, X-­linked
lissencephaly with absent corpus callosum and ambiguous genitalia; ZFHX1B, zinc finger homeobox 1b.
From Sherr EH, Hahn JS. Disorders of forebrain development. In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, Schor NF, eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2012: Table 23-­2.

CONGENITAL CRANIAL DYSINNERVATION
DISORDERS

*

C

C

A

B

expected evolution of the septum pellucidum.
Fig. 631.14 Age-­

Throughout fetal life, the septum pellucidum exists as paired leaflets
enclosing a midline CSF space. This configuration is known as a cavum
septum pellucidum and undergoes fusion into a single membrane during the first months of postnatal life. A, A brain MRI axial T2-­weighted
image of a 42-­day-­old female followed for a cistern of the velum interpositum cyst (C) demonstrates normal separation of the septal leaflets
with an intervening CSF pocket, the cavum septum pellucidum (asterisk). B, An axial single-­shot T2-­weighted brain MR image at 13 mo in the
same patient demonstrates expected fusion of the leaflets into a single
membrane (arrow).

631.8 Dysgenesis of the Cranial Nerves and
the Posterior Fossa
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
The classification of disorders of development of the cranial nerve,
brainstem, and cerebellum remains anatomic, but future classification
systems will likely be based on the molecular biology of brain development based on the genes involved and the roles they play in orchestrating brain architecture.

Congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs) are congenital
nonprogressive disorders that affect the cranial nerves, primarily presenting with abnormal eye and/or facial movements. These disorders
include Möbius syndrome, Duane syndrome, and congenital fibrosis of
the external ocular muscles (CFEOM). Increasingly, genetic causes for
these disorders have been identified.
Möbius syndrome is generally characterized by bilateral facial
weakness (seventh cranial nerve) and sixth nerve palsies (limited eye
abduction). Injury or abnormal development at any level (i.e., cranial
nerve nuclei, roots, nerves, or muscles) can lead to Möbius syndrome,
but most patients have pathology at the level of the cranial nerve nuclei.
The genetics of Möbius syndrome remain incompletely understood.
Genetic linkage mapped inheritance to chromosome 13q12.2-­q13,
with identification of de novo pathogenic variants in PLXND1 and
REV3L in some patients. Environmental factors may also play a role.
Affected infants present in the newborn period with facial weakness,
causing feeding difficulties owing to a poor suck. Möbius syndrome
can also be associated with other congenital anomalies, including talipes equinovarus (clubfoot), arthrogryposis, and syndactyly. Over 30%
of patients with Möbius syndrome are reported to have autism spectrum disorder and/or intellectual disability.
Duane retraction syndrome is characterized by congenital limitation of horizontal globe movement and globe retraction and palpebral
fissure narrowing on attempted adduction. This is caused by underdevelopment or absence of the abducens nuclei and nerves, as well as
aberrant innervation of the lateral rectus muscle by the oculomotor
nerve. Duane syndrome often occurs in families with an autosomal
dominant pattern of inheritance, with three genes (CHN1, MAFB, and
SALL4) identified thus far as well as associations with chromosome
8q13, 20q12, and 2q21.1.
Congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles (CFEOM) is characterized by severe restriction of eye movements and ptosis from
abnormal oculomotor and trochlear nerve development and/or from
abnormalities of extraocular muscle innervation. The most common
form is caused by pathogenic autosomal dominant variants in KIF21A,
which encodes a kinesin motor protein. Variants in KIF21A therefore
lead to abnormal axonal transport. Other autosomal dominant causes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3576 Part XXV u The Nervous System
of CFEOM include pathogenic variants in the tubulin genes TUBA1A,
TUBB2B, and TUBB3. Malformations of cortical development can also
be associated with these and other tubulinopathy genes. Autosomal
recessive forms of CFEOM are associated with variants in PHOX2A
and COL25A1.

BRAINSTEM AND CEREBELLAR DISORDERS

Disorders of the posterior fossa structures include abnormalities not
only of the brainstem and cerebellum but also of the CSF spaces.
Chiari malformation, the most common malformation of the posterior fossa and hindbrain, consists of downward displacement of the
cerebellum and sometimes the brainstem through the foramen magnum. Often, there is an associated developmental abnormality of the
bones of the skull base leading to a small posterior fossa. Chiari malformations are divided into three groups (type I, II, and III). In Chiari
type I, the cerebellar tonsils are downwardly displaced (Fig. 631.15).
Chiari type I malformations can be asymptomatic. When symptoms
develop, they often do not do so until late childhood. Symptoms include
headaches that are worse with straining and other Valsalva maneuvers
that increase ICP. Symptoms of brainstem compression such as diplopia, oropharyngeal dysfunction, spasticity, tinnitus, sleep apnea, and
H

H
1

2

A

B

Fig. 631.15 A, A 16-­yr-­old male with Chiari malformation type 1 (arrow 1) and syringomyelia (arrow 2). B, Postoperative MRI reveals decompression of the Chiari malformation and resolution of the syrinx.
(From Albert GW. Chiari malformation in children. Pediatr Clin N Am.
2021;68:783–792, Fig. 1, p. 786.)

vertigo can also occur. Type I malformations are not associated with
hydrocephalus. Syrinx of the spinal cord, especially in the cervical
region, should be looked for on MRI imaging. This can result in neck
pain, urinary frequency, and progressive lower extremity spasticity.
Although the pathogenesis is unknown, a prevailing theory suggests
that obstruction of the caudal portion of the fourth ventricle during
fetal development is responsible. Chiari type I malformations may be
associated with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome.
With Chiari type II, the inferior cerebellar vermis, cerebellar tonsils, and medulla are displaced through the foramen magnum. Most
patients with myelomeningocele have a Chiari type II malformation
(also see Neural Tube Defects). Chiari type III, the rarest form, also
consists of downward displacement of the medulla, as well as a high
cervical or occipital encephalocele. Chiari type II is usually identified
early in life because of the association with myelomeningocele and, as
with Chiari type I, can cause symptoms from brainstem compression.
Complications for all the Chiari malformations include obstructive
hydrocephalus and/or syringomyelia. Patients with Chiari type III are
more severely affected, with high mortality and neurologic morbidity.
Dandy-­Walker malformation consists of cystic dilation of the
fourth ventricle, hypoplasia or agenesis of the cerebellar vermis, and an
enlarged posterior fossa with elevation of the lateral venous sinuses and
the tentorium (Fig. 631.16). Various associated brain malformations
can also be seen, including agenesis of the corpus callosum and malformations secondary to abnormal neuronal migration. Most patients will
develop hydrocephalus in infancy, and variable degrees of neurologic
impairment are usually present. The etiology of Dandy-­Walker malformation is heterogeneous and includes chromosomal abnormalities,
single gene disorders, and exposure to teratogens. It is important to distinguish Dandy-­Walker malformation from other causes of posterior
fossa CSF collections (see Fig. 631.16). These include the Blake pouch
cyst, a benign variant that consists of enlargement of the fourth ventricle, caused by persistence of the developmental Blake pouch structure. Isolated mega cisterna magna, another benign normal variant,
refers to an enlarged cisterna magna with otherwise normal cerebellar
architecture and size. Finally, posterior fossa arachnoid cysts can lead
to hydrocephalus caused by obstruction of CSF flow but often remain
asymptomatic.
Joubert syndrome and related disorders are a group of autosomal
recessive disorders in which there is cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and
the pontomesencephalic molar tooth sign (a deepening of the interpeduncular fossa with thick and straight superior cerebellar peduncles)
(Fig. 631.17). It is associated with hypotonia, ataxia, characteristic
breathing abnormalities including episodic apnea and hyperpnea
(which improves with age), global developmental delay, nystagmus,
strabismus, ptosis, and oculomotor apraxia. Joubert syndrome is

V
V
V

A

B

C

Fig. 631.16 Dandy-­Walker spectrum posterior fossa abnormalities. Abnormal fenestration of embryologic outlets of the fourth ventricle and as-

sociated hypoplasia of the vermis (V in A-­C) result in so-­called Dandy-­Walker spectrum. As illustrated by these sagittal T1-­weighted brain MRI sequences, the most severe end of the spectrum consists of the classic Dandy-­Walker malformation (A) where there is severe vermian hypoplasia and
a remodeling of an enlarged posterior fossa CSF space (e.g., elevation of the tentorium and torcula above the confluence of the lambdoid sutures,
arrows). At the least severe end of the spectrum, the vermis is fully formed but there is a prominent retrocerebellar and cisterna magna CSF space
without expansion of the posterior fossa: a mega cisterna magna (C). In between these extremes, one may encounter vermian hypoplasia and posterior fossa CSF space prominence without overt expansion of the posterior fossa (e.g., vermian hypoplasia with rotation in B).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

A

B

C

3577

D

Fig. 631.17 Neuroimaging findings in a 2-­yr-­old child with pure Joubert syndrome (upper panels) compared with a healthy control (lower panels).

A, Parasagittal T1-­weighted image shows the thickened, elongated, and horizontally oriented superior cerebellar peduncles (white arrow). B, Midsagittal T1-­weighted image demonstrates a moderate hypoplasia and dysplasia of the cerebellar vermis (white arrows) with secondary distortion and
enlargement of the fourth ventricle, with rostral shifting of the fastigium (white arrowhead). A deepened interpeduncular fossa is also noted. C, Axial
T1-­weighted image at the level of the pontomesencephalic junction shows the molar tooth sign with a deepened interpeduncular fossa (white arrowhead) and elongated, thickened, and horizontally oriented superior cerebellar peduncles (white arrows). Additionally, the cerebellar vermis appears
to be hypoplastic and its remnants dysplastic. D, Coronal T1-­weighted image reveals the thickened superior cerebellar peduncles (white arrows).
(From Romani M, Micalizzi A, Valente EM. Joubert syndrome: congenital cerebellar ataxia with the molar tooth. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:894–905,
Fig. 1.)

considered a ciliopathy, as many of the 35 genes implicated encode for
proteins important in cilia function (e.g., AHI1, CC2D2A, CEP290).
There can also be associated systemic features, including progressive
retinal dysplasia (Leber congenital amaurosis), coloboma, congenital
heart disease, microcystic kidney disease, liver fibrosis, polydactyly,
tongue protrusion, and soft tissue tumors of the tongue (Fig. 631.18).
Rhombencephalosynapsis consists of an absent or small vermis
associated with a nonseparation or fusion of the deep midline cerebellar structures. Ventriculomegaly or hydrocephalus is often seen. There
is a variable clinical presentation from normal function to cognitive
and language impairments, epilepsy, and spasticity.
The pontocerebellar hypoplasias (PCHs) are a group of autosomal
recessive disorders characterized by impairment of cerebellar and pontine development. Ten types have been defined to date, with increasing identification of underlying genetic causes (e.g., TSEN2, TSEN34,
RARS2). Patients tend to be severely affected, with hypotonia, feeding difficulties, developmental delay, breathing difficulties, and seizures. Other
disorders can also present with some PCH, most commonly including
Walker-­Warburg syndrome, muscle-­eye-­brain disease, congenital disorders of glycosylation type 1A, and mitochondrial cytopathies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.9 Hydrocephalus
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Hydrocephalus is not a specific disease; it represents a diverse group of
conditions that result from impaired circulation and/or absorption of
CSF or, in rare circumstances, from increased production of CSF by a
choroid plexus papilloma (Tables 631.6 and 631.7).

PHYSIOLOGY

The CSF is formed primarily in the ventricular system by the choroid plexus, which is situated in the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles. Although most CSF is produced in the lateral ventricles,
approximately 25% originate from extrachoroidal sources, including the capillary endothelium within the brain parenchyma. There
is active neurogenic control of CSF formation because adrenergic
and cholinergic nerves innervate the choroid plexus. Stimulation
of the adrenergic system diminishes CSF production, whereas excitation of the cholinergic nerves may double the normal CSF production rate. In a normal child, approximately 20 mL/hr of CSF
is produced. The total volume of CSF approximates 50 mL in an
infant and 150 mL in an adult. Most of the CSF is extraventricular.
The choroid plexus forms CSF in several stages; through a series of
intricate steps, a plasma ultrafiltrate is ultimately processed into a
secretion, the CSF.
CSF flow results from the pressure gradient that exists between
the ventricular system and venous channels. Intraventricular pressure may be as high as 180 mmH2O in the normal state, whereas the
pressure in the superior sagittal sinus is in the range of 90 mmH2O.
Normally, CSF flows from the lateral ventricles through the foramina of Monro into the third ventricle. It then traverses the narrow
aqueduct of Sylvius, which is approximately 3 mm long and 2 mm
in diameter in a child, to enter the fourth ventricle. The CSF exits
the fourth ventricle through the paired lateral foramina of Luschka
and the midline foramen of Magendie into the cisterns at the base
of the brain. Hydrocephalus resulting from obstruction within the
ventricular system is called obstructive or noncommunicating hydrocephalus. The CSF then circulates from the basal cisterns posteriorly through the cistern system and over the convexities of the
cerebral hemispheres. CSF is absorbed primarily by the arachnoid
villi through tight junctions of their endothelium by the pressure
forces that were noted earlier. CSF is absorbed to a much lesser

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3578 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 631.18 Spectrum of organ involvement in Jou-

bert syndrome and classification in clinical subgroups
(in bold). Chorioretinal colobomas are more frequently
found in the subgroup of Joubert syndrome with liver
involvement but can be present also in other subgroups.
Similarly, polydactyly (especially if preaxial or mesoaxial)
is invariably present in the orofaciodigital type VI subgroup, but postaxial polydactyly is frequently observed
also in association with other Joubert syndrome phenotypes. Other clinical features outside the circles occur
more rarely, without a specific association to a clinical
subgroup. CNS, Central nervous system; COR, cerebellooculorenal; OFDVI, orofaciodigital type VI syndrome.
(From Romani M, Micalizzi A, Valente EM. Joubert
syndrome: congenital cerebellar ataxia with the molar
tooth. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:894–905, Fig. 3.)

Table 631.6  Causes of Pediatric Hydrocephalus
CAUSE

PROPOSED MECHANISM

ACQUIRED HYDROCEPHALUS
Inflammatory
Subarachnoid hemorrhage or infection

Arachnoid scar

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Intraventricular hemorrhage or infection

Ependymal scar

Ventricular obstruction

Neoplasm
Parenchymal brain tumor

Mass effect

Ventricular obstruction

Spinal cord tumor

Altered CSF composition

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Disseminated tumor

Tumors with meningeal infiltration (e.g., primitive
neuroectodermal tumor)

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Choroid plexus tumor

Altered CSF composition

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Choroid plexus tumor

Mass effect

Ventricular obstruction

Choroid plexus tumor or hyperplasia

Altered choroid plexus function

CSF overproduction or hyperdynamic
intraventricular pulsations

Ventricular obstruction (e.g., vein of Galen
malformation); venous hypertension (e.g.,
arteriovenous malformation)

Ventricular obstruction; decreased venous
compliance or decreased CSF absorption

Extrinsic venous obstruction (e.g., skeletal
dysplasias); intrinsic venous obstruction (e.g.,
venous sinus thrombosis); idiopathic venous
dysfunction (e.g., congenital idiopathic
hydrocephalus)

Decreased venous compliance or
decreased CSF absorption

Vascular
Vascular malformation

Disordered cerebral venous function

CONGENITAL OR DEVELOPMENTAL HYDROCEPHALUS
Congenital aqueduct stenosis
Third ventricle outlet obstruction

Ventricular obstruction

Neural tube defects (e.g.,
myelomeningocele and Chiari II
malformation)

Third or fourth ventricle outlet obstruction; altered
venous compliance; arachnoid or ependymal scar

Variable

Posterior fossa malformations

Fourth ventricle outlet obstruction (e.g.,
Dandy-­Walker complex); Chiari I malformation

Ventricular obstruction

Developmental cysts

Mass effect

Ventricular obstruction

Congenital foramen of Monro atresia

Lateral ventricle outlet obstruction

Ventricular obstruction

From Kahle KT, Kulkarni AV, Limbick DD Jr, et al. Hydrocephalus in children. Lancet. 2016;387:788–798, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System
extent by the lymphatic channels directed to the paranasal sinuses,
along nerve root sleeves, and by the choroid plexus itself. Hydrocephalus resulting from obliteration of the subarachnoid cisterns or
malfunction of the arachnoid villi is called nonobstructive or communicating hydrocephalus.
Table 631.7  Genetic Abnormalities Associated with
Pediatric Hydrocephalus
PUTATIVE GENETIC LINK
X-­linked hydrocephalus with
aqueduct stenosis (307000)

L1CAM

Nonsyndromic autosomal
recessive hydrocephalus (HYC;
236600 [HYC1]; 615219 [HYC2])

CCDC88C; MPDZ

Fried-­type syndromic mental
retardation (304340)

AP1S2

Walker-­Warburg syndrome
(multiple subtypes)

POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1,
and others

Neural tube defects
(folate-­sensitive [601634] and
insensitive [182940] forms)

Multiple susceptibility genes
involved in planar-­cell polarity
(e.g., FUZ, VANGL1/2, CCL2,
and others); folate-­sensitive
neural tube defects associated
with genes in folate synthesis
pathway (MTR, MTRR, MTHFR,
MTHFD)

Primary ciliary dyskinesias and
other ciliopathies (including the
many heterogeneous subtypes
of Meckel-­Gruber syndrome
and Joubert syndrome)

Multiple genes involved in
cilia structure, function, and
regulation (e.g., CC2D2A,
TMEM67, MKS1, and others)

RAS-­opathies (e.g.,
neurofibromatosis type
1, Noonan syndrome,
Costello syndrome,
cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome)

NF1; Ras-­Raf-­MEK-­ERK pathway
genes) e.g., KRAS, BRAF,
PTPN11, and others)

VACTERL-­H (association of
vertebral, anal, cardiac,
tracheoesophageal, renal,
and limb anomalies plus
hydrocephalus; 276950)

PTEN

X-­linked VACTERL-­H (300515)

FANCB

Numbers given are Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) identifiers.
From Kahle KT, Kulkarni AV, Limbick DD Jr, et al. Hydrocephalus in children. Lancet.
2016;387:788–798, Table 2.

A

B

3579

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY

Obstructive or noncommunicating hydrocephalus develops most
commonly in children because of an abnormality of the aqueduct of
Sylvius or a lesion in the fourth ventricle. Aqueductal stenosis results
from an abnormally narrow aqueduct of Sylvius that is often associated
with branching or forking (Fig. 631.19). In a small percentage of cases,
aqueductal stenosis is inherited as a sex-­linked recessive trait. These
patients occasionally have minor neural tube closure defects, including
spina bifida occulta. Rarely, aqueductal stenosis is associated with neurofibromatosis. Aqueductal gliosis can also give rise to hydrocephalus.
As a result of neonatal meningitis or a subarachnoid hemorrhage in a
premature infant, the ependymal lining of the aqueduct is interrupted,
and a brisk glial response results in complete obstruction. Intrauterine viral infections can also produce aqueductal stenosis followed by
hydrocephalus. A vein of Galen malformation can expand and, because
of its midline position, obstruct the flow of CSF. Lesions or malformations of the posterior fossa are prominent causes of hydrocephalus, including posterior fossa brain tumors, Chiari malformation, and
Dandy-­Walker syndrome, as previously discussed.
Nonobstructive or communicating hydrocephalus most commonly follows a subarachnoid hemorrhage, which is usually a result
of intraventricular hemorrhage in a premature infant. Blood in the
subarachnoid spaces can disrupt CSF flow through the cisterns or
damage the arachnoid villi resulting in obstruction of CSF flow.
Pneumococcal and tuberculous meningitis have a propensity to produce a thick, tenacious exudate that obstructs the basal cisterns, and
intrauterine infections can also destroy the CSF pathways. Leukemic
infiltrates can seed the subarachnoid space and produce communicating hydrocephalus. Tumors or arteriovenous malformations in the
spinal cord or cauda equina are uncommon etiologies of communicating hydrocephalus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation of hydrocephalus is variable and depends
on many factors, including the age at onset, the nature of the lesion
causing the obstruction, and the duration and rate of increase of the
ICP. In an infant, an accelerated rate of enlargement of the head is
the most prominent sign. In addition, the anterior fontanel is wide
open and bulging, and scalp veins can be dilated. The forehead is
broad, and the eyes might deviate downward (i.e., setting-­sun eye
sign) because of impingement of the dilated suprapineal recess on
the brainstem tectum. Long-­
tract signs, including brisk tendon
reflexes, spasticity, clonus (particularly in the lower extremities), and
Babinski sign, are common because of stretching and disruption of
the corticospinal fibers originating from the leg region of the motor
cortex. In an older child, the cranial sutures are less accommodating,
so that the signs of hydrocephalus may be subtler. Irritability, lethargy, poor appetite, and vomiting are common to both age-­groups,
and headache is a prominent symptom in older patients. A gradual

C

D

Fig. 631.19 Aqueduct stenosis. A, Sagittal brain T2-­weighted MRI of infant with hydrocephalus secondary to congenital aqueduct stenosis. Arrow

indicates point of obstruction. B, Same patient after endoscopic third ventriculostomy; note dark flow void indicating flow across endoscopic third
ventriculostomy. C, Endoscopic view of healthy patent aqueduct. D, Endoscopic view of obstructed aqueduct in aqueduct stenosis; note posterior
commissure at dorsal margin of the aqueduct ostium in both A and B. (From Kahle KT, Kulkarni AV, Limbick Jr DD, et al. Hydrocephalus in children.
Lancet. 2016;387:788–798, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3580 Part XXV u The Nervous System
change in personality and deterioration in academic productivity
suggest a slowly progressive form of hydrocephalus. Percussion of
the skull might produce a cracked pot sound or Macewen sign, indicating separation of the sutures. Serial head circumference measurements, with special attention to the velocity of growth, are important
measurements when identifying hydrocephalus and tracking resolution. A foreshortened occiput suggests Chiari malformation, and
a prominent occiput suggests Dandy-­Walker malformation. Papilledema, abducens nerve palsies, and pyramidal tract signs, which are
most evident in the lower extremities, are apparent in many cases.
Type II Chiari malformations can manifest with progressive hydrocephalus. Approximately 10% of type II malformations produce symptoms during infancy, consisting of stridor, weak cry, and apnea, which
may be relieved by shunting or by decompression of the posterior fossa.
A more indolent form consists of abnormalities of gait, spasticity, and
increasing incoordination (including the arms and hands) during
childhood. Plain skull radiographs show a small posterior fossa and a
widened cervical canal. CT scanning with contrast and MRI display the
cerebellar tonsils protruding downward into the cervical canal and the
hindbrain abnormalities. The anomaly is treated by surgical decompression, but asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients may be
managed conservatively.
Approximately 90% of patients with Dandy-­Walker malformation have hydrocephalus, and a significant number of children have
associated anomalies, including agenesis of the posterior cerebellar
vermis and corpus callosum. Infants present with a rapid increase
in head size and a prominent occiput. Most children have evidence
of long-­tract signs, cerebellar ataxia, and delayed motor and cognitive milestones, probably because of the associated structural anomalies. Dandy-­Walker malformation is managed by shunting the cystic
cavity (and on occasion the ventricles as well) in the presence of
hydrocephalus.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Investigation of a child with hydrocephalus begins with the history.
Familial cases suggest X-­linked or autosomal hydrocephalus secondary to aqueduct stenosis. A history of prematurity with intracranial hemorrhage, meningitis, or mumps encephalitis is important
to ascertain. Multiple café-­au-­lait spots and other clinical features
of neurofibromatosis point to aqueductal stenosis as the cause of
hydrocephalus.
Examination includes careful inspection, palpation, and auscultation of the skull and spine. The occipitofrontal head circumference is recorded and compared with previous measurements. The
size and configuration of the anterior fontanel are noted, and the
back is inspected for abnormal midline skin lesions, including tufts
of hair, lipoma, or angioma, that might suggest spinal dysraphism.
The presence of a prominent forehead or abnormalities in the shape
of the occiput can suggest the pathogenesis of the hydrocephalus.
A cranial bruit is audible in association with many cases of vein of
Galen arteriovenous malformation (Fig. 631.20). Transillumination
of the skull is positive with massive dilation of the ventricular system or in Dandy-­Walker syndrome. A fundoscopic exam is mandatory because the finding of chorioretinitis suggests an intrauterine
infection, such as toxoplasmosis, as a cause of the hydrocephalus.
Papilledema is observed in older children but is rarely present in
infants because the cranial sutures separate in the setting of the
increased pressure.
An ultrasound is a quick and easy study to perform on infants with
an open fontanelle to identify and monitor the trajectory of hydrocephalus. Brain MRI has the capability to perform specific sequences to
evaluate CSF flow dynamics as well as evaluating for etiology and additional abnormalities that may be present. In many centers, CT scans
are often limited to evaluating for acute symptomatic hydrocephalus
and skull abnormalities to avoid radiation exposure. Although rarely
used, plain skull films can show separation of the sutures, erosion of the
posterior clinoids in an older child, and an increase in convolutional

MPV
FS

Fig. 631.20 Vein of Galen malformation. A vein of Galen malforma-

tion is an arteriovenous fistula between intracranial arteries and the
embryologic median prosencephalic vein. As seen in this postcontrast
sagittal T1-­weighted brain MR image of a newborn with a prenatally
diagnosed vein of Galen malformation, this vascular malformation is
characterized by marked distension of the median prosencephalic vein
(MPV) and distension of downstream dural sinuses, commonly through
a persistent embryologic falcine sinus (FS). The ensuing high-­velocity
arteriovenous shunting can cause venous hypertension, communicating
hydrocephalus, and high-­output cardiac failure. Although large median
prosencephalic veins can compress the cerebral aqueduct (arrow), the
primary treatment modality is still endovascular intervention (embolization) rather than CSF diversion.

markings (beaten-­silver appearance) on the inside of the skull with
long-­standing increased ICP.
Rapid head growth raises suspicion of hydrocephalus; however,
other etiologies must be considered. Accelerated skull growth from
a thickened cranium can result from chronic anemia, rickets, osteogenesis imperfecta, and epiphyseal dysplasia. Chronic subdural collections can produce bilateral parietal bone prominence. Benign
external hydrocephalus is often associated with macrocephaly with
notable increase in volume of the subarachnoid spaces on brain
imaging. No intervention is required for this self-­limited hydrocephalus, which is hypothesized to be the result of a delayed maturation
of the arachnoid villi. Various metabolic and degenerative disorders
of the CNS produce megalencephaly as a result of abnormal storage
of substances within the brain parenchyma. These disorders include
lysosomal diseases (Tay-­Sachs disease, gangliosidosis, and the mucopolysaccharidoses), the aminoacidurias (maple syrup urine disease),
and the leukodystrophies (metachromatic leukodystrophy, Alexander disease, Canavan disease). In addition, cerebral gigantism (Sotos
syndrome), other overgrowth syndromes, and neurofibromatosis
are characterized by increased brain mass. Familial megalencephaly
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and is characterized by
delayed motor milestones and hypotonia but normal or near-­normal
intelligence. Measurement of the parents’ head circumferences is necessary to establish the diagnosis.
Ventriculomegaly can exist without increased ICP (normal-­pressure
hydrocephaly) or in patients with loss of white or gray matter secondary to prior injury (cerebral atrophy with ventricular dilation ex
vacuo). It can be difficult to distinguish between ventriculomegaly
and true hydrocephalus by static neuroimaging alone unless CSF flow
assessment is included in the MRI. Additional clinical information
(e.g., clinical context, fundoscopic exam, lumbar puncture with pressure measurements) may also be required. This is an important clinical
distinction to make, as the management of ventriculomegaly secondary to hydrocephalus is quite different from the management of ventriculomegaly secondary to brain volume loss.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

T

3581

T

B
B

A

B

C

Fig. 631.21 Hydranencephaly. Brain MRI sagittal (A), coronal (B), and axial (C) single-­shot T2-­weighted images of a 13-­yr-­old female with severe

neurologic impairment demonstrates lysis of the cerebral hemispheres apart from small remnants of the frontal/occipital poles and left temporal
pole. There is preservation of the thalami (T) and brainstem (B). This congenital lysis of the cerebrum is dubbed hydranencephaly and believed to
reflect anterior circulation vascular insufficiency in utero.

A

B

C

Fig. 631.22 Porencephaly from in utero encephaloclastic/hemorrhagic injury. High-­grade in utero germinal matrix hemorrhage results in venous

infarction and hemorrhagic injury to the brain parenchyma. As a result, there is focal lysis and thinning of the brain parenchyma, resulting in a hemispheric cavity in communication with the ventricular system called porencephaly. A, Axial single-­shot brain MR T2-­weighted imaging of a fetus at
32 wk demonstrates severe ventriculomegaly with a clot in the ventricular system (arrows) and hemosiderin-­stained (hypointense) tissue lysis in the
surrounding cerebral hemispheres. Axial (B) and coronal (C) T2-­weighted imaging of the same patient during the first day of life better depicts the
areas of hemosiderin staining and parenchymal thinning/lysis as well as residual clot in the ventricular system (arrows).

HYDRANENCEPHALY

Hydranencephaly may be confused with hydrocephalus. The cerebral
hemispheres are absent or represented by membranous sacs with remnants of frontal, temporal, or occipital cortex dispersed over the membrane. The midbrain and brainstem are relatively intact (Fig. 631.21).
The cause of hydranencephaly is unknown, but bilateral occlusion
of the internal carotid arteries during early fetal development would
explain most of the pathologic abnormalities. Affected infants can have
a normal circumference at birth that grows at an excessive rate postnatally because of excessive CSF production and absorption. Transillumination shows an absence of the cerebral hemispheres. The child is
irritable, feeds poorly, develops seizures and spastic quadriparesis, and
has little or no cognitive development. A ventriculoperitoneal shunt
prevents massive enlargement of the cranium.

PORENCEPHALY

Porencephaly is the presence of cysts or cavities within the brain
that result from developmental defects or acquired lesions, including

infarction of tissue. True porencephalic cysts are most commonly
located in the region of the sylvian fissure and typically communicate with the subarachnoid space or the ventricular system, or both.
They represent developmental abnormalities of cell migration and
are often associated with other malformations of the brain, including
microcephaly, abnormal patterns of adjacent gyri, and encephalocele.
Affected infants tend to have many problems, including intellectual
disability, spastic hemiparesis or quadriparesis, optic atrophy, and
seizures.
Several risk factors for porencephalic cyst formation have been
identified, including hemorrhagic venous infarctions, various
thrombophilias such as protein C deficiency and factor V Leiden
variants, perinatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia, von Willebrand
disease, maternal warfarin use, maternal cocaine use, congenital
infections, trauma such as amniocentesis, and maternal abdominal trauma. Pathogenic variants in the COL4A1 and COL4A2
genes have been described in cases of familial porencephaly
(Fig. 631.22).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3582 Part XXV u The Nervous System
TREATMENT

Therapy for hydrocephalus depends on the cause. Medical management, including the use of acetazolamide and furosemide, can provide temporary relief by reducing the rate of CSF production, but
long-­term results have been disappointing. Most cases of hydrocephalus require extracranial shunts, particularly a ventriculoperitoneal
shunt. Endoscopic third ventriculostomy is a viable approach, and
criteria have been developed for its use, but the procedure might need
to be repeated to be effective. Endoscopic fenestration of the floor of
the third ventricle with drainage into the subarachnoid space (prepontine cistern) is attempted in patients over 6 months of age with
noncommunicating hydrocephalus. It often requires cauterization
of the choroid plexus as an additional procedure (see Fig. 631.19).
Ventricular shunting may be avoided with this approach. The major
complications of shunting are occlusion (characterized by headache,
papilledema, emesis, and mental status changes) and bacterial infection (fever, headache, meningismus), usually caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis. With meticulous preparation, the shunt infection
rate can be reduced to <5%. The results of intrauterine surgical management of fetal hydrocephalus have been poor (possibly because of
the high rate of associated cerebral malformations in addition to the
hydrocephalus) except for some promise in cases of hydrocephalus
associated with fetal meningomyelocele.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis depends on the cause of the dilated ventricles and not
on the size of the cortical mantle at the time of operative intervention,
except in cases in which the cortical mantle has been severely compressed and stretched. Children with hydrocephalus are at increased
risk for various developmental disabilities. The mean intelligence quotient is reduced compared with the general population, particularly for
performance tasks as compared with verbal abilities. Many children
have abnormalities in memory function. Vision problems are common,
including strabismus, visuospatial abnormalities, visual field defects,
and optic atrophy with decreased acuity secondary to increased ICP.
The visual evoked potential latencies are delayed and take some time
to recover after correction of the hydrocephalus. Accelerated pubertal
development in patients with shunted hydrocephalus or myelomeningocele is relatively common, possibly because of increased gonadotropin secretion in response to increased ICP. It is imperative that children
with hydrocephalus receive long-­term follow-­up in a multidisciplinary
setting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.10 Craniosynostosis
Irene M.J. Mathijssen
See also Chapter 101.4.
Craniosynostosis is defined as premature closure of the cranial
sutures and is classified as primary or secondary. It is associated
with varying types of abnormal skull shape (see Fig. 101.5). Primary
craniosynostosis refers to closure of one or more sutures owing to
abnormalities of skull development, whereas secondary craniosynostosis results from failure of brain growth and expansion (e.g.,
microcephaly or after insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt),
specific medication during pregnancy (e.g., valproate), or metabolic
disorders. The incidence of primary craniosynostosis approximates
1 in 2,000 live births. The cause is unknown in the majority of children; however, genetic syndromes account for 10–20% of cases (see
Table 101.5). The distinction between craniosynostosis and deformational forces is important in occipital and frontal plagiocephaly
to allow successful intervention to be offered in the form of physical
therapy for torticollis and other positional asymmetries that lead to
plagiocephaly.

Table 631.8  Commonly Used Clinical Genetic
Classifications of Craniosynostoses
DISORDER

CAUSE

ISOLATED CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS
Unicoronal synostosis
Unknown, consider TWIST1,
FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, TCF12,
IL11RA, ERF pathogenic
variants
Metopic and sagittal synostosis

SMAD6

SYNDROMIC CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS
Antley-­Bixler syndrome
FGFR2, POR
Apert syndrome

Usually one of two pathogenic
variants in FGFR2

Beare-­Stevenson syndrome

FGFR2

Baller-­Gerold syndrome

RECQL4

Carpenter syndrome

RAB23 in most; MEGF8 in some

Craniofrontonasal syndrome

EFNB1

Crouzon syndrome (and Pfeiffer
syndrome)

Numerous different pathogenic
variants at FGFR2; rarely FGFR1

Crouzon acanthosis nigricans
syndrome

Ala391Glu pathogenic variants
in FGFR3

Muenke syndrome

Pro250Arg pathogenic variants
in FGFR3

Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome

Pathogenic variants or deletion
in TWIST1

TCF-­12 related craniosynostosis

Pathogenic variants or deletion
of TCF12

IL11RA-­related craniosynostosis

IL11RA

ERF-­related craniosynostosis

ERF

Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome

Pathogenic variants in FBN1 or
SKI

DEVELOPMENT AND ETIOLOGY

The bones of the cranium are well developed by the fifth month of
gestation (frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital) and are separated
by sutures and fontanels. The brain grows rapidly in the first several years of life and is normally not impeded because of equivalent
growth along the suture lines. The cause of craniosynostosis is largely
unknown. Genetic factors have been identified for some isolated
and for many syndromic causes of craniosynostosis (Table 631.8; see
Table 101.5).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT

Most cases of craniosynostosis are evident at birth and are characterized by a progressive skull deformity that is a direct result of premature
suture fusion. Fusion of metopic and sagittal suture reveals a palpable
prominent bony ridge, and fusion of the suture may be confirmed by
plain skull roentgenograms, ultrasound, 3D-­CT scan, or black bone
MRI (Table 631.9).
Scaphocephaly is the result of premature closure of the sagittal
suture and produces a long and narrow skull, the most common
form of craniosynostosis. Scaphocephaly is associated with a prominent occiput, a broad forehead, and a triangular-­shaped anterior
fontanel. The condition is sporadic, is more common in males, and
can cause difficulties during labor because of cephalopelvic disproportion resulting from a head circumference of ≥2 SD. Scaphocephaly is associated with increased ICP in about 10% of patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3583

Table 631.9  Epidemiology and Clinical Characteristics of the Common Craniosynostoses
TYPE

EPIDEMIOLOGY

SKULL DEFORMITY

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Sagittal

Most common CSO affecting a
single suture, 80% male

Dolichocephaly or scaphocephaly
(boat-­shaped)

Frontal bossing, prominent occiput, palpable keel ridge;
OFC increased and reduced biparietal diameter

Coronal

More common in girls
Associated with various
syndromes

Unilateral: plagiocephaly
Bilateral: brachycephaly

Unilateral: flattened forehead and elevated orbit on
affected side, nose deviation; higher supraorbital margin
Bilateral: broad, flattened forehead.

Lambdoid

Rare

Unilateral: Lambdoid/occipital
plagiocephaly
Bilateral: pachycephaly

Unilateral: flattening of ipsilateral occiput, bulging of
ipsilateral forehead, ipsilateral ear and mastoid is
inferiorly displaced, curvature in face
Bilateral: brachycephaly with bilateral inferiorly displaced
ears and mastoids

Metopic

SMAD 6 mutation; genetic
overlap with developmental
delay disorders

Trigonocephaly

Pointed forehead and midline ridge, hypotelorism

Multiple

Often syndromic

Depending on which sutures are
involved

CSO, Craniosynostosis; OFC, occipital–frontal circumference.

at the age of 12 months if left untreated and thus requires surgical
treatment.
Trigonocephaly is the next most common form of craniosynostosis, caused by premature fusion of the metopic suture. These children have a keel-­shaped forehead and hypotelorism and are at risk for
associated cognitive impairment, behavioral problems and visual disturbances. The phenotype also includes milder presentations, which
are usually self-­limiting over time. Metopic ridging occurs with closure of the suture around the time of birth and is a physiologic process. The risk on increased ICP is limited, even in the more severe
presentation.
Frontal plagiocephaly is characterized by unilateral flattening of the
forehead, elevation of the orbit and eyebrow, and a caudal displacement
of the ear on the corresponding side, with contralateral bossing of the
forehead. The condition is more common in females and is the result
of premature fusion of one of the coronal sutures. These children can
present with raised ICP in up to 16% at 1 year of age and have a high
risk of visual disturbances. Therefore skull surgery is indicated in addition to close monitoring by the optometrist. Unicoronal synostosis can
be a presentation of a syndrome, and genetic analysis is always indicated (see Table 101.5).
Occipital plagiocephaly is most often a result of positioning
during infancy and is more common in an immobile child or a child
with a disability, but fusion of the lambdoid suture can cause unilateral occipital flattening and caudal displacement of the ipsilateral
ear and mastoid and of the contralateral parietal bone. Surgery is
indicated to prevent the development of distinct asymmetry of the
face.

GENETIC DISORDERS

The most prevalent genetic disorders associated with craniosynostosis include Crouzon, Apert, Saethre-­
Chotzen, and Muenke
syndromes.
Crouzon syndrome (including Pfeiffer syndrome) is characterized by premature craniosynostosis and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. The shape of the head depends on the timing
and order of suture fusion but often is a compressed back-­to-­front
diameter or brachycephaly resulting from bilateral closure of the
coronal sutures. Pansynostosis is also common, in which all sutures
close and the skull shape appears to be normal initially. The orbits

are underdeveloped, and ocular proptosis is prominent. Hypoplasia
of the maxilla and orbital hypertelorism are typical facial features.
Crouzon syndrome can be associated with the skin condition acanthosis nigricans.
Apert syndrome has many features in common with Crouzon syndrome. Apert syndrome is usually a sporadic condition and linked
to increased paternal age, although autosomal dominant inheritance
can occur. It is associated with premature fusion of multiple sutures,
especially the two coronal sutures. Apert syndrome is characterized
by symmetric complex syndactyly of the hands and feet. Severe acne
often develops during puberty, and most patients have a developmental
delay.
Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome is characterized by unicoronal or
bicoronal synostosis. The condition is inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait. It is associated with ptosis of one or both eyelids,
short fingers, and soft tissue syndactyly of the second and third fingers and/or toes.
Muenke syndrome is the most prevalent of the genetic syndromes
and usually presents with bicoronal synostosis. It is associated with
sensorineural hearing loss and behavioral issues.
Pathogenic variants of the fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGFR) gene family have been shown to be associated with specific types of craniosynostosis. Crouzon syndrome is mainly caused
by variants in FGFR2 and incidentally of FGFR1 and FGFR3. Apert
syndrome is mainly caused by two specific types of FGFR2 variants.
Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome results from variants or deletions in
TWIST1, and Muenke syndrome is solely caused by the Pro250Arg
variant in FGFR3.
Each of the genetic syndromes poses a risk of additional anomalies, including hydrocephalus, increased ICP, optic atrophy, respiratory problems secondary to upper airway anomalies, and disorders
of speech and hearing. Vault expansion is mandatory for management of increased ICP, treatment to reduce the respiratory difficulties
such as midface advancement, and a multidisciplinary craniofacial
team is essential for the long-­term follow-­up of affected children until
adulthood. Craniosynostosis may be surgically corrected with good
outcomes and relatively low morbidity and mortality, especially for
nonsyndromic infants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3584 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Chapter 632

Deformational
Plagiocephaly
Megan L. Dietze-­Fiedler and
John A. Girotto
Deformational plagiocephaly (DP), also known as positional plagiocephaly, is the development of cranial flattening and asymmetry in
the infant as a result of extrinsic molding forces placed on the skull,
such as consistently sleeping on the same area of the head. Since the
suggestion was made to place sleeping infants on their backs for the
prevention of sudden infant death syndrome, the incidence of DP has
risen dramatically, up to 46.6% and peaking between 7 weeks and 4
months of age.

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
Risk Factors

Infants cannot reposition their heads in the first few postnatal weeks
and are unable to hold their heads up until about 4 months of age. It
is for this reason that DP is most severe around 4 months of age. It
is also during this time that an infant’s head circumference increases
rapidly: about 2 cm/month in the first 3 months, 1 cm/month from
4 to 6 months of age, and 0.5 cm/month after 6 months of age. By ∼6
months of age, infants have developed head control, and this ability to
actively reposition their head allows for the gradual improvement of
the cranial shape because of pressure offloading and continued brain
growth.
Congenital torticollis, positional preference when sleeping, and
lower levels of activity are especially prominent in patients with DP.
Table 632.1 lists other risk factors. Many of these risk factors cannot be
prevented, but sleeping supine with the head always turned to the same
side is associated with DP independent of the other factors, and this
factor can be prevented. There may be an association between developmental delay and DP. Although not causal, studies have identified
significant differences in gross motor development (e.g., sitting up,
crawling, and rolling back to side) between babies with and without
DP. Family demographics, such as lower maternal education, primiparity, more prenatal education, and siblings with cranial asymmetries,
may also be associated with the development of DP. The increased
prevalence of DP in infants of mothers receiving more prenatal education is considered related to the emphasis placed on sudden infant
death syndrome and the Back to Sleep campaign.

Causes

Prenatal causes of DP include uterine compression and intrauterine constraint, such as occurs with oligohydramnios or multifetus
Table 632.1  Factors that Increase the Risk for
Deformational Plagiocephaly
• Male
• First-­born child
• Prematurity
• Multiple pregnancy (twins, triplets)
• Limited passive neck rotation at birth (e.g., congenital torticollis)
• Developmental delay
• Sleep position is supine at birth and at 6 wk
• Bottle feeding only
• Tummy time <3 times/day
• Lower activity level, slower milestone achievement
• Sleeping with head to same side, positional preference

pregnancy. Postnatal causes of DP include infant sleeping position and
congenital muscular torticollis.
Muscular torticollis is a condition that is present in as many as one
in six newborns and causes continuous tightening of muscles in the
neck, preventing passive rotation (see Chapter 721.1). It is thought that
this condition precedes the development of cranial deformity. However, head position preference may result from cervical asymmetry
that leads to torticollis and later flattening of a side of the skull from
acquired positional preference. Muscular and positional issues lead to
nonsynostotic plagiocephaly rather than the opposite. Given that DP
results from more time spent on one side of the head and that torticollis (and other neck muscle imbalances) are likely to lead to this
disproportional partitioning of time, they are most likely causes, not
effects, of DP.
Sleeping position plays a major role in the incidence of DP. When
an infant continuously sleeps with the same part of the skull resting on a flat surface, a continuous force is placed in this area. During this time of rapid skull development, the growth is inhibited at
the area where it rests on a hard surface, causing a flat spot. Because
of this inhibition, growth is increased in opposite directions, causing a deformation that can be distinguished from other types of
plagiocephaly.

EXAMINATION AND DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN
DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY AND
CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS

An abnormal head shape in an infant is distressing for parents. DP is
a clinical diagnosis. Management also requires accurate counseling
about its cause and treatment. It is especially important to be able to
rule out craniosynostosis as a primary cause for cranial asymmetry
in infants because management of this condition is quite different
from that of DP and requires immediate referral to a craniofacial surgeon for evaluation (see Chapter 631.10). Craniosynostosis occurs in
approximately 1 in 2,000 live births and results in plagiocephaly as
a consequence of the early closure of skull sutures. Craniosynostosis
must be distinguished from DP because the management is different.
Lambdoidal craniosynostosis, although extremely rare (1 in 300,000
live births), presents with features most similar to those of DP. It
can be distinguished from DP by a variety of historical and physical findings. Bilateral coronal synostosis also presents similarly to
posterior DP.

History and Physical Examination

Tables 632.2 and 632.3 outline the key components of the history and
physical examination.
Observation of cranial shape and ear displacement are the first steps.
It is critical to observe the child anteriorly, laterally, and from a vertex
view. When cranial shape is viewed from above, DP typically looks like
a parallelogram, and the ear on the same side of the flat or bald spot
is displaced anteriorly. In lambdoidal craniosynostosis, the head has a
trapezoid shape and the ear on the same side as the flat spot is posteriorly displaced (Fig. 632.1). It is important to note that the ear position,
though more likely to be anterior in DP and posterior in lambdoidal
craniosynostosis, may present anteriorly in both conditions.
Palpation will help to differentiate these two conditions. Craniosynostosis presents with palpable ridges along the suture, whereas DP does
not. Additionally, patients with craniosynostosis will not have mobile
calvarial bones. This can be tested by applying gentle pressure on two
adjacent skull bones separated by a suspected synostotic suture. If the
plates do not move relative to each other, then the suspicion for craniosynostosis is raised.
Verifying neck muscle tone and range of motion is a key part of the
examination because it helps in evaluating motor development and in
diagnosing congenital torticollis. Resistance to passive motion raises
the concern for torticollis. Decreased tone should prompt further evaluation of motor development. Infants do not gain the muscle control to
turn or lift their heads until approximately 4 months of age, and delays
in motor development could increase the infant’s risk of DP at later

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 632 u Deformational Plagiocephaly

3585

Table 632.2  Important Factors to Evaluate in the History and Physical Examination of the Patient with Plagiocephaly
DEFORMATIONAL

SYNOSTOTIC

Birth history

Intrauterine compression
First-­born child

Typically no complications

Head shape at birth

Typically normal

Can be irregular

Age at which shape irregularity first noticed

Usually in first few months of life

Can be at birth

How patient prefers to sleep

Same side, same position
Same even during naps

Variable

Bald spot

Yes

No

Motor development for age

If age is atypical for deformational plagiocephaly,
motor development is typically slow for age
Torticollis present
History of limited activity or mobility

Varies depending on presence
of concomitant syndrome

Tummy time

Decreased

Suggested time

Signs or symptoms of increasing intracranial pressure

No

Possible

Table 632.3  Key Differences Between Synostotic (Craniosynostosis) and Deformational Plagiocephaly
DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY

CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS

Causes

External forces applied to the skull
Prenatal: uterine compression, intrauterine constrained
Postnatal: congenital torticollis, sleeping position

Premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures

Common types

Lateral
Posterior

Bilateral coronal
Sagittal
Metopic

Common distinguishing
features

Normal round head shape at birth
Parallelogram shape to head
Ipsilateral ear anteriorly displaced
No palpable bony ridges or open fontanels

Can have abnormal head shape at birth
Trapezoid shape to head
Ipsilateral ear posteriorly displaced
Palpable bony ridges

Management

Repositioning
Physical therapy
Helmet in some cases

Surgery
Helmet in some cases

Adapted from Nield LS, Brunner MD, Kamat D. The infant with a misshapen head. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2007;46:292–298, Tables 1 and 2.

Positional molding

Unilateral lambdoid synostosis

L

R

Width

Length

Transcranial
diagonal difference

Fig. 632.2 Cranial measurements. (Modified from Looman WS, Flan-

Contralateral
occipital
bossing

A

Flattening

Ipsilateral
ear displaced
anteriorly

Parietal
bossing

B

Ipsilateral ear
displaced
posteriorly
Ipsilateral (variable)
occipitomastoid
bossing

Flattening

Fig. 632.1 Differentiating physical findings between deformational

plagiocephaly and craniosynostosis. Vertex views. A, Right-­sided deformational plagiocephaly exhibiting a parallelogram head shape. B,
Right-­sided lambdoid craniosynostosis exhibiting a trapezoid-­like head
shape. (From Lin AY, Losee JE. Pediatric plastic surgery. In: Zitelli BJ,
McIntire SC, Norwalk AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012: Fig. 22-­5.)

nery AB. Evidence-­
based care of the child with deformational plagiocephaly, part I: assessment and diagnosis. J Pediatr Health Care.
2012;26:242–250, Table 1.)

ages than those at which it usually occurs. Decreased range of motion
can also be seen in cervical spine abnormalities, although this is rare.
Early recognition of these conditions is critical in treatment, management, and outcome.
Accurate and consistent measurements will help to distinguish etiologies and manage infants presenting with an abnormally shaped skull.
Along with the usual head circumference measurements, the clinician
should also measure cranial width, length, and transcranial diagonal
diameter (Fig. 632.2), which is best performed with calipers. These

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3586 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 632.4  Diagnostic Guide for Determining Type and Severity of Lateral and Posterior Deformational Plagiocephaly
LATERAL DEFORMATIONAL
PLAGIOCEPHALY
DETERMINING TYPE BASED ON CLINICAL FINDINGS
Occiput (vertex
Ipsilateral occipital flattening; contralateral
view)
occipital bossing

POSTERIOR DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY (BRACHYCEPHALY)
Uniform occipital flattening

Ear position (vertex
view)

Ipsilateral ear may be anteriorly displaced

Normal

Face, forehead
(anterior, lateral,
and vertex views)

May be normal; more severe cases may
present with the following: mandibular
asymmetry, ipsilateral frontal bossing,
contralateral forehead flattening,
ipsilateral cheek anteriorly displaced

Temporal bossing, increase in vertical height in severe cases

Other

Torticollis, head position preference

Large size, history of limited activity or limited mobility

DETERMINING SEVERITY
Mild
TDD 3-­10 mm

Type I

Flattening restricted
to back of the skull

CI: 0.82-­0.9

Central posterior deformity
(ping-­pong ball
depression)

Moderate

Type II

Malposition of ear

CI: 0.9-­1.0

Type III

Forehead deformity

Central posterior deformity
and widening of
posterior skull

Type IV

Malar deformity

CI: >1.0

Type V

Vertical or temporal
skull growth

Vertical head, head growth,
or temporal bossing

Severe

TDD 10-­12 mm

TDD > 12 mm

CI, Cephalic index (cranial index); TDD, transcranial diagonal diameter difference.

measurements allow the clinician to diagnose, determine severity, and
monitor the plagiocephaly:
• Cranial length: Distance from the most prominent point between the
eyebrows to the most prominent point of the occiput.
• Width: Maximum transverse diameter, horizontal.
• Cephalic index (cranial index): Ratio of the cranial width to the cranial length.
• Occipital-­frontal transcranial diameter: Find the points on either side
of the head where the deformation is the worst (two on the right,
two on the left), then measure the diagonal distances between these
points.
• Transdiagonal difference (transcranial diagonal difference): The difference between two transcranial diagonal diameters.
• Cranial vault asymmetry: Ratio of oblique measurements. This is
difficult to implement because different physicians and authors propose varying points to use for these measurements.
One technology for the evaluation of the severity and improvement over time of DP is the three-­dimensional photographic system.
Advantages of this system include an easy and comfortable ability
to image in an unbiased manner. Similarly, the use of laser scanners
for the prefabrication scans for helmets is frequently employed by
orthotists.
After observations and measurements, the clinician can determine the type and severity of the DP (Table 632.4 and Fig. 632.3).
For lateral DP, bossing of the occiput occurs opposite the flattened deformity and the ear on the same side as the flat area can
be anteriorly displaced. This type of DP is typically associated with
infants who have torticollis or a head position preference to one
side. Transdiagonal diameter is typically abnormal in this type of
plagiocephaly, and this measurement is the gold standard for determining severity.
In posterior DP, the occiput is uniformly flattened, temporal bossing
can occur, and the ears are normal. It is usually associated with large
head size and a history of limited activity or mobility. The cephalic
index is increased with posterior DP.
Time and accurate exam records can help in management. If deformation is worsening when DP typically begins to demonstrate improving head shape, craniosynostosis should be suspected.

LATERAL DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY
Mild

Moderate

Severe

Ipsilateral ear
anteriorly
displaced,
ipsilateral
frontal bossing

Ipsilateral
temporal
skull growth

Key findings
Flattening on
back of skull
only

POSTERIOR DEFORMATIONALPLAGIOCEPHALY
(BRACHYCEPHALY)
Mild

Moderate

Severe

Widening of
posterior
skull

Temporal
bossing

Key findings
Central
posterior
deformity

Fig. 632.3 Types of deformational plagiocephaly. (From Looman WS,

Flannery AB. Evidence-­based care of the child with deformational plagiocephaly, part I: assessment and diagnosis. J Pediatr Health Care.
2012;26:242–250, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

