Water

Maintains homeostasis
in the body
Allows transport
of nutrients to
cells and removal
and excretion of
waste products of
metabolism

Infants
(L/day)
0-­6 mo
7-­12 mo
Children
1-­3 yr
4-­8 yr
Males
(L/day)
9-­13 yr
14-­18 yr
≥19 yr
Females
(L/day)
9-­13 yr
14-­18 yr
≥19 yr
Pregnancy
(L/day)
≥14 yr
Lactation
(L/day)
≥14 yr

0.7
0.8
1.3
1.7

2.4
3.3
3.7

2.1
2.3
2.7

None set

All beverages, including
water
Moisture in foods
High-­moisture foods
include watermelon,
meats, and soups

No UL because normally
functioning kidneys can
handle >0.7 L (24 oz) of fluid
per hour.
Symptoms of water intoxication
include hyponatremia, which
can result in heart failure,
and rhabdomyolysis (skeletal
muscle tissue injury), which
can lead to kidney failure.

Recommended intakes for water are
based on median intakes of generally
healthy persons who are adequately
hydrated.
Persons can be adequately hydrated
at levels above or below the AIs
provided; AIs provided are for total
water in temperate climates.
All sources can contribute to total water
needs: beverages (tea, coffee, juice,
soda, drinking water) and moisture
found in foods.
Moisture in food accounts for about
20% of total water intake.
Thirst and consumption of beverages
at meals are adequate to maintain
hydration.

3.0

3.8

Note: Bold numbers are RDA. RDAs and AIs may both be used as goals for individual intake. RDAs are set to meet the needs of 97–98% of members in a group. For healthy breastfed infants, the AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life
stage and gender groups is believed to cover the needs of all members of a group, but lack of data prevents specifying with confidence the percentage covered by this intake.
UL is the maximum level of daily nutrient intake that is likely to pose no risk of adverse effects. Unless otherwise specified, the UL represents total intake from food, water, and supplements. Because of a lack of suitable data, ULs could not
be established for potassium, water, or inorganic sulfate. In the absence of ULs, extra caution may be warranted in consuming levels above recommended intakes.
ND amounts are not determinable because of a lack of data on adverse effects in this age-­group and concern with regard to lack of ability to handle excess amounts. Source of intake should be from food only to prevent high levels of
intake.
*Vitamin D RDA in IU/day: 400 if <1 yr, 600 if >1 yr of age or pregnant or lactating.
ACE, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme; AI, adequate intake; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; GI, gastrointestinal; ND, not determinable; RDA, recommended dietary allowance; UL, upper limit of normal.
Data from Food and Nutrition Board, U.S. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate (http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=10925); and Ross AC, U.S. Institute of Medicine,
Committee to Review Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin D and Calcium. Dietary Reference Intakes: Calcium, Vitamin D. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011: pp. xv, 536

Chapter 60 u Nutritional Requirements

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 60.6  Dietary Reference Intakes for Select Micronutrients and Water—cont’d

407

408 Part V u Nutrition

Yeast Breads
& Tortillas

3%

Poultry,
Excluding Deli &
Mixed Dishes

Starchy
Vegetables

Eggs

3

3%

5%

4%
Sodium
Average Intake:
3,393 mg/day

Deli & Cured
Products

Pizza

Chips, Crackers
& Savory Snacks

5%

4%

%

Breakfast
Cereals & Bars

Sandwiches

21%

8%

Within
Sandwiches:
Hotdog
Sandwiches

2

Vegetables,
Excluding Starchy

Soups

4%

2%

5%

4%

7%

4%

7%

Meat, Poultry
& Seafood
Mixed Dishes

Chicken & Turkey
Sandwiches

Other
Sandwiches

Within Rice, Pasta &
Other Grain-Based
Mixed Dishes:

Desserts &
Sweet Snacks
Breakfast
Sandwiches

%

3%

Rice, Pasta &
Other Grain-Based
Mixed Dishes

Other Sources

Other Sources

Other
Mexican Dishes,
Excludes
Tacos & Burritos

3%

19%
Condiments
& Gravies

3%

1%

3%
1%

Other Sources

3%

1%
PBJ
Sandwiches

2%

Rice Mixed
Dishes
Pasta Mixed Dishes,
Excludes
Macaroni & Cheese

Burritos &
Tacos

Fig. 60.5 Top sources and average intakes of sodium: U.S. population age 1 and older. Estimates based on 2-­day dietary intake data, weighted,

from What We Eat in America (WWEIA), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 2013-­2016. (From Dietary Guidelines for
Americans. 2020-­2025, Chapter 1: Nutrition and Health Across the Lifespan. Fig 1.12. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-­
12/Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-­2025.pdf.)

Table 60.7  Growth Chart Comparisons for Measuring Growth from Birth to 20 Years
AGE
RANGE

GROWTH CHART

GROWTH METRICS

INSUFFICIENT
GROWTH
PERCENTILE

EXCESSIVE
GROWTH
PERCENTILE

BMI STATUS PERCENTILE

World Health
Organization, 2006

Birth to 2 yr

Weight, length, weight-­
for-­length, and head
circumference

<2.3rd

>97.7th

—

U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and
Prevention, 2000

2-­20 yr

Weight, height, body
mass index (BMI)

<5th

>95th

Under (<5th)
Normal (5-­85th)
Over (85-­95th)
Obese (>95th)
Severe obesity (≥120% of
95th or ≥35 kg/m2)

infants and young children can be explained in part by the high ratio
of body surface area to volume in infancy, high respiratory rate, and
rapid growth.
The consequences of inadequate fluid intake include impaired thermoregulation and heat dissipation, reduced activity tolerance and performance, and reduced intravascular fluid and dehydration. Inadequate
fluid intake may be reflected by decreased urine output. These deficits can result in an increased compensatory heart rate, hypotension,
and syncope, and if uncorrected, renal injury or nephrolithiasis. “Free
water” is defined as water in the body that can be removed by ultrafiltration and in which substances can be dissolved. Excess free water
intake is usually better tolerated by healthy adults than by younger children, who are at increased risk for water intoxication. Hyponatremia
can result when water and sodium are out of balance, such as excess
free water intake coupled with inadequate sodium intake. Fluid intake
requirements and restrictions are also influenced by any underlying
renal and hormonal disorders, including diabetes, the syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), and diabetes
insipidus.

MEASURING NUTRITIONAL ADEQUACY

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and AAP
recommend the use of the WHO charts to monitor growth of all infants
and children (human milk–fed and infant formula–fed) from birth to
2 years, and the use of the CDC 2000 growth charts for children 2-­20
years (see Chapters 19 and 27). The WHO growth charts are derived
from longitudinal and cross-­sectional data obtained from a sample of
healthy breastfed infants and children (0-­2 years) who were receiving
adequate nutritional intake and medical care in Brazil, Ghana, India,
Norway, Oman, and the United States. Consequently, the WHO/CDC
0-­2 year growth charts are considered standards and describe the ideal
growth of adequately nourished healthy children under best-­care practices. The CDC 2-­20 year charts are considered references and describe
the population’s average growth and distribution.
In the clinical setting, the 2.3rd and 97.7th percentiles on the WHO
growth charts are used to identify insufficient and excessive growth from
birth to 2 years, respectively. In contrast, the 5th and 95th percentiles
are recommended for the equivalent identification in the CDC growth
charts from 2 to 20 years (Table 60.7). Note that length, weight, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 61 u Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents
weight-­for-­length are used in the WHO growth charts from birth to 2
years. Body mass index (BMI) can be calculated but is not recommended
for use in children <2 years. Stature, weight, and BMI are used in the CDC
2000 growth charts from 2 to 20 years of age. These charts can be used to
categorize children as underweight (<5th BMI percentile), normal weight
(5-­85th), overweight (85-­95th), and obese (≥95th BMI percentile).
Severe obesity is defined as BMI ≥120% of the 95th percentile or
BMI ≥35 kg/m2 (whichever is lower). This assessment corresponds to
approximately the 99th percentile or a BMI z score ≥2.33. Severe obesity that exceeds the 99th percentile is tracked on a specialized percentile curve for obesity. Furthermore, adult classification is used for BMI
≥27 kg/m2 in adolescents over age 18 for consideration of medication
and bariatric surgery.
It is important to consider the limitations in the use of WHO and
CDC growth charts for certain populations such as premature infants,
children with certain genetic disorders (e.g., Turner syndrome, Down
syndrome, Wolf-­
Hirschhorn syndrome, achondroplasia) and children with cerebral palsy. Specific growth charts addressing the unique
growth characteristics of these children are available from various
resources, including the AAP.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 61

Feeding Healthy Infants,
Children, and Adolescents
Katherine J. Barrett, Stephanie P. Gilley,
Matthew A. Haemer, Nancy F. Krebs, and
Susan L. Johnson
Early feeding experiences can support the development of healthy
eating habits, optimal growth and development, and prevention of
chronic disease throughout the life course. Childhood nutrition is
known to play a role in the origin of adult diseases such as type 2 diabetes, hypertension, obesity, and metabolic syndrome. To support development and to prevent chronic disease, appropriate feeding practices
are best established in the neonatal period and continued throughout
childhood and adolescence to adulthood. Healthful feeding in children
requires partnerships between family members, the healthcare system,
schools, the community, and policy makers.

FEEDING DURING THE FIRST YEAR OF LIFE
Breastfeeding

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and World Health Organization (WHO) have declared breastfeeding and the administration
of human milk to be the ideal practice for infant feeding and nutrition.
Breastfeeding has documented short-­and long-­term medical and neurodevelopmental advantages and rare contraindications (Tables 61.1,
61.2, and 61.3). The AAP and the WHO recommend that infants be
exclusively fed human breast milk for approximately 6 months. Breastfeeding ideally should be continued with the introduction of complementary foods until 24 months of age or longer, if mutually desired by
the mother and infant. We recognize that there are some lactating individuals who do not identify as women/mothers and may prefer the use
of other terms, including the use of chestfeeding in lieu of breastfeeding. This is a consideration that a practitioner may need to make when
speaking to a family member who uses these alternative terms. The success of breastfeeding initiation and continuation depends on multiple

409

Table 61.1  Selected Beneficial Properties of Human Milk
Compared with Infant Formula
FACTOR

ACTION

ANTIBACTERIAL FACTORS
Secretory IgA

Specific antigen-­targeted antiinfective
action

Lactoferrin

Immunomodulation, iron chelation,
antimicrobial action, antiadhesive,
trophic for intestinal growth

κ-­Casein

Antiadhesive, bacterial flora

Oligosaccharides

Prevention of bacterial attachment

Cytokines

Antiinflammatory, epithelial barrier
function

GROWTH FACTORS
Epidermal growth factor

Luminal surveillance, repair of intestine

Transforming growth
factor (TGF)

Promotes epithelial cell growth (TGF-­β)
Suppresses lymphocyte function (TGF-­β)

Nerve growth factor

Promotes neural growth

ENZYMES
Platelet-­activating factor
(PAF)–acetylhydrolase

Blocks action of PAF

Glutathione peroxidase

Prevents lipid oxidation

Nucleotides

Enhance antibody responses, bacterial
flora

Adapted from Hamosh M. Bioactive factors in human milk. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2001;48:69–86.

factors, such as education about breastfeeding, hospital breastfeeding
practices and policies, routine and timely follow-­up care, family and
societal support, and the health of the mother (Tables 61.4 and 61.5).
Breastfeeding support from both professionals and lay individuals has
a positive impact on breastfeeding success, and the importance of such
support cannot be overstated.
Feedings are initiated soon after birth unless medical conditions
preclude them. Mothers can be encouraged to feed at both breasts
at each feeding, starting with the breast offered second at the last
feeding. For optimal milk production, it is preferable to fully empty
the first breast before moving to the second breast, rather than partially emptying both sides. It is not unusual for an infant to fall asleep
after the first breast and refuse the second. Table 61.6 summarizes
patterns of milk supply in the first week. Pacifiers may help prevent
sudden infant death syndrome in breastfed infants, but it is not recommended to introduce until breastfeeding is well established and
should not be used to try to increase time between feeds or in lieu of
a feed in a baby showing hunger cues.
Breastfeeding is a learned skill for both mother and infant, and
support from a provider knowledgeable in breastfeeding is critical,
especially as milk production is established in the first few weeks postpartum. It is helpful to instruct new mothers about infant hunger cues
and correct nipple latch, positioning of the infant on the breast, and
feeding frequency. It is also suggested that someone trained in lactation
observe a feeding to evaluate positioning, latch, milk transfer, maternal
responses, and infant satiety. Attention to these issues during the newborn period allows dialog with the mother and family and can prevent
problems that could occur with improper technique or knowledge of
breastfeeding. Discussions about normal infant feeding, infant elimination patterns, breast engorgement, breast care, and maternal nutrition
are important aspects of the hospital discharge process. A follow-­up
appointment with a lactation specialist is recommended within 24-­48
hours after hospital discharge. The AAP recommends that exclusively
breastfed infants start supplementation with vitamin D (10 mcg, or 400
IU) by 2 weeks of life.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

410 Part V u Nutrition
Table 61.2  Absolute and Relative Contraindications to
Breastfeeding Because of Maternal Health
Conditions
MATERNAL
HEALTH
CONDITION

DEGREE OF RISK

HIV and HTLV
infection

In the United States, breastfeeding is
contraindicated.
In other settings, health risks of not
breastfeeding must be weighed against the
risk of transmitting the virus to the infant.

Tuberculosis
infection

Direct breastfeeding is contraindicated until
completion of approximately 2 wk of
appropriate maternal therapy.

Varicella-­zoster
infection

Infant should not have direct contact with active
lesions.
Infant should receive immune globulin.

Herpes simplex
infection

Breastfeeding is contraindicated with active
herpetic lesions of the breast.

CMV infection

May be found in milk of mothers who are CMV
seropositive.
Transmission through human milk causing
symptomatic illness in term infants is uncommon.

Hepatitis B
infection

Infants routinely receive hepatitis B immune
globulin and hepatitis B vaccine if mother is
HBsAg positive.
No delay in initiation of breastfeeding is required.

Hepatitis C
infection

Breastfeeding is not contraindicated.

COVID-­19

Maternal infection is not a contraindication for
breastfeeding or feeding expressed milk.

Ebola

Confirmed maternal Ebola infection is a
contraindication to breastfeeding and
expressed milk.

Brucellosis

Active untreated brucellosis is a contraindication
to breastfeeding and expressed milk.

Live vaccines

Smallpox and yellow fever live-­virus
vaccines are contraindicated for
breastfeeding mothers.

Alcohol intake

Limit maternal alcohol intake to <0.5 g/kg/day
(for a woman of average weight—this is the
equivalent of 2 cans of beer, 2 glasses of wine,
or 2 oz of liquor).

Cigarette smoking

Discourage cigarette smoking, but smoking is
not a contraindication to breastfeeding.

Marijuana usage

Metabolites, including tetrahydrocannabinol, are
detectable in breast milk. Marijuana
usage is not recommended but is not a strict
contraindication to breastfeeding.

Chemotherapy,
radio­
pharmaceuticals

Breastfeeding is generally contraindicated.

CMV, Cytomegalovirus; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus; HTLV, human T-­lymphotropic virus.
Adapted from Schanler RJ, Krebs NF, Mass SB (eds). Breastfeeding Handbook for Physicians,
2nd ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2014: 223–226.

Nipple pain is one of the most common complaints of breastfeeding
mothers in the immediate postpartum period. Poor infant positioning and improper latch are the most common reasons for nipple pain
beyond the mild discomfort felt early in breastfeeding. If the problem
persists and the infant refuses to feed, evaluation for nipple candidiasis is indicated. If candidiasis is present, the nipples can be treated with
an antifungal cream that is wiped off of the breast before feeding, and
the infant is treated with an oral antifungal medication.

Table 61.3  Conditions for Which Human Milk May Have a
Protective Effect
INFANT
• Diarrhea
• Otitis media
• Urinary tract
infection
• Necrotizing
enterocolitis
• Septicemia
• Infant botulism
• Insulin-­dependent
diabetes mellitus
• Celiac disease

• Crohn disease
• Lymphoma
• Leukemia
• Recurrent otitis media
• Atopy
• Hospitalizations for
respiratory illness
• Sudden infant death
syndrome
• Obesity

MOTHER
• Uterine atony
• Breast cancer
• Ovarian cancer
• Cardiovascular
disease
• Obesity
• Type 2 diabetes

Table 61.4  Ten Hospital Practices to Encourage and
Support Breastfeeding*†
1.	Have a written breastfeeding policy that is routinely
communicated to all healthcare staff.
2.	Train all healthcare staff in the skills necessary to implement this
policy.
3.	Inform all pregnant women about the benefits and management
of breastfeeding.
4.	Help women initiate breastfeeding within 1 hour of birth.
5.	Show women how to breastfeed and how to maintain lactation,
even if they are separated from their newborns.
6.	Give newborns no food or drink other than breast milk unless
medically indicated.
7.	Practice rooming-­in; allow mothers and newborns to remain
together 24 hours a day.
8.	Encourage breastfeeding on demand.
9.	Give no pacifiers or artificial nipples to breastfeeding infants.‡
10.	Foster the establishment of breastfeeding support groups and
refer to them on discharge from the hospital or birth center.
COMPONENTS OF SAFE POSITIONING FOR THE NEWBORN
WHILE SKIN-­TO-­SKIN**
1.	Infant’s face can be seen.
2.	Infant’s head is in “sniffing” position.
3.	Infant’s nose and mouth are not covered.
4.	Infant’s head is turned to one side.
5.	Infant’s neck is straight, not bent.
6.	Infant’s shoulders and chest face mother.
7.	Infant’s legs are flexed.
8.	Infant’s back is covered with blankets.
9.	Mother-­infant dyad is monitored continuously by staff in the
delivery environment and regularly on the postpartum unit.
10.	When mother wants to sleep, infant is placed in bassinet or with
another support person who is awake and alert.
*The 1994 report of the Healthy Mothers, Healthy Babies National Coalition Expert
Work Group recommend that the UNICEF-­WHO Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative
be adapted for use in the United States as the United States Breastfeeding Health
Initiative, using the adapted 10 hospital practices noted.
†Data from Baby-­Friendly USA. Guidelines and evaluation criteria for facilities seeking baby-­
friendly designation. Sandwich, MA: Baby Friendly USA; 2010. Available at https://www.b
abyfriendlyusa.org/for-­facilities/practice-­guidelines/. Accessed 10 November 2022. From
ACOG Committee Opinion. Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of obstetric
practice. Obstet Gynecol. 2018;132(4):e187–e195, Boxes 1 and 2, pp. e191–e192.
‡The American Academy of Pediatrics endorsed the UNICEF-­WHO Ten Steps to
Successful Breastfeeding, but does not support a categorical ban on pacifiers
because of their role in reducing the risk of sudden infant death syndrome and their
analgesic benefit during painful procedures when breastfeeding cannot provide the
analgesia.
**Data from Ludington-­Hoe SM, Morgan K. Infant assessment and reduction of sudden
unexpected postnatal collapse risk during skin-­to-­skin contact. Newborn Infant Nurs
Rev. 2014;14:28–33.

Tongue-­tie (ankyloglossia) has been associated with nipple pain,
poor latching, and poor weight gain in breastfed and bottle-­fed infants.
Ankyloglossia is defined as a lingual frenulum that attaches close to the
anterior tongue tip and is estimated to be present in 4–11% of newborns. Frenotomy is a minor surgical procedure with few complications

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 61 u Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents
Table 61.5  Recommendations on Breastfeeding
Management for Healthy Term Infants
1.	Exclusive breastfeeding for about 6 months

• Breastfeeding preferred; alternatively, expressed mother’s milk or donor
breast milk
• To continue for 2 years or beyond as long as mutually desired by mother
and child
• Complementary foods rich in iron, zinc, and other micronutrients should
be introduced at about 6 mo of age

2.	Peripartum policies and practices that optimize breastfeeding
initiation and maintenance should be compatible with the AAP
and Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Model Hospital Policy
and include the following:

• Direct skin-­to-­skin contact with mothers immediately after delivery
until the first feeding is accomplished and encouraged throughout the
postpartum period
• Delay in routine procedures (weighing, measuring, bathing, blood tests,
vaccines, and eye prophylaxis) until after the first feeding is completed
• Delay in administration of intramuscular vitamin K until after the first
feeding is completed but within 6 hr of birth
• Ensure 8-­12 feedings at the breast every 24 hr
• Ensure formal evaluation and documentation of breastfeeding by
trained caregivers (including position, latch, milk transfer, examination)
at least once for each nursing shift
• Give no supplements (water, glucose water, commercial infant
formula, or other fluids) to breastfeeding newborn infants unless
medically indicated using standard evidence-­based guidelines for the
management of hyperbilirubinemia and hypoglycemia
• Avoid routine pacifier use in the postpartum period
• Begin daily oral vitamin D drops (400 IU) at hospital discharge

3.	All breastfeeding infants should be seen by a pediatrician within
48-­72 hr after discharge from the hospital

• Evaluate hydration and elimination patterns
• If weight >7% below birthweight or there is additional weight loss on
day 5 or later, providers should consider more frequent follow-ups and/
or referral to a lactation consultant.
• Discuss maternal/infant issues
• Observe feeding

4.	Mother and infant should sleep in proximity to each other to
facilitate breastfeeding
5.	Pacifier should be offered, while placing infant in back-­to-­sleep-­
position, no earlier than 3-­4 weeks of age and after breastfeeding
has been established
From American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Breast-­feeding and the use of human
milk. Pediatrics. 2012;129:e827–e841.

Table 61.6  Patterns of Milk Supply
DAY OF LIFE

MILK SUPPLY

Day 1

Some milk (∼5 mL) may be expressed.

Days 2-­4

Lactogenesis; milk production increases.

Day 5

Milk present; fullness and leaking are felt.

Day 6 onward

Breasts should feel “empty” after feeding.

Adapted from Neifert MR. Clinical aspects of lactation: promoting breastfeeding
success. Clin Perinatol. 1999;26:281–306.

and has been used as a treatment option for ankyloglossia with increasing frequency despite insufficient evidence that it improves breastfeeding outcomes, making its use somewhat controversial. Most infants
with ankyloglossia have no feeding problems, and most infants with
nursing problems do not have ankyloglossia. Providing a feeding
evaluation and assessment of latch while monitoring weight over the
course of 2-­3 weeks may be more valuable than proceeding immediately to frenotomy. During that time many feeding issues resolve, thus
avoiding unnecessary frenotomy.
Engorgement may occur in the second stage of lactogenesis (typically days 3-­10 postpartum) and is characterized by the breasts feeling

411

firm, overfilled, and sometimes painful. Incomplete removal of milk
as a result of ineffective breastfeeding technique or infant illness can
cause engorgement. Breastfeeding immediately at signs of infant
hunger can prevent this from occurring. To reduce engorgement,
breasts may be softened before infant feeding with a combination of
hot compresses and manual expression of milk. To reduce inflammation and pain, between feedings mothers can wear a supportive bra,
apply cold compresses, and take oral nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs).
Mastitis occurs in 2–3% of lactating women and is usually unilateral,
manifesting with localized warmth, tenderness, edema, and erythema
after the second postdelivery week. Sudden onset of breast pain, myalgia, and fever with fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and headache can also
occur. Organisms implicated in mastitis include Staphylococcus aureus,
Escherichia coli, group A streptococcus, Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Bacteroides species. Diagnosis is confirmed by
physical examination. Treatment is with oral antibiotics (most commonly dicloxacillin or cephalexin) and analgesics, while at the same
time promoting breastfeeding or emptying of the affected breast. A
breast abscess is a much less common complication of mastitis, but
it is a more serious infection that requires intravenous antibiotics and
incision and drainage, along with continued breast emptying. Washing hands thoroughly before breastfeeding or pumping, especially
after changing the baby’s diapers, can help minimize risk for breast
infections.
Insufficient milk intake, dehydration, and jaundice in the infant can
occur within the first weeks of life. In fact, retrospective studies suggest
higher rates of hospitalization—primarily caused by jaundice and poor
weight gain—in the first month of life for breastfed versus formula-­
fed babies, highlighting the critical importance of lactation support.
Breastfed neonates feed 8-­12 times a day. Signs that milk intake is not
adequate include lethargy, delayed stooling, decreased urine output,
weight loss >10% of birthweight, hypernatremic dehydration, inconsolable crying, and increased hunger. Insufficient milk intake may be
caused by inadequate milk production and/or health conditions in
the infant that prevent proper breast stimulation. Careful attention to
prenatal history can identify maternal factors associated with low milk
production (for example, obesity, type 2 diabetes, postpartum hemorrhage, or failure of breasts to enlarge during pregnancy or within the
first few days after delivery). Excess weight loss or failure to return to
birthweight by 7-­10 days in an exclusively breastfed infant should trigger an evaluation of breastfeeding effectiveness. Direct observation of
breastfeeding can help identify improper technique, and test weighs
(weighing the infant before and after feeding) may help assess milk
transfer. If a large volume of milk is expressed manually after breastfeeding, the infant might not be extracting enough milk, eventually
leading to decreased milk output. Late preterm infants (34-­36 weeks)
are at particular risk for insufficient milk intake because of weak suck,
difficulty coordinating suck and swallow patterns, or medical issues.
Breastfeeding jaundice, also referred to as suboptimal intake jaundice, is related to insufficient fluid intake during the first week of life
and is a common reason for hospital readmission of healthy breastfed infants (see Chapter 137). Breastfeeding jaundice is associated
with dehydration and hypernatremia. Treatment may require supplementation with expressed maternal breast milk, donor milk, or infant
formula. Breast milk jaundice is a different disorder that causes persistently high serum indirect bilirubin in thriving, healthy, well-­fed
infants. Breast milk contains inhibitors of glucuronyl transferase and
causes enhanced absorption of bilirubin from the gut. Breast milk
jaundice becomes evident later than breastfeeding jaundice and generally declines in the second to third week of life. Infants with severe
or persistent jaundice or a direct hyperbilirubinemia need evaluation
for other medical causes (see Chapter 137). Persistently high bilirubin
levels may require treatment with phototherapy without cessation of
breastfeeding or changing from breast milk to infant formula for 24-­48
hours if phototherapy is not available or if a rapid reduction in total
serum bilirubin is urgently needed. Breastfeeding can resume after the
decline in serum bilirubin. Parents can be encouraged to continue collecting breast milk during the period the infant is taking formula.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

412 Part V u Nutrition
Breast milk collection by pumping is a common practice when the
mother and baby are separated and when families wish for other caregivers to engage in infant feeding. Electric breast pumps are generally
more efficient and better tolerated by mothers than manual pumps
or hand-­expression, but not all insurance companies cover electric
pumps. Good handwashing and hygiene are important during all steps
of pumping. Collection kits should be cleaned with hot soapy water,
rinsed, and air-­dried after each use. Glass or plastic containers can be
used to collect the milk. Fresh milk can be stored at room temperature
for up to 4 hours and in the refrigerator for up to 4 days. Expressed
breast milk can be frozen and used for up to 6-­12 months; frozen milk
should be used within 24 hours of thawing. Human milk should never
be microwaved. Paced bottle feeding helps support breastfeeding during bottle feeds by matching the slower pace of direct breastfeeding.
Growth of the breastfed infant differs from that of the formula-­
fed infant; the infant’s risk for excess weight gain during late infancy
may be associated with bottle feeding (whether formula or expressed
human milk). The WHO growth charts are based on growth patterns of
healthy breastfed infants through the first year of life. The infants were
selected based on being breastfed, having good healthcare, an absence
of socioeconomic constraints, and nonsmoking mothers, so that they
reflect the growth pattern of breastfed infants in optimal conditions
and can be used as prescriptive standards rather than as normative reference curves. Charts are available for growth monitoring. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends use of the
WHO growth charts for infants from birth to 2 years and CDC growth
charts for ages 2 to 20 years (see Chapter 27).

use of bottled water that is defluoridated is preferred to avoid possible
toxicity and tooth discoloration.
Proper handwashing is important before preparing formula for the
infant. Formula storage guidelines vary based on preparation. Once
opened, ready-­
to-­
feed and concentrated liquid containers can be
covered and stored in the refrigerator for no longer than 48 hours.
Manufacturer guidelines recommend storing powder formula in a
cool, dry place but not in the refrigerator; once opened, cans can be
covered with the original plastic cap or aluminum foil, and the powdered product used within 4 weeks. The CDC recommends using prepared formula within 24 hours, regardless of type. The CDC further
recommends using formula within 2 hours of removal from the refrigerator and within 1 hour from the start of a feed. Prepared formula
stored in the refrigerator can be warmed by placing the container in
warm water for about 5 minutes. Formula should never be heated in
a microwave because it can heat unevenly and result in burns, despite
appearing to be at the right temperature when tested.
Formula feedings are ideally provided ad libitum, with the goal of
achieving growth and development to the child’s genetic potential.
The usual intake to allow a weight gain of 20-­30 g/day in the first 2-­3
months of life is approximately 140-­180 mL/kg/day, although some
may require intake outside this range. The average rate of weight gain
declines from 3 to 12 months of age (see Chapters 27 and 64). Overfeeding with resultant rapid weight gain increases the risk for developing obesity and is to be prevented. Paced bottle feeding may help avoid
overfeeding.

Formula Feeding

Intact cow’s milk protein–based formulas are appropriate for most
term infants. There are nutritional differences between formula and
breast milk, although the effects of these differences on long-­term
health are unknown. Formulas contain 10-­35 times higher iron compared with breast milk and higher zinc, sodium, and vitamin D. Most
formulas in the United States also contain considerably higher protein
than in mature breast milk. This concentration is designed to meet the
needs of the youngest infants but may lead to excess protein intake for
older infants and has been associated with increased risk of obesity.
In contrast, breast milk protein content decreases over time to match
needs. Protein concentration and composition differences between
human milk and cow’s milk–based formulas result in different plasma
amino acid profiles in infants on different feeding patterns, but clinical
significance has not been demonstrated.
Fat provides 40–50% of the energy in cow’s milk–based formulas and
is primarily from plant and animal oils. Fat blends are better absorbed
than dairy fat and provide saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). All infant formulas are supplemented
with long-­chain PUFAs, specifically docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and
arachidonic acid (ARA). DHA and ARA are found at varying concentrations in human milk and vary by geographic region and maternal
diet. The DHA and ARA added to formulas are derived from single-­cell
microfungi and microalgae and are classified as “generally recognized
as safe” (GRAS) for use in infant formulas at approved concentrations
and ratios. Long-­term studies are lacking on the relationship between
routine supplementation of formula with long-­chain PUFAs and physical, neurodevelopmental, or visual outcomes of term infants.
Lactose is the major carbohydrate in breast milk and in standard
cow’s milk–based formulas for term infants. Formulas for term infants
may also contain modified starch or other complex carbohydrates like
prebiotic oligosaccharides similar to those in human milk.

Despite efforts to promote exclusive breastfeeding through 6 months,
only ~55% of women in the United States continue any breastfeeding at
6 months. Parental preferences are the most common reason for using
infant formula and may relate to return to work, perceived poor milk
supply, lack of support, or other factors. Most parents make their infant
feeding choices early in pregnancy. However, infant formula is also
indicated for infants whose intake of breast milk is contraindicated for
infant factors (e.g., inborn errors of metabolism) or maternal factors
(see Table 61.2). In addition, infant formula may be used as a supplement to support inadequate weight gain in breastfed infants, though
often formula is used to supplement based upon caregiver perception
of benefit rather than medical necessity.
Infant formulas marketed in the United States are safe and nutritionally adequate as the sole source of nutrition for healthy infants for the
first 6 months of life. Infant formulas are available in ready-­to-­feed,
concentrated liquid, and powder forms. Ready-­to-­feed products generally provide 19-­20 kcal/30 mL (1 oz) and approximately 64-­67 kcal/100
mL. Concentrated liquid products, when diluted according to instructions, and powder formulas, when mixed according to instructions
(typically 2 ounces of water plus one scoop of powder), will result in
similar caloric density.
Although infant formulas are manufactured in adherence to good
manufacturing practices and are regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), there are potential safety issues. Ready-­to-­feed
and concentrated liquid formulas are commercially sterile, but powder preparations are not. Although the number of bacterial colony-­
forming units per gram (CFU/g) of powder formula is generally
lower than allowable limits, outbreaks of infections with Cronobacter
sakazakii (previously Enterobacter sakazakii) have been documented,
especially in premature infants. The powder preparations can contain
other coliform bacteria but have not been linked to disease in healthy
term infants. Care must be taken to follow the mixing instructions
to avoid overdilution or underdilution, to use clean water, and to use
the specific scoops provided by the manufacturer because scoop sizes
vary. Water that has been boiled must cool fully to prevent degradation of heat-­labile nutrients, specifically vitamin C. Well water should
be tested regularly for bacteria and toxin contamination. Testing may
also identify high lead concentrations in water flowing through pipes
installed before 1986. Municipal water can contain variable concentrations of fluoride, and if the concentrations are higher than 2.0 mg/L,

COW’S MILK PROTEIN–BASED FORMULAS

SOY PROTEIN–BASED FORMULAS

Soy protein–based formulas on the market are all free of cow’s
milk–based protein and lactose. They meet the vitamin, mineral,
and electrolyte guidelines from the AAP and the FDA for feeding
term infants. In term infants, although soy protein–based formulas
have been used to provide nutrition resulting in normal growth patterns, there are few indications for use in place of cow’s milk–based
formula. Indications for soy formula include galactosemia, preference for a vegetarian diet, and hereditary lactase deficiency, because

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 61 u Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents
soy-­based formulas are lactose free. Most healthy infants with acute
gastroenteritis can be managed after rehydration with continued use
of breast milk or cow’s milk–based formulas and do not require a
lactose-­free formula. However, soy protein–based formulas may be
indicated when documented secondary lactose intolerance occurs.
Soy protein–based formulas have no advantage over cow’s milk protein–based formulas as a supplement for the breastfed infant, unless
the infant has one of the indications noted previously. Soy protein–
based formulas are contraindicated for preterm infants because of
concerns about protein quality and aluminum content. The routine use of soy protein–based formula has no proven value in the
prevention or management of infantile colic, fussiness, or atopic
disease. Infants with documented cow’s milk protein–induced
enteropathy or enterocolitis often are also sensitive to soy protein
and should be fed using an extensively hydrolyzed or amino acid–
based formula.

PROTEIN HYDROLYSATE FORMULAS

Protein hydrolysate formulas may be partially hydrolyzed, containing oligopeptides with a molecular weight of <5,000 daltons (range
3,000-­10,000 Da), or extensively hydrolyzed, containing peptides
with a molecular weight <3,000 Da. These formulas are lactose free
and can include medium-­chain triglycerides, making them useful in infants with gastrointestinal malabsorption caused by cystic
fibrosis, short bowel syndrome, prolonged diarrhea, or hepatobiliary disease. Partially hydrolyzed protein formulas have fat blends
similar to cow’s milk–based formulas, and carbohydrates are supplied by corn maltodextrin or corn syrup solids. Because the protein is only partially hydrolyzed, these formulas are not appropriate
for infants who are allergic to cow’s milk protein. There is insufficient evidence to recommend use of hydrolyzed formulas to prevent atopic dermatitis or other atopic diseases in high-­risk infants.
Extensively hydrolyzed formulas are recommended for infants
intolerant to cow’s milk or soy proteins.

AMINO ACID FORMULAS

Amino acid (elemental) formulas are peptide-­free formulas that contain mixtures of essential and nonessential amino acids. They are
designed for infants with cow’s milk–based protein allergy who fail
to thrive on extensively hydrolyzed protein formulas. The effectiveness of amino acid formulas to prevent atopic disease has not been
studied.

OTHER FLUIDS IN INFANTS AND TODDLERS

Neither breastfed nor formula-­fed infants require additional water
unless dictated by a specific condition involving excess water loss,
such as diabetes insipidus. Vomiting and spitting up are common in
healthy infants. When weight gain and general well-­being are noted,
no change in formula is necessary. Whole cow’s milk can impair
iron absorption and is not recommended for infants younger than
12 months. Nondairy, very low-­protein milks are also inadequate to
meet infant nutritional needs. Prune or apple juice may be used in
small amounts for treatment of constipation, but juice is not recommended for routine consumption in infants. Infants with vomiting
caused by gastroenteritis may need to consume an oral electrolyte
solution but will need close monitoring and ideally will consume
the solution for less than 24 hours. Goat milk is not an appropriate
substitution for formula. Goat milk has been shown to cause significant electrolyte disturbances and anemia because it has low folic
acid concentrations. Likewise, homemade formulas, which typically
involve a combination of raw cow, raw goat, or plant-­based milk,
cod liver oil, molasses, and other ingredients, cannot be considered
safe for infant feeding. Mixing homemade formula incorrectly can
put unnecessary stress on a newborn’s kidneys and intestines and
may not provide sufficient calories or micronutrients. Infants and
young children are also particularly susceptible to infections such
as Escherichia coli, Campylobacter, Listeria, Brucella, and Salmonella found in raw or unpasteurized milk.

413

COMPLEMENTARY FEEDING

The timely introduction of complementary foods (solid and liquid
foods other than breast milk or formula, also called weaning foods)
during infancy is important for nutritional and developmental reasons
(Table 61.7). The AAP recommends exclusive breastfeeding for about
the first 6 months, after which nutrient requirements cannot be met
by breastfeeding alone. Table 61.7 summarizes the AAP recommendations for introducing complementary foods, though nearly 25% of
parents do not adhere to current guidelines (e.g., introducing complementary foods too early or introducing inappropriate foods, such as
cow’s milk, in children under 12 months).
Complementary foods should be introduced around 6 months
and be varied to ensure adequate macronutrient and micronutrient
intake. Although there is not currently evidence to promote a recommended order in which to introduce foods, information about
important nutrients is included here. Additionally, a wide variety of
textures is important for oral motor development, typically starting
with pureed or very soft (easy to mash with the gums) foods. This
is also a good time to establish consistent eating routines, including
providing predictable meal and snack times for solid foods, eating
in a safe dedicated space (such as in a highchair at the family table),
and eating with family members to the extent possible. Continued
breastfeeding up to 24 months of age and use of infant formula until
12 months is encouraged.
Some complementary foods are more nutritionally beneficial than
others. Iron-­and zinc-­rich foods (such as fortified infant cereals, age-­
appropriate meats, eggs, and legumes) are especially important for
breastfed infants, whose iron and zinc stores decline over time and are
not sufficiently replaced through consumption of breast milk. Yogurt
and cheese (including soy-­based products) without added sugars are
appropriate for infants receiving complementary foods, but full-­fat
cow’s milk as a replacement for infant milk is inappropriate before 12
months. In addition to honey and unpasteurized consumables, foods
and beverages with added sugars and those high in sodium are not recommended. Overconsumption of energy-­dense complementary foods
(e.g., cakes, cookies, fried foods, and sugar-­sweetened beverages) can
lead to excessive weight gain in infancy, increasing the risk of obesity
in childhood.
Early introduction of peanuts and eggs around 4-­6 months helps to
prevent the development of food allergies. Although data are limited
for other highly allergenic foods, the strength of current evidence suggests that introducing other allergenic foods early in complementary

Table 61.7  Important Principles for Weaning
• Begin around 6 mo of age.
• Introduce one new food at a time.
• Choose foods that provide key nutrients and help meet energy needs.
• Iron-­containing foods (meat, iron-­supplemented cereals) are
required, especially for breastfed infants.
• Zinc intake should be encouraged with foods such as meat, dairy
products, and fortified infant cereal.
• Phytate intake should be low to enhance mineral absorption.
• By 7-­8 mo infants should be consuming foods from all food groups.
• Between 9 and 12 mo of age, encourage a cup rather than a bottle.
• Fluids other than breast milk, formula, and water should be
discouraged.
• Breast milk can continue up to 24 mo of age; cow’s milk can be
introduced at 12 mo of age and up to 24 oz/day of cow’s milk can
be consumed if breastfeeding is discontinued.
• Give no more than 4 oz/day of 100% fruit juice; no sugar-­
sweetened beverages.
• Encourage routine mealtimes and responsive feeding, watching
for and responding to the child’s hunger and satiety cues.
Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics. Pediatric Nutrition Handbook, 8th ed.
Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2019.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

414 Part V u Nutrition
feeding may prevent IgE-­mediated food allergies. The most recent
guidelines from the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and
Immunology recommend early introduction of the top 9 highly allergenic foods (dairy, soy, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, sesame, wheat, fish,
and shellfish) for all children, especially those at higher risk for atopic
disease. For more information, see Chapter 192.

Table 61.8  Feeding Skills Birth to 36 Months
AGE (mo)

Nipple feeding, breast or bottle
Hand on bottle during feeding (2-­4 mo)
Maintains semiflexed posture during feeding
Promotion of infant-­parent interaction

6-­9 (transition
feeding)

Head and neck control
Feeding more in upright position
Spoon-­feeding thin, pureed foods
Both hands to hold bottle
Finger feeding of easily dissolvable solids
introduced
Vertical munching of easily dissolvable solids

9-­12

Cup drinking
Eats lumpy, mashed food
Finger feeding for easily dissolvable solids
Chewing includes rotary jaw action

12-­18

Self-­feeding; grasps spoon with whole hand
Holds cup with two hands
Drinking with four to five consecutive swallows
Holding and tipping bottle

>18-­24

Swallowing with lip closure
Self-­feeding predominates
Chewing broad range of food
Up-­down tongue movements

24-­36

Circulatory jaw rotations
Chewing with lips closed
One-­handed cup holding and open cup drinking
with no spilling
Using fingers to fill spoon
Eating wide range of solid food
Total self-­feeding, using fork

TRANSITION TO MILK

Whole cow’s milk can be introduced at 12 months, and formula-­
fed children are transitioned to milk at this time. In children 12-­24
months, for whom overweight or obesity is a concern or who have
a family history of obesity, dyslipidemia, or cardiovascular disease,
the use of reduced-­fat milk may be appropriate. Otherwise, whole
milk is recommended until age 24 months, after which changing to
1% milk helps reduce overall dietary intake of fat if this is a concern. The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC) does not provide 2% or whole milk for
children over 24 months unless authorized by a medical provider.
Regardless of the type, all animal milk consumed should be pasteurized because of the infection risk with raw or unpasteurized milk,
as discussed earlier.
Nondairy alternatives to milk from plant-­based (e.g., soy, hemp,
pea, oat, rice) and nut-­based (e.g., almond, cashew, peanut) sources
are popular. When counseling parents, it is important to emphasize
that the overall nutritional content and quality of plant-­based milk
alternatives is not equivalent to cow’s milk. Although most are fortified with vitamin A, vitamin D, and calcium, only some soy-­, hemp-­,
and pea-­based milk alternatives have comparable protein content, and
all products have inferior protein quality. Many plant-­based products
have added oils and sugars. No nondairy alternative milks are appropriate substitutions for infant formula or breast milk in infants. Nut-­
based milks may be suitable for toddlers ≥12 months of age without
allergies who have an otherwise adequate diet. Nondairy (vegan) milks
vary between products; a careful assessment of ingredients, including
protein and micronutrient fortification, must be determined.

RESPONSIVE FEEDING

Responsive feeding begins in infancy and is associated with desirable growth outcomes. Responsive feeding refers to recognizing and
responding to children’s signs of hunger and satiety in a timely and
developmentally appropriate manner. Parents are encouraged to learn
to recognize signs of hunger (e.g., child leans forward or reaches for
food, or opens mouth when offered food) and satiety (e.g., child closes
mouth or turns away from food) in infants who receive solid foods so
that they can respond appropriately.
The period from 6 months to 15 months is characterized by acquisition of self-­feeding skills as the infant learns to grasp finger foods, use
a spoon, and eat soft foods (Table 61.8). Around 12 months of age,
the child learns to drink from a cup, and bottle weaning around 12-­
15 months is recommended. To prevent dental caries, bedtime bottles
should be discouraged, and it is best that cups contain only water outside of mealtimes. Sugar-­sweetened beverages and 100% fruit juice are
not recommended for infants less than 12 months. Cups without a lid
or with a straw rather than a hard spout are preferred.
Baby-­led weaning (BLW) typically refers to allowing infants to self-­
feed soft (often well-­cooked) solid or table foods from the very beginning of complementary feeding. Presently, many parents are choosing
to give their infants finger foods rather than, or in combination with,
purees. There is little evidence that BLW leads to improved nutrient
status, weight gain, or food acceptance longitudinally. In general, all
food textures, including purees, are encouraged to be included in the
infant’s diet. Parents should be counseled on avoidance of foods that
are common choking hazards.

FEEDING TODDLERS AND PRESCHOOL-­AGED
CHILDREN

Toddlerhood is a period when eating behaviors and healthful habits
can be established, and it is often a confusing and anxiety-­generating
period for parents. Important goals of early childhood nutrition are to

FEEDING/ORAL SENSORIMOTOR SKILLS

Birth to 4-­6

Adapted from Arvedson JC. Swallowing and feeding in infants and young children. GI
Motility Online. 2006. https://doi.org/10.1038/gimo17.

offer foods that are developmentally appropriate and to begin to foster
healthful eating habits that will last a lifetime. Growth after the first
year slows dramatically, appetite decreases, motor activity increases,
and children naturally become leaner until they reach an adiposity
nadir at 4-­6 years. Using growth charts to illustrate adequate growth
and provide guidance about typical behavior and eating habits can
help allay parents’ concerns if they are explained in a way that parents
can understand (Table 61.9). Eating behavior can be erratic, and children can appear distracted from eating as they explore the environment. Young children may consume a limited variety of foods, and it is
common for children to “like” a particular food for a period and then
reject the favored food. It can take many offers before children become
familiar with and decide to try a novel food, and it is important to help
children learn about food without expectations regarding how much
they will eat.

Recommended Intake and Serving Sizes

Toddlers and preschool-­aged children usually eat three healthy meals
and one to two snacks daily. Recommended daily amounts for each
food group can be found in Table 61.10. Toddlers and preschool children often fail to meet the recommended servings of fruits, vegetables,
and fiber, whereas intakes of food with fat and added sugar are excessive. Recommended serving sizes of fruits, vegetables, and grains are
approximately the size of the child’s fist, and a serving size of protein
can be the size of the child’s palm. It is important to be mindful that
some children become overwhelmed when large portions are offered,
fearing that they will be expected to finish the entire portion. If parents
are concerned about their children eating enough vegetables, giving
vegetables at the beginning of the meal has been shown, in some circumstances, to be an effective strategy for increasing vegetable consumption in preschool children. Milk continues to be an important

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 61 u Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents

415

Table 61.9  Suggested Language for Discussing Growth Charts with Families
UNDERWEIGHT
• Looking at how your child’s weight is
matched for their height, only 2 of 100
children are at a weight that is lower at the
same height.
• Your child’s weight for their height is lower
than what is generally thought to be
healthy.
• BMI looks at the way height and weight are
balanced with each other. Currently your
child’s BMI is too low, which has a higher
risk of developing health problems related
to weight.

NORMAL WEIGHT

OVERWEIGHT OR OBESE

• Looking at how your child’s weight is
matched for their height, 75 of 100 children
are at a weight that is lower at the same
height.
• Your child’s weight and height are matched
for each other in a way that is generally
thought to be healthy.
• If you were to line up 100 children of the
same age by weight, your child would be
right in the middle.

• Looking at how your child’s weight is
matched for their height, 99 of 100 children
are at a weight that is lower at the same
height.
• Your child’s weight for their height is heavier
than what is generally thought to be
healthy.
• BMI looks at the way height and weight are
balanced with each other. Currently your
child’s BMI is too high, which has a higher
risk of developing health problems related
to weight.

Table 61.10  Recommended Daily Amounts for Children
TODDLERS AGES 12-­23 MO

CHILDREN AGES 2-­8 YR

CHILDREN AGES 9 YR AND OLDER

Calories per day*

700-­1,000

1,000-­1,400

1,600-­3,200

Vegetables

2

⁄3-­1 cup

1-­1½ cups

2-­4 cups

Fruits

½-­1 cup

1-­1½ cups

1½-­2½ cups

Grains

1¾-­3 ounces

3-­5 ounces

5-­10 ounces

Dairy

1 ⁄3-­2 cups

2-­2½ cups

3 cups

Protein foods

2 ounces

2-­4 ounces

5-­7 ounces

Oils

9-­13 grams

15-­17 grams

22-­51 grams

2

*Calorie needs may be higher for children who are active far above typical levels for age. Additionally, calorie needs may change on a daily basis as children experience illness,
growth spurts, and variations in activity.
Adapted from the U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-­2025, 9th Edition. December 2020.
Available at DietaryGuidelines.gov.

source of nutrition, particularly protein, fat, calories, and vitamin D,
and it is recommended that children consume up to 2-­3 cups (16-­24
ounces) per day (see Table 61.10). Sugar-­sweetened beverages like
soda, sports drinks, sweetened tea, or fruit punch are not recommended. Toddlers ages 12 months and older can be given up to 4 oz/
day of 100% fruit juice. Grapefruit juice can affect medications metabolized by CYP34A (e.g., antifungals such as fluconazole and ketoconazole, antiretrovirals, erythromycin, clarithromycin, fluoxetine, and
amiodarone).

Feeding Practices

In the second year of life, self-­feeding is learned, becomes the norm with
time, and provides more opportunities for the family to eat together.
Self-­feeding also provides the child with the autonomy to self-­regulate
their intake. Child feeding is an interactive process, especially because
children receive cues regarding appropriate eating behaviors from parents. Parents are encouraged to notice and comment on positive and
ignore negative eating behaviors unless the behavior jeopardizes the
health and safety of the child. Parents should avoid pressuring young
children to eat, particularly pressuring them to eat larger, adult-­sized
portions. Instead, parents are encouraged to focus on acceptance of a
wide variety of healthful foods. In addition, parents are encouraged to
eat the same foods with their toddlers to model positive eating behaviors such as trying and consuming healthful foods.
The 2-­year-­old child can progress from small pieces of soft finger
foods to prepared table foods with care. They can also learn how
to eat with utensils (as culturally appropriate) over the preschooler
period. The young child is not capable of completely chewing and
swallowing chewy or hard foods, and hard foods present a choking risk. Hard candies, nuts, popcorn, and raw carrots should be
avoided before age 4 years. Foods like hot dogs, sausages, and grapes
can be sliced lengthwise to avoid choking. Caregivers should always
be vigilant and present during feeding, and the child placed in a

highchair or booster seat. The AAP discourages eating in the presence of distractions such as television, tablets, mobile devices, and
other screens and eating in a car where an adult cannot adequately
observe and assist the child.

FEEDING SCHOOL-­AGED CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS
MyPlate

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) MyPlate (www.myplate.gov)
is a basis for building an optimal diet for children and adults (Fig. 61.1).
MyPlate is based on the 2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
MyPlate provides a visual representation of the different food groups and
portion sizes designed for the general public. The website provides recipes, weight management strategies, and tools to track calories and physical activity goals. A personalized eating plan based on these guidelines
provides, on average over a few days, all the essential nutrients necessary
for health and growth, while limiting nutrients associated with chronic
disease development. MyPlate can also be used as an interactive tool for
customized recommendations based on age, sex, physical activity, and
for some populations, weight and height. Print materials from the USDA
are also available for families without internet access.
The MyPlate model emphasizes making half the plate vegetables and
fruits, prioritizing whole grains, and eating protein from both animal and
plant sources. A separate dairy section is included. Physical activity recommendations to achieve a healthful energy balance are not visually displayed
but are provided on the website. MyPlate has removed foods that have low
nutritional value, such as sugar-­sweetened beverages and sweetened baked
goods.
In the United States, the vast majority of children and adolescents
do not consume a diet that follows the recommendations of MyPlate.
The intake of high-­calorie/low-­nutrient-­density foods is much higher
than recommended, with frequent consumption of sugar-­sweetened
beverages (e.g., soda, juice drinks, iced tea, sport drinks), snack foods,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

416 Part V u Nutrition
Table 61.11  Revised National School Lunch Program and
School Breakfast Program Recommendations
1.	Portion sizes of food are to be based on age-­grade groups.
2.	School lunches and breakfasts will have a minimum and
maximum calorie level, maximum saturated fat content, and a
maximum sodium content.
3.	Foods must contain zero grams of trans fat per serving.
4.	The inclusion of unsaturated vegetable oils is encouraged within
calorie limits.
5.	Vegetables and fruits are not interchangeable.
6.	Vegetable offerings at lunch must include cup equivalent of the
following: dark-­green vegetables, bright-­orange vegetables, and
legumes.
7.	No more than half of fruit servings may be in the form of juice.
8.	At least one half of bread/grain offered must be whole grain.
9.	Milk must be fat free if flavored and either fat free or 1% fat if
plain.
10.	Students must select a fruit option at breakfast with their meal
and either a fruit or a vegetable at lunch for the meal to be
reimbursable.

Fig. 61.1 MyPlate food guide. (From U.S. Department of Agriculture:

Adapted from the National Academies of Engineering, Science and Medicine. School
Meals: Building Blocks for Healthy Children. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press; 2010.

http://www.myplate.gov/.)

high-­fat meat (e.g., bacon, sausage), and high-­fat dairy products (e.g.,
cheese, ice cream). Intake of dark-­green and orange vegetables (vs fried
white potatoes), whole fruits, reduced-­fat dairy products, and whole
grains is typically lower than recommended (see Table 61.10 for recommendations). Other common unhealthful eating habits include
consuming larger-­than-­recommended portion sizes; preparing foods
with added fat, sugar, or salt; skipping breakfast and/or lunch; grazing; consuming packaged snack foods; and following fad diets. MyPlate
offers a helpful and customer-­friendly tool to assist pediatricians counseling families on optimal eating plans for short-­and long-­term health.
Diet quality tends to decline with child age, and ensuring that children and adolescents consume sufficient nutrient-­dense foods is a challenge for many parents. The vast majority of children and adolescents
consume more than the recommended amounts of added sodium, saturated fats, and added sugars, with ∼17% of calorie intake coming from
highly processed packaged foods. Frequent snacking and consumption
of sugar-­sweetened beverages are major contributors to this excess
and are valuable targets for dietary counseling. Among adolescents,
night eating may be an important source of lower-­quality food intake
that may be missed during a standard diet recall. In the United States,
nearly 85% of adolescents consume caffeinated beverages. Although
moderate consumption (up to 2.5 mg/kg/day, equivalent to 6 ounces
of coffee for a 30-­kg child) is generally considered safe, higher levels
of caffeine consumption are associated with impaired sleep and with
negative physiologic, emotional, and behavioral outcomes.

NUTRITION ISSUES OF IMPORTANCE ACROSS
PEDIATRIC AGES
Eating at Home

At home, parents control much of what children and adolescents eat
because they typically shop for groceries and monitor which foods are
available in the household. Home food availability is associated with child
dietary intake: availability of foods such as fruits, vegetables, and dairy has
been associated with intake of those foods, whereas availability of foods
such as sugar-­sweetened beverages is associated with lower diet quality.
Parents can help to influence children’s healthy food choices by modeling healthful eating behaviors themselves. Dietary counseling includes
encouraging parents to make healthier food choices available and attractive at home and part of routine family meals. Improved diet quality for
children is associated with regular family meals while sitting at a table
(vs eating alone or watching a TV or other screen), perhaps because of
increased opportunities for positive parenting during meals. Although
there are many reasons families may be unable to provide an ideal meal

setting (busy schedules, parents working multiple jobs, no kitchen table),
family meals at predictable times are encouraged to the extent families are
able.
Another important aspect of food parenting is helping children
learn to be mindful of and respond to internal cues of hunger and
satiety. This can be a challenge for some families who have children
with a propensity to overeat or to eat in response to nonhunger signals (such as eating as an emotional response). Parents can support their children to eat at a slower pace and to chew their food
properly. Useful strategies when the child is still hungry after a
meal include a 15-­to 20-­minute pause (to allow the child to engage
in another activity) before providing a second serving or offering
foods that are insufficiently consumed, such as vegetables, whole
grains, or fruits.

Eating in Childcare and School Settings

Many U.S. toddlers and preschool children attend formal or informal childcare and receive meals and snacks in this setting. There is
wide variation in the quality of food offered (if food is provided)
and level of mealtime supervision. Parents are encouraged to assess
the quality of the food and supervision by asking questions, visiting
the center, and taking part in parent committees. Free or reduced-­
price snacks and meals are provided in childcare centers for low-­
and medium-­income communities through the USDA Child and
Adult Care Food Program. Participating programs are required
to provide meals and snacks that meet meal regulations set by the
USDA, enabling a certain level of food quality. However, many centers and schools still struggle to provide high-­quality meals and
snacks due to cost.
The National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program provide low-­cost meals to millions of children. Guidelines for
meals are taken from the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Recommendations include the use of age-­grade portion sizes and the amounts of
vegetables and fruits, grains, and fats (Table 61.11). Among the necessary
components of these programs are training and equipment for school
food service staff, school community engagement, parent education, and
food industry involvement. Parents are encouraged to assist their child
with food choices at school. If children bring their lunch from home,
lunch should include, at a minimum, a fruit and/or vegetable, a whole
grain, and a protein source. Parents can be directed to www.myplate.gov
for healthful lunch ideas. Additionally, parents are encouraged to be
aware of school and classroom parties and work with teachers and other
parents to ensure children have access to healthy choices.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 61 u Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents
Eating Outside the Home

The number of meals eaten outside the home or brought home from
takeout restaurants continues to increase among all age-­groups in the
United States. The increased convenience of this meal pattern is undermined by the generally lower nutritional value of the meals compared
with home-­cooked meals. Typically, meals from fast-­food or casual
restaurants are of large portion size; are dense in calories; and contain large amounts of saturated fat, salt, and sugar and low amounts of
whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. Although an increasing number
of restaurants offer healthier alternatives, the vast majority of what is
consumed at restaurants does not fit MyPlate recommendations. Parents are encouraged to evaluate menu labels when available, select the
healthiest available options, and consider sharing meals to supplement
children’s meals, which often comprise highly palatable options with
low nutrient density.
With increasing age, more meals and snacks are also consumed during peer social gatherings at friends’ houses and parties. When a large
part of a child’s or adolescent’s diet is consumed on these occasions,
diet quality can suffer because food offerings are typically of low nutritional value. Parents and pediatricians need to guide children and teens
in navigating these occasions while maintaining a healthful diet and
enjoying meaningful social interactions. These occasions may also be
opportunities for teens to consume alcohol; consequently, adult supervision is important.

Food Environment

Environmental and social challenges can make it difficult for families
to make healthful food choices. Although taste is the main determinant of food choice, many other complex factors influence that choice,
including cost, availability, accessibility, convenience, and marketing
strategies, including shelf placement and special pricing. Recognizing
the context of food and lifestyle choices can help providers understand
lack of changes or “poor adherence” to dietary recommendations and
can decrease the frustration often experienced by the pediatricians who
might otherwise “blame the victim” for behavior that is not entirely
under their control. Local and national efforts to improve access to
fresh and unprocessed foods are ongoing but often struggle to address
broader issues such as cost or time to prepare foods at home.

Responsive Feeding and Contingent Feeding
Practices

Responsive feeding entails recognizing and responding to children’s
hunger and satiety cues in an age-­appropriate and developmentally
appropriate way across all stages of childhood and adolescence
(Table 61.12). It also includes providing routines and structure with
clear expectations (e.g., providing meals and snacks at scheduled
intervals with a variety of healthy foods to choose from) and a warm
emotional context that promotes positive interactions about food
and eating. Responsive feeding strategies can include encouraging

Table 61.12  Responsive Feeding Recommendations
WAYS TO PROMOTE
RESPONSIVE FEEDING
• Have set meal and snack
times and a consistent place
to eat.
• Select and provide healthful
snack and meal options.
• Allow child to decide what to
eat and how much.
• Sit and eat with the child.
• Encourage child to try what is
on the plate.
• Notice when child attempts
to try a food: “You tried your
broccoli,” or “good job trying
your broccoli.”

WHAT TO AVOID
• Allow child to “graze” or eat
small bites throughout the
day.
• Allow child to eat whatever
they want.
• Make child eat all of the food
on their plate.
• Leave child to eat by
themselves.
• Offer the child a (food) reward
for eating their food.
• Offer person praise to child:
“You are a good person for
trying your broccoli.”

417

children to eat foods that are healthful, teaching them about various
foods, and involving them in the selection and preparation of meals.
Allowing children to select (within reason) how much to eat of each
offered food encourages children to listen to internal cues of hunger
and satiety.
It is common for parents to use food as a reward or sometimes withdraw preferred foods as punishment. Most parents use this practice
occasionally, and some use it systematically, starting at young ages.
The practice is also commonly used in other settings, such as in childcare, school, or even athletics. Although it is a good idea to limit some
unhealthful but desirable foods to special occasions, using food as a
reward can be problematic. Making access to food contingent on an
accomplishment increases the desirability of that food. Conversely,
pressuring children to consume some healthful foods renders those
foods less desirable. Therefore phrases such as, “Finish your vegetables, and you will get ice cream for dessert” can result in establishing
unhealthful eating habits once the child has more autonomy in food
choices. Parents are encouraged to choose items other than food as
rewards, such as stickers, inexpensive toys or sporting equipment,
additional time for a favorite activity, special family events, or collectible items. Similar types of behavior are also seen in schools and extracurricular events, and parents are encouraged to work with teachers
and coaches to identify appropriate alternative rewards.

Cultural Considerations in Nutrition and Feeding

Food choices, food preparation, eating patterns, and infant feeding
practices all have very deep cultural roots. Beliefs, attitudes, and practices related to food and eating are some of the most important components of cultural identity (Fig. 61.2). In multicultural societies, high
dietary variability can be observed. In a world where global marketing
forces tend to reduce geographic differences in the types and brands
of food that are available, most families are still influenced by their
cultural background, especially during family meals at home. Therefore pediatricians are encouraged to become familiar with the dietary
characteristics of various cultures in their community, so that they can
identify the potential nutritional benefits and concerns related to their
patients’ diets and address concerns in a nonjudgmental way.

Vegetarianism

Vegetarianism is the practice of following a diet that excludes animal
flesh foods, including beef, pork, poultry, fish, and shellfish. There are
several variations on the vegetarian diet, some of which also exclude
eggs and/or some products produced from animal labor, such as dairy
products and honey. Another expression used for different varieties of
vegetarianism is plant-­based diets.
It is important to ask parents or adolescents about their diets when
they report following a vegetarian, vegan, or plant-­based diet, because
these terms may mean different restrictions for different families. Vegetarian and vegan diets, with extensive knowledge and forethought, can
be safely followed by children. Some people practice diets that are even
more restrictive, such as those that exclude foods from the allium family (e.g., onion, garlic, chives) or include only raw foods cooked below
a certain temperature. The safety of these more restrictive diets, which
can be very limited in macronutrients and micronutrients, has not been
studied in children, and these more restrictive diets are not recommended. Although being on a vegetarian or vegan diet does not appear
to increase the risk of an eating disorder, some teenagers with disordered eating may choose such diets to aid in limiting their caloric intake.
Vegetarianism, or following a plant-­based diet, is considered a healthful and viable diet: both the U.S. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
and the Dietitians of Canada have found that a properly planned and
well-­balanced vegetarian diet can satisfy the nutritional goals for all
stages of life. Recommendations for healthy vegetarian dietary patterns
at all ages can be found in the 2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
Families may benefit from consultation with a registered dietitian to
ensure all nutrient requirements are being met.
Compared with meat-­based diets, vegetarian diets tend to have lower
intakes of saturated fat, cholesterol, and animal protein and relatively
higher levels of complex carbohydrates, fiber, magnesium, potassium,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

418 Part V u Nutrition

Community, demographic,
and societal characteristics
Ethnicity

Socioeconomic
status

Parenting styles and
family characteristics
School lunch
programs

Child characteristics
and child risk factors*

Types of foods
available in
the home
Work hours

Peer and sibling
interactions

Child feeding
practices

Nutritional
knowledge

Age

Gender
DIETARY
INTAKE

Parent
dietary intake
Parent food
preferences
Accessibility of
recreational facilities

SEDENTARY
BEHAVIOR

Child
weight
status

PHYSICAL
ACTIVITY

Familial susceptibility
to weight gain

Leisure time

Family TV
viewing

Parent weight
status

Crime rates and
neighborhood
Parent
safety
monitoring of
child TV viewing
Parent
preference
for activity

Parent activity
patterns

School physical
education
programs

Parent encouragement
of child activity
Family leisure time
activity

Accessibility of convenience
foods and restaurants

Fig. 61.2 A conceptual framework of the context of food and lifestyle choices. Child risk factors (shown in uppercase lettering) refer to child

behaviors associated with the development of overweight. Characteristics of the child (shown in italic lettering) interact with child risk factors and
contextual factors to influence the development of overweight (i.e., moderator variables). (From Davison KK, Birch LL. Childhood overweight: a contextual model and recommendations for future research. Obes Rev. 2001;2:159–171. © 2001 The International Association for the Study of Obesity.)

folate, vitamins C and E, and phytochemicals. Vegetarians tend to have
a lower body mass index, cholesterol level, and blood pressure and are
at decreased risk for cancer and ischemic heart disease. Specific nutrients of concern in vegetarian diets include the following:
• Iron (see Chapter 72): Vegetarian diets may have similar levels
of iron intake as nonvegetarian diets, but iron from plant sources
has lower bioavailability than iron from meat sources. Additionally, iron absorption may be inhibited by other dietary constituents,
such as phytate (found in leafy green vegetables and whole grains).
Iron stores are lower in vegetarians and vegans than in nonvegetarians, and iron deficiency is more common in vegetarian and vegan
women and children. Plant-­based foods rich in iron include iron-­
fortified cereals, black beans, cashews, kidney beans, lentils, oatmeal, raisins, black-­eyed peas, soybeans, sunflower seeds, chickpeas,
molasses, chocolate, and tempeh. Iron absorption from plants is
increased when consumed with vitamin C–containing foods (e.g.,
bell peppers, citrus fruits, strawberries, tomatoes, broccoli). Periodic
monitoring of iron stores may be valuable in vegan and vegetarian
children and adolescents with low iron intake.
• Vitamin B12: Plants are not a good source of B12 (see Chapter 67.7).
Vegetarians may consume vitamin B12 through dairy products and
eggs; vegans need fortified foods or supplements. Breastfeeding by
B12-­unsupplemented vegan mothers can place an infant at risk for
vitamin B12 deficiency. Only some infant liquid multivitamins contain B12. Vegan children and adolescents may need assessment of
vitamin B12 levels if supplementation is inconsistent.
• Fatty acids: Vegetarians and vegans may be at risk for insufficient
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and DHA. The inclusion of sources of
linolenic acid (a precursor of EPA and DHA), such as walnuts, soy
products, flaxseed oil, and canola oil, is recommended.
• Calcium and vitamin D: Without supplementation, vegan diets
can be low in calcium and vitamin D, putting vegans at risk for impaired bone mineralization (see Chapter 69). Monitoring serum
25-­hydroxyvitamin D levels can identify patients with deficiency
(<30 ng/mL) and start supplementation. Calcium sources include
leafy greens with low oxalate, such as broccoli, kale, and Chinese
cabbage. Calcium and vitamin D are found in some fortified plant-­
based milks and yogurts and some brands of orange juice.

• Zinc: The bioavailability of zinc in plant sources tends to be low because of the presence of phytates and fiber that inhibit zinc absorption (see Chapter 72). Zinc is found in soy products, legumes, grains,
cheese, and nuts.
• Iodine: Plant-­based diets can be low in iodine, and vegetarians and
vegans who do not consume iodized salt or sea vegetables (which
have variable iodine content) may be at risk of iodine deficiency. The
exclusive use of noniodized salt such as Himalayan, sea, or kosher
salts could further increase that risk. Iodized salt is not typically used
in processed foods such as crackers, although some bread products
are fortified with iodine.
Families may also choose to restrict specific foods in the form of
elimination diets to prevent allergies or to treat real or presumed gastrointestinal disorders. Figure 61.3 provides an approach to elimination/restrictive diets.

Organic Food

Organic food is defined as produce and ingredients grown without the
use of synthetic pesticides, synthetic fertilizers, sewage sludge, genetically modified organisms, or ionizing radiation. Animals that produce
organic meat, poultry, eggs, and dairy products are not given antibiotics or growth hormones. In the United States, certification must be
obtained, and USDA regulations must be followed to market food as
“organic.”
Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in themselves are not
thought to be harmful to consume. However, GMOs are modified
to be resistant to the effects of herbicides, including glyphosate and
2,4-­dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-­D), which give GMOs a selective
growth advantage and facilitate use of these chemicals. Glyphosate and
2,4-­D have been designated by the International Agency for Research
on Cancer as probable and possible human carcinogens, respectively.
Therefore higher concentrations of these chemicals in GMO foods are
of concern.
Parents may prefer organic foods to feed children secondary to
concerns regarding chemical and hormonal content of animals and
produce. Although nutritional differences between organic and conventional foods have been reported (e.g., higher levels of PUFAs,
α-­tocopherol, and iron and lower levels of cadmium, selenium, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 61 u Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents

419

Assess nutritional risk

0-5 years

6-17 years

18 years or over

Indicators for follow-up:
• Weight for height or height for age
≤ –2 z-score
• Recent static weight/growth
faltering or downward crossing of
≥2 centiles or 1 z-score
• Feeding difficulties
• Exclusion of cow’s milk
• Food allergy and concomitant
atopic eczema
• Multiple food elimination
• Family is vegetarian or vegan
• Other food restrictions due to
religious or cultural factors

Indicators for follow-up:
• Weight for height/BMI ≤ –2
z-score growth faltering
or downward crossing of
≥2 centiles or 1 z-score
• Avoidant restrictive
food intake disorder
• Multiple food elimination
• Family are vegetarian or
vegan
• Other food restrictions
due to religious or
cultural factors

Indicators for follow-up:
• BMI <18.5
• Exclusion of milk or
wheat or multiple
foods ≥6 months
• Vegetarian or vegan
• Other food restrictions
due to religious or
cultural factors
• Presence of another
chronic condition
• Other dietary
restrictions, e.g.,
diabetes

Review intake of key staple foods, amount and frequency, and advise on substitute foods

Milk Avoidance
• Age-dependent
substitute milk
• Other cheese and
yogurt substitutes,
e.g., soy or coconutbased
• Assess protein and
energy intakes
• Calcium, iron, zinc,
vitamins A and D
supplements may be
required

Wheat Avoidance
• Check need to
avoid barley and rye
• Advise alternative
sources of grains,
e.g., oats, rice, corn,
quinoa, teff, and
buckwheat
• Check if wheat
substitute foods
(gluten-free
products) are being
eaten
• B vitamin and iron
supplements may
be required

High nutritional risk if avoiding both wheat
and milk

Egg Avoidance
• If vegetarian,
ensure diet is
enhanced with
other high-protein
foods including
beans and lentils
Fish Avoidance
• Omega 3
supplements may
be required

Soy, peanut,
tree nut, and
seed avoidance
• Legumes, e.g.,
beans and
lentils, will often
be tolerated,
and can be
substituted for
peanuts or tree nuts
• Vegans may
need iron,
calcium, and B
vitamin supplements

Vitamin D
Check individual requirement for vitamin D
and follow country-specific guidelines for
age-appropriate vitamin D supplementation

Fig. 61.3 Approach to evaluate risk for adverse elimination diets. BMI, Body mass index. (Modified from Skypala IJ, McKenzie R. Nutritional issues
in food allergy. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2019;57:166–178, Fig. 1, p. 172.)

iodine), they may not be clinically relevant. Similarly, children consuming organic foods have lower levels of pesticides in their urine
compared with those consuming nonorganic foods, but it remains
unclear whether such a reduction is clinically meaningful. However,
other chemicals in the environment, such as the endocrine disruptors
bisphenol-­A and phthalates (found in plastics), are best avoided. A
high frequency of organic food ingestion has been associated with a
lower risk of cancer in adults.

Nutritional Supplements

The use of nutritional supplements as complementary or alternative medicine is increasing, despite limited data on safety and efficacy, especially in children. Many parents assume that if a food or

supplement is “natural” or “organic,” there is no potential for risk and
some potential for benefit. However, adverse effects of some dietary
supplements have been documented, and some supplements have
been discovered to contain common allergens. In the United States,
dietary supplements, including botanical and herbal products, are
regulated differently from medications. Manufacturers do not have
to prove safety or efficacy before marketing the supplement; the
potential for adverse effects, inefficacy, unnecessary cost, and contamination is therefore high. It can be difficult to compete against
the aggressive marketing of food supplements. Medical professionals
must also compete against advice from people without a scientific
background and those with significant conflicts of interest, particularly on the internet.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

420 Part V u Nutrition
Pediatricians may be asked whether a child needs to receive a
daily multivitamin. Many children do not follow all the guidelines
of MyPlate, and parents and pediatricians may be tempted to use
multivitamin supplements to fill gaps. The average U.S. diet provides more than a sufficient amount of most nutrients. Therefore
multivitamins are recommended only where there is concern for
dietary inadequacy, especially when intake of one of the major food
groups is very limited or absent (fruits, vegetables, proteins, whole
grains, dairy or equivalent). Using vitamin supplements as a support while working to expand dietary variety can help avoid micronutrient deficiencies in cases of dietary restriction whether due to
food selectivity or for health, cultural, or religious reasons.

Food Safety

Food safety issues are an important aspect of feeding infants, children, and adolescents. In addition to choking hazards and food
allergies, pediatricians and parents need to be aware of food safety
issues related to infectious agents and environmental contaminants.
Food poisoning with bacteria, viruses, or their toxins is most common with raw or undercooked food, such as meat, poultry, eggs,
and seafood, or cooked foods that have not been handled or stored
properly. Unwashed fruits and vegetables may also be contaminated. The specific bacteria and viruses involved in food poisoning
are described in Chapter 259. Many chemical contaminants, such
as heavy metals, pesticides, and organic compounds, are present
in various foods, usually in small amounts. Because of concerns
regarding their child’s neurologic development and cancer risk,
many questions arise from parents, especially after media coverage
of isolated incidents. A recurring debate is the balance between the
benefits of seafood for the growing brain and cardiovascular health
and the risk of mercury contamination from consuming large, predatory fish species. The Food Safety Modernization Act provides
the FDA with authority to have stricter control over food production and distribution, including requirements that manufacturers
develop food safety plans. A good source of information for patients
and parents can be found at www.foodsafety.gov. Other reliable
sources of information include the websites of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), FDA, and CDC.

Preventive Nutrition Counseling in Pediatric Primary
Care

An important part of the primary care well child visit focuses on
nutrition and growth because most families turn to pediatric healthcare providers for guidance on child nutrition. Preventive nutrition
is one of the cornerstones of preventive pediatrics and a critical
aspect of anticipatory guidance. The first steps of nutrition counseling are nutritional status assessments, primarily achieved through
growth monitoring and dietary intake assessment. Although dietary
assessment is somewhat simple in infants who have a relatively
monotonous diet, it is more challenging at older ages. The goals of
dietary assessment in the primary care setting need to include an
idea of the eating patterns (time, location, and environment) and
usual diet. A basic assessment of the child’s intake includes evaluating meal routine, dietary diversity (ensuring that a child eats
foods from all food groups, namely vegetables, fruits, whole grains,
sources of iron and protein, and low-­fat or nonfat dairy products),
and consumption of sugar-­sweetened beverages, including 100%
fruit juice. Pediatricians can encourage regularly scheduled meals
and one or two healthy snacks (depending on the child’s age) with
avoidance of grazing, particularly on foods and beverages that are
energy dense but of low nutritional value. For more ambitious goals
of dietary assessment, referral to a registered dietitian with pediatric experience is recommended.
After understanding the child’s usual diet, existing or anticipated
nutritional problems can be addressed, such as diet quality, dietary

habits, and portion size. Most nutritional issues, such as overeating
or poor food choices, are not solely the result of lack of parents’
knowledge but can be the result of access, availability, and economic
factors. Therefore nutrition education alone is insufficient in these
situations, and pediatricians need to acquire training in behavior-­
modification techniques such as motivational interviewing (see
Chapter 18) or refer to specialists to assist their patients in engaging
in healthful feeding and eating behaviors. The physical, cultural,
and family environment in which the child lives must be considered
so that nutrition counseling is relevant and changes feasible (see
Fig. 61.2). The phone app ChangeTalk from the AAP provides free
training on motivational interviewing for the prevention and treatment of pediatric obesity.
One important aspect of nutrition counseling is providing families with sources of additional information and behavioral change
tools. Although some handouts are available from government
agencies, the AAP, and other professional organizations for families
without internet access, an increasing number of families rely on
the internet to find nutrition information. Therefore pediatricians
need to become familiar with common websites so that they can
point families to reliable and unbiased sources of information. Perhaps the most useful websites for children are the AAP and USDA
MyPlate sites and those of the CDC, FDA, National Institutes of
Health, The National Academies, and Food and Nutrition Board
for government sources. Other professional resources include the
American Heart Association and Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Unfortunately, there are websites that provide biased or even
dangerous information. Examples include dieting sites, sites that
openly promote dietary supplements or other food products, and
the sites of “nonprofit” organizations that are mainly sponsored by
food companies or that have other social or political agendas.

Food Security and U.S. Food Assistance Programs

Food insecurity is defined as the state of being without reliable
access to a sufficient quantity of affordable, nutritious food. In 2016,
minoritized households were 1.5 to almost 2 times more likely to be
food insecure than the national average of 12.3%. Children in food-­
insecure homes are more likely to have medical problems, including asthma and depression, and are more likely to seek emergency
medical care. Patients from all backgrounds can experience food
insecurity, and selective screening risks reinforcing bias and missing children in need. Answering “often true” or “sometimes true”
(versus “never”) to the following two-­question screen has a sensitivity of 97% and specificity of 83% for identifying food insecurity: For
the last 12 months: (1) “We worried whether our food would run
out before we got money to buy more.” (2) “The food we bought just
didn’t last, and we didn’t have money to get more.”
Several programs exist in the United States to help meet the needs
of families experiencing food insecurity. One of the most utilized federal programs is the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). This program provides nutrition supplements to a large proportion of pregnant and postpartum
women and children up to their fifth birthday. One of its strengths is
that families regularly visit a WIC nutritionist, who can be a useful
resource for nutritional counseling. For older children, federal programs provide school lunches, breakfasts, and after-­school meals, as
well as daycare and summer nutrition. Lower-­income families are also
eligible for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP),
formerly known as the Food Stamp Program. This program provides
funds directly to families to purchase various food items in regular
food stores. Food insecurity screening should be universal in clinical
settings. Eligibility criteria for both WIC and SNAP can be found on
the programs’ federal websites.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 62 u Nutrition, Food Security, and Health

transplantation, and inborn errors of metabolism (see Chapter 64).
Severe malnutrition has been reported in affluent communities in
infants whose families believe in fad diets and in infants with food
allergies fed nutritionally inadequate foods such as rice “milk,” which
has a very low protein and micronutrient content (Figs. 62.2 and 62.3;
also see Fig. 61.3).

Chapter 62

Nutrition, Food Security,
and Health

FOOD SECURITY

Jason M. Nagata and Christine M. McDonald
MALNUTRITION AS THE INTERSECTION OF FOOD
INSECURITY AND HEALTH INSECURITY

Undernutrition is usually an outcome of three factors, often in combination: household food supply insecurity, suboptimal childcare
practices, and restricted access to or use of health and water/sanitation services. In famine and emergency settings, food shortage is the
foremost factor, but in many countries with widespread undernutrition, food production or access to food might not be the most limiting
factor. More important causes might be repeated childhood infections,
especially diarrheal diseases associated with an unsanitary environment, poor infant and young child feeding practices, or various challenges that may prevent families from using quality maternal and child
health services. Figure 62.1 shows some of the many causal factors on
the pathway to undernutrition and how they extend from household
and community levels to national/international levels. Inequitable distribution of resources because of political, economic, and agricultural
policies often denies families their right to adequate land, water, food,
healthcare, education, and a safe environment, all of which can influence nutritional status.
Families with few economic resources who know how to care for
their children and are enabled to do so can often use available food and
health services to produce well-­nourished children. If food resources
and health services are not available in a community, not used, or not
accessible to some families, children might become undernourished.
Undernutrition is not confined to low-­income countries. It has been
noted in chronically ill patients in neonatal and pediatric intensive
care units in high-­income countries and among patients with burns,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, tuberculosis, cystic fibrosis, chronic diarrhea syndromes, malignancies, bone marrow

Conflict
Population
displacement,
migration, disruption
to agriculture/food
supply

Natural Disasters
Drought, flood,
hurricane, earthquake

Political, Economic
Weak social systems,
corruption, low GDP,
high foreign debt,
poor infrastructure

Food security exists when all people, at all times, have access to sufficient, safe, nutritious food to maintain a healthy and active life. Four
main dimensions of food security can be identified: availability, access,
utilization, and stability. Availability refers to the supply of food,
reflecting the level of food production, food stocks, and net trade.
Access is typically defined at the household level, reflecting purchasing
power, household food production, and food/cash transfers received
through social “safety net” programs. The utilization dimension recognizes that even when a household has access to food, it is not necessarily shared equitably within a household. Stability refers to being “food
secure” at all times: Examples of situations that affect stability are the
“lean seasons” before a harvest, natural disasters, political unrest, and
rising food prices. To be food secure, all four dimensions must be met
simultaneously.

Measuring Food Insecurity

The most commonly used measurement of food insecurity is undernourishment (chronic hunger), which is the proportion of the population who are unable to meet daily energy requirements for light
activities. It is an estimate calculated by the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) based on country-­level food balance sheets. It
does not take nutrient adequacy into account, but has the advantage of
being available for almost all countries annually (although with a time
lag) and assists in monitoring global trends. In addition, FAO measures
food access by asking individuals about their experiences over the last
12 months, such as whether they ran out of food or skipped meals. The
responses are graded from mild to severe food insecurity. This relatively simple monitoring tool, the Food Insecurity Experience Scale,
provides timely information to guide decision-­making at national and
local levels.
In 2020, the FAO estimated that between 720 and 811 million people, or approximately 9.9% of the world’s population, were undernourished. More than half of the world’s undernourished were found in

Health
Insecurity
Inadequate health
services, unhealthy
environment

Resources and
Control

Inadequate
Education
Poverty, women’s
disempowerment,
closely-spaced births

Food
Insecurity
Food unavailable,
unaffordable

421

Disease
Anorexia, nutrient
losses, increased
requirements

Inadequate Care
for Mothers and
Children
Psychosocial
deprivation

Poor Growth
Impaired immunity,
frequent, more severe
infections

Inadequate
Dietary Intake
Poor feeding
practices, maternal
competence, cultural
beliefs

Fig. 62.1 Basic, underlying, and immediate causes of undernutrition.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Undernutrition

422 Part V u Nutrition
Table 62.1  Global Food Security and Nutrition Targets
ZERO HUNGER CHALLENGE
OBJECTIVES

Fig. 62.2 A 14-­month-­old girl with “flaky paint” dermatitis. (From Katz

1.	Access to an adequate and
stable food supply for all
2.	Elimination of stunting
in children <2 yr, and no
malnutrition in pregnancy and
early childhood
3.	Sustainable food systems
4.	Doubling of smallholder
productivity and income,
particularly for women
5.	No loss or waste of food and
responsible consumption

KA, Mahlberg MH, Honig PJ, et al. Rice nightmare: Kwashiorkor in 2
Philadelphia-­area infants fed Rice Dream beverage. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;52:S69–S72.)

WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY
GLOBAL NUTRITION TARGETS
FOR 2025
1.	A 40% reduction in the
number of stunted children
<5 yr
2.	A 50% reduction in anemia in
women of reproductive age
3.	A 30% reduction in low
birthweight
4.	No increase in childhood
overweight
5.	Increase exclusive
breastfeeding rates to at least
50% in the first 6 mo
6.	Reduce and maintain
childhood wasting to <5%

Food Security and Nutrition Targets

Fig. 62.3 Paired, transverse, homogeneous, and smooth bordered

lines noted in all fingernails suggestive of Muehrcke lines in an infant
fed diluted cow’s milk since birth. Muehrcke lines are an apparent
leukonychia most often associated with hypoalbuminemia. (From Williams
V, Jayashree M. Muehrcke lines in an infant. J Pediatr. 2017;189:234.)

Asia, and more than one third were found in Africa. The majority are
rural poor people subsisting on small plots of land or hired as laborers and urban poor people who lack the means to grow or buy food.
Alongside the 768 million people who are underfed are 1.9 billion who
are overweight or obese, reflecting global inequalities and the “double
burden of malnutrition” in low-­and middle-­income countries.

Nutrition, Food Security, and Poverty

Household food security tracks income closely. With rising incomes,
very poor households first increase their dietary energy intake to avert
hunger. If incomes rise further, there is a shift to more expensive staple foods and then to a more varied diet with a greater proportion of
energy from animal sources, fruits/vegetables, and fats/sugars and less
from cereals, roots, and tubers. National economic growth tends to be
accompanied by reductions in stunting, but economic growth can pass
by poor persons if they work in unaffected sectors or are unable to take
advantage of new opportunities because of lack of education, access to
credit, or transportation, or if governments do not channel resources
accruing from economic growth to healthcare, education, social protection, and other public services and infrastructure. There is good evidence that economic growth reduces poverty but does not necessarily
reduce undernutrition.

The period of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) ended in
2015. All developing regions except sub-­Saharan Africa achieved the target to halve the proportion of people living in extreme poverty, with the
proportion falling from 47% in 1990 to 14% in 2015. Reductions in hunger were broadly consistent with those of poverty reduction, and rates of
undernourishment in developing regions fell from 23% in 1990 to 13%
in 2015. The prevalence of underweight among children under 5 years
(another MDG indicator of “hunger”) fell from 29% in 1990 to 15% in
2015 for the developing regions combined. Rural children are almost twice
as likely to be underweight as urban children, and the poorest quintile is
almost 3 times as likely to be underweight as the richest quintile.
Eradicating poverty and hunger continue to be core targets of the
Sustainable Development Goals, as agreed by 193 countries of the
United Nations General Assembly in September 2015, and are to be
achieved by 2030. In addition, in 2012 the World Health Assembly
agreed to six global nutrition targets to be reached by 2025, measured
against a 2010 baseline, and the United Nations Secretary-­General
launched the Zero Hunger Challenge with five objectives that “would
boost economic growth, reduce poverty and safeguard the environment” and “would foster peace and stability” (Table 62.1).

Future Food Security

Between now and 2050 the world’s population is expected to exceed 9
billion, and an increase in the food supply of 70–100% will be needed
to feed this larger, more urban, and more affluent populace. Over this
same period, the world’s food supply is expected to diminish unless
action is taken. Accelerating the decline in fertility rates and reducing overconsumption are basic but difficult actions to bridge the gap
between increasing demand and diminishing supply. Equally challenging actions include limiting climate disruption, increasing the efficiency of food production, reducing waste, and reducing the demand
for meat and dairy foods. The COVID-­19 pandemic significantly disrupted food systems and exacerbated food insecurity globally.
u Limit climate disruption. Drought, floods, and other extreme weather
events are becoming more prevalent and destroy crops and livestock,
often on a huge scale. Rising sea levels will lead to loss of productive
land through inundation and salinization. Acidification of oceans
will reduce marine harvests. Because curbing greenhouse gas emissions is essential to minimize climate disruption, the goals are (1)
to cut fossil fuel use by at least half of present levels by 2050 so as
to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and (2) change livestock
husbandry and agronomic practices to reduce methane and nitrous
oxide (N2O) emissions.
u Increase efficiency of food production. Expanding the area of agricultural land to any large extent (e.g., by deforestation) is not a sustainable option because of adverse consequences on ecosystems and
biodiversity, although some expansion of food production could be




Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 62 u Nutrition, Food Security, and Health
achieved by switching good-­quality land away from first-­generation
biofuels. For example, almost 40% of the U.S. corn harvest in 2016–
2017 went to biofuels. Efforts to increase the intensity of production
need to be environmentally sustainable. These include optimizing
yields by soil and water conservation, removal of technical and financial constraints faced by farmers, and breeding resource-­efficient
crops and livestock that are also climate resilient and pest/disease
resistant.
u Reduce waste. Approximately 30–40% of food is wasted, between
harvesting and the market, during retail, at home, and in the food
service industry. Better transport and storage facilities in developing countries, less stringent sell-­by dates, lower cosmetic standards
for fruits and vegetables, and ending supersized portions would help
reduce waste.
u Change diets. As wealth increases, so does the demand for processed
foods, meat, dairy products, and fish. About one third of global cereal production is fed to animals, so reducing consumption of meat
from grain-­fed livestock and increasing the proportion derived from
the most efficient sources (pigs and poultry) would allow more people to be fed from the same amount of land.


Table 62.2  Classification of Undernutrition
CLASSIFICATION
Gomez (underweight)

The greatest risk of undernutrition (underweight, stunting, wasting,
and micronutrient deficiencies) occurs in the first 1,000 days, from
conception to 24 months of age, and this early effect on growth and
development can have adverse consequences on health, intellectual
ability, school achievement, work productivity, and earnings in later
life. Governments and agencies are therefore advised to focus interventions on this critical window of opportunity.

INDEX

GRADING

90–75% of median
weight-­for-­age
75–60%
<60%

Grade 1 (mild)

90–80% of median
weight-­for-­height
80–70%
<70%

Mild

95–90% of median
height-­for-­age
90–85%
<85%

Mild

WHO (wasting)

< −2 to > −3 SD
weight-­for-­height
< −3

Moderate

WHO (stunting)

< −2 to > −3 SD
height-­for-­age
< −3

Moderate

115-­125 mm
mid-­upper arm
circumference
<115 mm

Moderate

Waterlow (wasting)

Waterlow (stunting)



UNDERNUTRITION

423

WHO (wasting) (for
age-­group 6-­59 mo)

Grade 2 (moderate)
Grade 3 (severe)

Moderate
Severe

Moderate
Severe

Severe

Severe

Severe

SD, Standard deviation; WHO, World Health Organization.

Measurement of Undernutrition

The term malnutrition encompasses both ends of the nutrition spectrum, undernutrition as well as overweight and obesity. Many poor
nutritional outcomes begin in utero and are manifest as low birthweight (LBW, <2,500 g). Preterm birth and fetal growth restriction are
the two main causes of LBW, with prematurity relatively more common
in richer countries and fetal growth restriction relatively more common in lower-­income countries.
Nutritional status is often assessed in terms of anthropometry (Table
62.2). International standards of normal child growth under optimum
conditions from birth to 5 years have been established by the World
Health Organization (WHO). To compile the standards, longitudinal
data from birth to 24 months of healthy, breastfed, term infants were
combined with cross-­sectional measurements of children ages 18-­71
months. The standards allow normalization of anthropometric measures in terms of z scores (standard deviation [SD] scores). A z ­score
is the child’s height (weight) minus the median height (weight) for
the child’s age and sex divided by the relevant SD. The standards are
applicable to all children everywhere, having been derived from a large,
multicountry study reflecting diverse ethnic backgrounds and cultural
settings.
Height-­for-­age (or length-­for-­age for children <2 years) is a measure of linear growth, and a deficit represents the cumulative impact
of adverse events, usually in the first 1,000 days from conception, that
result in stunting, or chronic undernutrition. A low height-­for-­age typically reflects socioeconomic disadvantage. A low weight-­for-­height,
or wasting, usually indicates acute malnutrition. Conversely, a high
weight-­for-­height indicates overweight. Weight-­for-­age is the most
commonly used index of nutritional status, although a low value has
limited clinical significance because it does not differentiate between
wasting and stunting. Weight-­for-­age has the advantage of being somewhat easier to measure than indices that require height measurements.
In humanitarian emergencies and some community or outpatient settings, mid-­upper arm circumference is used as a screening tool to
identify wasted children (Fig. 62.4).
Body mass index (BMI) is calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by the square of height in meters. For children, BMI is age and
gender specific. BMI-­for-­age can be used from birth to 20 years and
is a screening tool for thinness (less than −2 SD), overweight (between

Fig. 62.4 Measuring mid-­upper arm circumference. (Courtesy Nyani
Quarmyne/Panos Pictures.)

+1 SD and +2 SD), and obesity (greater than +2 SD). To diagnose
obesity, additional measures of adiposity are desirable because a high
BMI can result from high muscularity and not only from excess subcutaneous fat.
Micronutrient deficiencies are another dimension of undernutrition. Those of particular public health significance are vitamin A,
iodine, iron, and zinc deficiencies.
Vitamin A deficiency is caused by a low intake of retinol (in animal
foods) or its carotenoid precursors, mainly beta-­carotene (in orange-­
colored fruits and vegetables and dark-­green leaves) (see Chapter 66).
The prevalence of clinical deficiency is assessed from symptoms and
signs of xerophthalmia (principally night blindness and Bitot spots).
Subclinical deficiency is defined as serum retinol concentration ≤0.70
μmol/L. Vitamin A deficiency is the leading cause of preventable blindness in children. It is also associated with a higher morbidity and mortality among young children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

424 Part V u Nutrition
Iodine deficiency is the world’s leading cause of preventable
intellectual impairment (see Chapter 72). An enlarged thyroid (goiter) is a sign of deficiency. Severe deficiency in pregnancy causes
fetal loss and permanent damage to the brain and central nervous
system in surviving offspring (cretinism). It can be prevented by
iodine supplementation before conception or during the first trimester of pregnancy. Postnatal iodine deficiency is associated with
impaired mental function and growth stunting. The median urinary
iodine concentration in children age 6-­12 years is used to assess the
prevalence of deficiency in the general population, and a median of
<100 μg/L indicates insufficient iodine intake.
Iron-­deficiency anemia is common in childhood either from low
iron intakes or poor absorption, or as a result of illness or parasite
infestation (see Chapter 72). Women also have relatively high rates
of anemia as a result of menstrual blood loss, pregnancy, low iron
intake, poor absorption, and illness. Hemoglobin cutoffs to define
anemia are 110 g/L for children 6-­59 months, 115 g/L for children
5-­11 years, and 120 g/L for children 12-­14 years. Cutoffs to define
anemia are 120 g/L for nonpregnant women, 110 g/L for pregnant
women, and 130 g/L for men.
Zinc deficiency increases the risk of morbidity and mortality from
diarrhea, pneumonia, and possibly other infectious diseases (see Chapter 72). Zinc deficiency also has an adverse effect on linear growth.
Deficiency at the population level is assessed from dietary zinc intakes
or serum zinc concentrations. For children under 10 years of age,
serum zinc cutoffs of <65 μg/dL and <57 μg/dL are used to define zinc
deficiency according to whether the blood sample was obtained in the
morning or afternoon, respectively. For females 10 years of age or older,
cutoffs of <70 μg/dL, <66 μg/dL, and <59 μg/dL are used depending
on whether the blood sample was obtained in the morning in a fasted
state, the morning in a nonfasted state, or in the afternoon in a nonfasted state, respectively.

Prevalence of Undernutrition

It is estimated that approximately 14.6% of births worldwide in
2015 were LBW. Rates of LBW are highest (48%) in southern Asia,
which are twice those of sub-­Saharan Africa. Globally, in 2015, 14%
of children <5 years of age were underweight (weight-­for-­age < −2
SD). The global prevalence of stunting (height-­for-­age < −2 SD) has
declined from 33% in 2000 to 22% in 2017, with the greatest reductions occurring in Asia. Stunting prevalence is highest in the African region (30%). Wasting (weight-­for-­height < −2 SD) affects 7% of
children <5 years, with minimal change in prevalence over the past
2 decades. These figures represent 149 million stunted children and
50 million wasted children under 5 years of age. Asia carries most
of the global burden of underweight children because of the combination of large population size and high prevalence. In 2017, 55%
of all stunted children and 69% of all wasted children lived in Asia.
Africa carries most of the remaining global burden.
Approximately 29% of children under 5 years of age in low-­and
middle-­
income countries (LMICs) suffer from vitamin A deficiency. Nationally representative data on the zinc status of children
are sparse, but an estimated 17% of the global population is believed
to be at risk of inadequate zinc intake. The estimated prevalence
of anemia in children and women of reproductive age in 2016 was
42% and 33%, respectively. Iron deficiency is considered to be the
primary cause of anemia in 25–42% and 50–60% of anemia cases
among children and women, respectively. Universal salt iodization has made great strides in reducing the global burden of iodine
deficiency. However, mild to moderate iodine deficiency remains a
public health concern in 25 countries.

Consequences of Undernutrition

The most profound consequence of undernutrition is premature death
(Table 62.3). Fetal growth restriction together with suboptimal breastfeeding in the first month of life contribute to 19% of all deaths in children <5 years (1.3 million deaths/year). When the effects of stunting,
wasting, and deficiencies of vitamin A and zinc are also considered,
these six items jointly contribute to 45% of global child deaths (3.1

Table 62.3  Global Deaths in Children <5 Years Attributed
to Nutritional Conditions
ATTRIBUTABLE
DEATHS

% OF TOTAL
DEATHS <5 YR

(a) Fetal growth
restriction (<1 mo)

817,000

11.8

(b) Stunting (1-­59 mo)

1,017,000

14.7

(c) Wasting (1-­59 mo)

875,000

12.6

(d) Zinc deficiency
(12-­59 mo)

116,000

1.7

(e) Vitamin A deficiency
(6-­59 mo)

157,000

2.3

(f) Suboptimal
breastfeeding (0-­
23 mo)

804,000

11.6

Joint effects of (a) + (f)

1,348,000

19.4

Joint effects of all 6
factors

3,097,000

44.7

CONDITION

From Black RE, Victora CG, Walker SP, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition and
overweight in low-­and middle-­income countries. Lancet. 2013;382:427–451.

million deaths/year), and many more are disabled or stunted for life.
Anemia contributes to over one quarter of maternal deaths.
The risk of child death from infectious diseases increases even
with mild undernutrition, and as the severity of undernutrition
increases, the risk increases exponentially (Table 62.4). Undernutrition impairs immune function and other host defenses; consequently, childhood infections are more severe and longer lasting
and more likely to be fatal than the same illnesses in well-­nourished
children. Infections can adversely affect nutritional status, and
young children can quickly enter a cycle of repeated infections
and ever-­worsening malnutrition. Even for the survivors, physical
and cognitive damage as a result of undernutrition can affect their
future health and economic well-­being. For females, the cycle of
undernutrition is passed on to the next generation when undernourished women give birth to LBW babies.
Fetal growth restriction and early childhood undernutrition have consequences for adult chronic illness. LBW is associated with an increased
risk of hypertension, stroke, and type 2 diabetes in adults. This increased
risk is thought to reflect “fetal programming,” a process by which fetal
undernutrition leads to permanent changes in the structure and metabolism of organs and systems that manifest as disease in later life. The
risk is exacerbated by low weight gain during the first 2 years of life. The
increased risk of adult chronic disease from undernutrition early in life is
a particular challenge to LMICs with rapid economic growth.
Stunting before age 3 years is associated with poorer motor and cognitive development and altered behavior in later years. The developmental quotient (DQ; see Chapter 28) is reduced by 6-13 points. Iodine
and iron deficiencies also lead to loss of cognitive potential. Indications
are that children living in areas of chronic iodine deficiency have an
average reduction in intelligence quotient (IQ) of 12-­13.5 points compared with children in iodine-­sufficient areas. Iron deficiency has a
detrimental effect on the motor development of children <4 years and
on cognition of school-­aged children. The estimated deficit is 1.73 IQ
points for each 10 g/L decrease in hemoglobin concentration.
Undernutrition can have substantial economic consequences for
survivors and their families. The consequences can be quantified in
five categories: (1) increased costs of healthcare, either neonatal care
for LBW babies or treatment of illness for infants and young children;
(2) productivity losses (and thus reduced earnings) associated with
smaller stature and muscle mass; (3) productivity losses from reduced
cognitive ability and poorer school performance; (4) increased costs of
chronic diseases associated with fetal and early child malnutrition; and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 62 u Nutrition, Food Security, and Health

425

Table 62.4  Hazard Ratios for All-­Cause and Cause-­Specific Deaths Associated with Stunting, Wasting, and Underweight in
Children <5 Years
DEATHS

STANDARD DEVIATION (SD)
SCORE

ALL

PNEUMONIA

DIARRHEA

MEASLES

OTHER INFECTIONS

HEIGHT/LENGTH-­FOR-­AGE
< −3

5.5

6.4

6.3

6.0

3.0

−3 to < −2

2.3

2.2

2.4

2.8

1.9

−2 to < −1

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.3

0.9

≥ −1

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

WEIGHT-­FOR-­LENGTH
< −3

11.6

9.7

12.3

9.6

11.2

−3 to < −2

3.4

4.7

3.4

2.6

2.7

−2 to < −1

1.6

1.9

1.6

1.0

1.7

≥ −1

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

WEIGHT-­FOR-­AGE
< −3

9.4

10.1

11.6

7.7

8.3

−3 to < −2

2.6

3.1

2.9

3.1

1.6

−2 to < −1

1.5

1.9

1.7

1.0

1.5

≥ −1

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

From Black RE, Victora CG, Walker SP, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in low-­and middle-­income countries. Lancet. 2013;382:427–451.

(5) consequences of maternal undernutrition on future generations.
The impact of nutrition on earnings appears to be independent of the
effects of childhood deprivation.

Interventions for Undernutrition

Interventions to address child undernutrition can be divided into those
that address immediate causes (nutrition-­specific interventions) and those
that address underlying or indirect causes (nutrition-­sensitive interventions) (Table 62.5). In the short-­term, nutrition-­specific interventions
(e.g., salt iodization) can have substantial impact even in the absence of
economic growth, and micronutrient interventions (supplementation and
fortification) are consistently ranked as the most cost-­effective investment.
However, there is increased attention to nutrition-­sensitive interventions
as the best means of sustainably eliminating malnutrition and to multisectoral policies that harness the synergism between the two types of interventions (e.g., cross-­sectoral linkages among agriculture, nutrition, and
health).
To reduce the adverse consequences of undernutrition on mortality, morbidity, and cognitive development, interventions must
encompass both fetal and postnatal periods. Preventing LBW is
essential, with emphasis on prevention of low maternal BMI and
anemia, and in the longer term, prevention of low maternal stature.
Maternal height is a strong predictor of birth outcomes, and approximately 6.5 million small-­for-­gestational age (SGA) or preterm
births are associated with maternal short stature each year. Other
measures include smoking cessation, birth spacing, delaying pregnancy until after 18 years of age, and intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in malaria-­endemic areas. In the postnatal period,
promotion and support of exclusive breastfeeding is a high priority.
Although the Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative has a marked benefit
on rates of exclusive breastfeeding in hospitals, postnatal counseling from community workers or volunteers is needed to facilitate
continuation of exclusive breastfeeding at home for 6 months (see
Chapter 61). Most studies show a lower risk of HIV transmission
with exclusive breastfeeding than with mixed breastfeeding. The
risk of HIV transmission by breastfeeding is approximately 5–20%

Table 62.5  Examples of Nutrition-­Specific and
Nutrition-­Sensitive Interventions
NUTRITION-­SPECIFIC
INTERVENTIONS

NUTRITION-­SENSITIVE
INTERVENTIONS

•	Promotion and support for
exclusive breastfeeding for
6 mo, and continued
breastfeeding for at least 2 yr
•	Promotion of adequate, timely,
and safe complementary
feeding from 6 mo
•	Increased micronutrient intake
through dietary diversity
•	Micronutrient supplements for
pregnant women (iron/folate)
and young children (vitamin A,
iron, zinc) in deficient areas
•	Zinc supplements to children
during and after diarrhea
(10-­20 mg/day for 2 wk)
•	Prevention and treatment of
severe acute malnutrition
•	Crop biofortification, food
fortification, salt iodization
•	Reduced heavy physical
activity in pregnancy

•	Increased access to
affordable, nutritious food;
smallholder agriculture; credit
and microfinance
•	Postharvest food processing
and preservation
•	Vaccination against neonatal
and childhood illness; access
to healthcare
•	Improved water/sanitation and
hygiene (e.g., handwashing
with soap)
•	Education; women’s
empowerment; gender equality
•	Social protection (e.g., cash
transfers)
•	Malaria prevention (vector
control/bednets); intermittent
preventive treatment during
pregnancy and in children
3-­59 mo
•	Birth spacing; delaying
pregnancy until after 18 yr of
age

depending on duration, but can be reduced to <2% with antiretroviral drugs. Even without antiretroviral drugs, exclusively breastfed
children of HIV-­infected mothers in low-­income countries have
lower mortality than nonbreastfed children, because the latter are
at increased risk of death from diarrhea and pneumonia.
Interventions to improve infant feeding must be designed for
the local setting and thus require careful formative research during their development. Messages should be few, feasible, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

426 Part V u Nutrition
culturally appropriate. For complementary feeding, the introduction of nutrient-­rich energy-­dense mixtures of foods at 6 months of
age and responsive feeding are often emphasized. Where adequate
complementary feeding is difficult to achieve and subclinical deficiencies are common, high-­dose vitamin A supplementation every
6 months in children 6-­59 months of age reduces all-­cause mortality
and death caused by diarrhea by 12%, and zinc supplementation can
reduce 1-­to 4-­year mortality by 18%, diarrhea incidence by 13%,
and pneumonia by 19%. Monitoring of child growth provides an
early alert to a nutrition or health problem but is only worthwhile if
accompanied by good counseling and growth promotion activities.
The impact of growth monitoring and promotion will depend on
coverage, intensity of contact, health worker performance and communication skills, adequacy of resources, and the motivation and
ability of families to follow agreed actions.

Table 62.6  Clinical Signs of Malnutrition
SITE

SIGNS

Face

Moon face (kwashiorkor), simian facies (marasmus)

Eye

Dry eyes, pale conjunctiva, Bitot spots (vitamin A),
periorbital edema

Mouth

Angular stomatitis, cheilitis, glossitis, spongy
bleeding gums (vitamin C), parotid enlargement

Teeth

Enamel mottling, delayed eruption

Hair

Dull, sparse, brittle hair; hypopigmentation; flag
sign (alternating bands of light and normal
color); broomstick eyelashes; alopecia

Skin

Treatment of vitamin and mineral deficiencies is discussed in Chapters
66-­72. Treatment of LBW and intrauterine growth restriction is discussed in Chapter 119.

Loose and wrinkled (marasmus); shiny and
edematous (kwashiorkor); dry, follicular
hyperkeratosis; patchy hyperpigmentation and
hypopigmentation (“crazy paving” or “flaky paint”
dermatoses); erosions; poor wound healing

Nails

SEVERE ACUTE MALNUTRITION

Koilonychia; thin and soft nail plates, fissures, or
ridges

Musculature

Muscle wasting, particularly buttocks and thighs;
Chvostek or Trousseau sign (hypocalcemia)

Skeletal

Deformities, usually as a result of calcium, vitamin
D, or vitamin C deficiencies

Abdomen

Distended: hepatomegaly with fatty liver; ascites
may be present

Cardiovascular

Bradycardia, hypotension, reduced cardiac
output, small vessel vasculopathy

Neurologic

Global developmental delay, loss of knee and
ankle reflexes, impaired memory

Hematologic

Pallor, petechiae, bleeding diathesis

Behavior

Lethargic, apathetic, irritable on handling

Gastrointestinal
tract

Atrophy of small intestine mucosa, lactase
deficiency common

Other Nutritional Interventions

Severe acute malnutrition is defined as severe wasting and/or
bilateral edema. Severe wasting is extreme thinness diagnosed by a
weight-­for-­length (or height) < −3 SD of the WHO Child Growth
Standards. In children ages 6-­59 months, a mid-­upper arm circumference <115 mm also denotes severe acute malnutrition: a
color-­banded tape (see Fig. 62.4) is a convenient way of screening
children in need of treatment.
Bilateral edema is diagnosed by grasping both feet, placing a thumb
on top of each, and pressing gently but firmly for 10 seconds. A pit
(dent) remaining under each thumb indicates bilateral edema.
This definition of severe acute malnutrition distinguishes wasted/
edematous children from those who are stunted because stunted
children (although underweight) are not a priority for acute clinical
care because their deficits in height and weight cannot be corrected
in the short term. The previous name protein-­energy malnutrition
is avoided because it oversimplifies the complex, multifactorial
etiology. Other terms are marasmus (severe wasting), kwashiorkor
(characterized by edema), and marasmic-­kwashiorkor (severe wasting and edema).
Children with severe acute malnutrition have had a diet insufficient in energy and nutrients relative to their needs. The magnitude
of the deficits will differ depending on the duration of inadequacy,
quantity and diversity of food consumed, presence of antinutrients
(e.g., phytate), individual variation in requirements, and number
and severity of coexisting infections and their duration. Infections
can lead to profound nutrient deficits and imbalances: For example, amino acids are diverted to form acute-­phase proteins, potassium, magnesium, vitamin A, and zinc are lost through diarrhea,
and losses of glycine and taurine are linked to small bowel bacterial
overgrowth. Ingested microbes can cause villous atrophy and loss
of nutrients from maldigestion and malabsorption, as well as disruption of gut barrier function leading to microbial translocation,
chronic immune activation, and altered gut microbiome (environmental enteric dysfunction). Deficits can also arise from increased
nutrient utilization in response to toxins (e.g., cysteine and methionine to detoxify dietary cyanogens).
Children affected by severe acute malnutrition may have different
clinical presentations and metabolic disturbances due to variations
in the type and extent of deficits and imbalances in their bodies.
This heterogeneity is a result of diverse pathways that lead to severe
acute malnutrition. Children who develop edematous malnutrition
are more likely than nonedematous children to have had exposures
that generate oxidative stress and/or to have greater deficits in free
radical–scavenging antioxidants (glutathione; vitamins A, C, and E;
and essential fatty acids) or cofactors (zinc, copper, selenium).

Modified from Grover Z, Ee LC. Protein energy malnutrition. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2009;56:1055–1068.

Clinical Manifestations of Severe Acute Malnutrition
(Table 62.6)

Severe wasting is most visible on the thighs, buttocks, and upper arms
and over the ribs and scapulae, where loss of fat and skeletal muscle
is greatest (Fig. 62.5). Wasting is preceded by failure to gain weight
and then by weight loss. The skin loses turgor and becomes loose as
subcutaneous tissues are broken down to provide energy. The face may
retain a relatively normal appearance, but eventually becomes wasted
and wizened. The eyes may be sunken from loss of retroorbital fat, and
lacrimal and salivary glands may atrophy, leading to lack of tears and a
dry mouth. Weakened abdominal muscles and gas from bacterial overgrowth of the upper gut may lead to a distended abdomen. Severely
wasted children are often fretful and irritable.
In edematous malnutrition the edema is most likely to appear
first in the feet and then in the lower legs. It can quickly develop
into generalized edema affecting also the hands, arms, and face
(Fig. 62.6). Skin changes typically occur over the swollen limbs and
include dark, crackled peeling patches (“flaky paint” dermatosis)
with pale skin underneath that is easily infected (see Figs. 62.2 and
62.6). The hair is sparse, easily pulled out, and may lose its curl. In
dark-­haired children, the hair may turn pale or reddish. The liver
is often enlarged with fat. Children with edema are uncomfortable,
irritable and/or apathetic, and often refuse to eat.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 62 u Nutrition, Food Security, and Health

427

Pathophysiology

Fig. 62.5 Child with severe wasting.

When a child’s intake is insufficient to meet daily needs, physiologic
and metabolic changes take place in an orderly progression to conserve energy and prolong life. This process is called reductive adaptation. Fat stores are mobilized to provide energy. Later, protein in
muscle, skin, and the gastrointestinal tract is mobilized. Energy is
conserved by reducing physical activity and growth, reducing basal
metabolism and the functional reserve of organs, and reducing
inflammatory and immune responses. These changes have important consequences:
u The liver makes glucose less readily, making the child more prone
to hypoglycemia. It produces less albumin, transferrin, and other
transport proteins. It is less able to cope with excess dietary protein
and to excrete toxins.
u Heat production is less, making the child more vulnerable to hypothermia.
u 
The kidneys are less able to excrete excess fluid and sodium, and
fluid easily accumulates in the circulation, increasing the risk of fluid
overload.
u The heart is smaller and weaker and has a reduced output, and fluid
overload readily leads to death from cardiac failure.
u Sodium builds up inside cells because of leaky cell membranes and
reduced activity of the sodium-­potassium pump, leading to excess
body sodium, fluid retention, and edema.
u Potassium leaks out of cells and is excreted in urine, contributing to
electrolyte imbalance, fluid retention, edema, and anorexia.
u Loss of muscle protein is accompanied by loss of potassium, magnesium, zinc, and copper.
u The gut produces less gastric acid and enzymes. Motility is reduced,
and bacteria may colonize the stomach and small intestine, damaging the mucosa and deconjugating bile salts. Digestion and absorption are impaired.
u Cell replication and repair are reduced, increasing the risk of bacterial translocation through the gut mucosa.
u 
Immune function is impaired, especially cell-­mediated immunity.
The usual responses to infection may be absent, even in severe illness, increasing the risk of undiagnosed infection.
u Red blood cell mass is reduced, releasing iron, which requires glucose and amino acids to be converted to ferritin, increasing the risk
of hypoglycemia and amino acid imbalances. If conversion to ferritin is incomplete, unbound iron promotes pathogen growth and
formation of free radicals.
u Micronutrient deficiencies limit the body’s ability to deactivate free
radicals, which cause cell damage. Edema and hair/skin changes are
outward signs of cell damage.
When prescribing treatment, it is essential to take these changes in
function into account. Otherwise, organs and systems will be overwhelmed, and death will rapidly ensue.

Principles of Treatment

Fig. 62.6 Child with generalized edema.

Figure 62.7 shows the 10 steps of treatment, which are separated
into two phases: stabilization and rehabilitation. These steps apply
to all clinical forms and all geographic locations, including North
America and Europe. The aim of the stabilization phase is to repair
cellular function, correct fluid and electrolyte imbalance, restore
homeostasis, and prevent death from the interlinked triad of hypoglycemia, hypothermia, and infection. The aim of the rehabilitation phase is to restore wasted tissues (i.e., catch-­up growth). It is
essential that treatment proceeds in an ordered progression and
that the metabolic machinery is repaired before any attempt is made
to promote weight gain. Pushing ahead too quickly risks inducing
the potentially fatal “refeeding syndrome” (see Chapter 63).
Caregivers bring children to health facilities because of illness,
rarely because of their malnutrition. A common mistake among
healthcare providers is to focus on the illness and treat as for a well-­
nourished child. This approach ignores the deranged metabolism
in malnourished children and can be fatal. Such children should
be considered as severely malnourished with a complication, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

428 Part V u Nutrition
Stabilization
Day 1–2
1.

Prevent/treat hypoglycemia

2.

Prevent/treat hypothermia

3.

Treat/prevent dehydration

4.

Correct imbalance of electrolytes

5.

Treat infections

6.

Correct deficiencies of micronutrients

7.

Start cautious feeding

8.

Rebuild wasted tissue (catch-up growth)

9.

Provide loving care and play

10.

Prepare for follow-up

Day 3–7

no iron

Rehabilitation
Week 2–6

with iron

Fig. 62.7 The 10 steps of treatment for severe acute malnutrition and their approximate time frames.

Table 62.7  Emergency Treatment in Severe Malnutrition
CONDITION

IMMEDIATE ACTION

Shock

1.	Give oxygen.
2.	Give sterile 10% glucose (5 mL/kg) rapidly by IV injection.
3.	Give IV fluid at 15 mL/kg over 1 hr, using:

•	Lethargic or unconscious and
•	Cold hands

Plus either:

•	Slow capillary refill (>3 sec) or
•	Weak fast pulse

•	Ringer lactate with 5% dextrose or
•	Half-­normal saline* with 5% dextrose or
•	Half-­strength Darrow solution with 5% dextrose
•	If all these are unavailable, Ringer lactate

4.	Measure and record pulse and respirations at the start and every 10 min. If there are signs of improvement
(pulse and respiration rates fall), repeat IV drip, 15 mL/kg for 1 more hr. Then switch to oral or nasogastric
rehydration with ReSoMal, 5-­10 mL/kg in alternate hr (see Table 62.8 step 3).
If there are no signs of improvement, assume septic shock and:
1.	Give maintenance fluid IV (4 mL/kg/hr) while waiting for blood.
2.	Order 10 mL/kg fresh whole blood and transfuse slowly over 3 hr. If signs of heart failure, give 5-­7 mL/kg
packed cells rather than whole blood.
3.	Give furosemide, 1 mg/kg IV at start of transfusion.
Hypoglycemia
Blood glucose <3 mmol/L

See Table 62.8 step 1 for treatment.

Severe dehydration

Do not give IV fluids except in shock.
See Table 62.8 step 3 for treatment.

Very severe anemia
Hgb <4 g/dL

If very severe anemia (or Hgb 4-­6 g/dL and respiratory distress):
1.	Give whole blood 10 mL/kg slowly over 3 hr. If signs of heart failure, give 5-­7 mL/kg packed cells rather
than whole blood.
2.	Give furosemide 1 mg/kg IV at the start of the transfusion.

Emergency eye care
Corneal ulceration

If corneal ulceration:
1.	Give vitamin A immediately (age <6 mo: 50,000 IU; 6-­12 mo: 100,000 IU; >12 mo: 200,000 IU)
2.	Instill 1 drop atropine (1%) into affected eye to relax the eye and prevent the lens from pushing out.

*Some would recommend 5% dextrose in normal saline.
Hgb, Hemoglobin; IV, intravenous(ly).

treatment should follow the 10 steps. Two other potentially fatal mistakes are to treat edema with a diuretic and to give a high-­protein diet
in the early phase of treatment.

Emergency Treatment

Table 62.7 summarizes emergency treatment for malnourished
children with shock and other emergency conditions. Note that
treatment of shock in these children is different (less rapid, smaller
volume, different fluid) from treatment of shock in well-­nourished
children. However, shock from dehydration and shock from sepsis
often coexist and are difficult to differentiate on clinical grounds.
Thus the physician must be guided by the response to treatment:
children with dehydration respond to IV fluid, whereas those with
septic shock will not respond. Because severely malnourished children can quickly succumb to fluid overload, they must be monitored closely.

Stabilization

Table 62.8 summarizes the therapeutic directives for stabilization steps
1-­7 (see Fig. 62.7). Giving broad-­spectrum antibiotics (Table 62.9)
and feeding frequent small amounts of F75 (a specially formulated
low-­lactose milk with 75 kcal and 0.9 g protein per 100 mL to which
potassium, magnesium, and micronutrients are added) will reestablish
metabolic control, treat edema, and restore appetite. The parenteral
route should be avoided; children who lack appetite should be fed by
nasogastric tube, because nutrients delivered within the gut lumen
help in its repair. Table 62.10 provides recipes for preparing the special feeds and their nutrient composition. Of the two recipes for F75,
one requires no cooking, and the other is cereal based and has a lower
osmolality, which may benefit children with persistent diarrhea. F75 is
also commercially available; maltodextrins replace some of the sugar,
and potassium, magnesium, minerals, and vitamins are already added.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 62 u Nutrition, Food Security, and Health

429

Table 62.8  Therapeutic Directives for Stabilization of Malnourished Children
STEP

PREVENTION

TREATMENT

1.	Prevent/treat
hypoglycemia blood
glucose <3 mmol/L.

Avoid long gaps without food and
minimize need for glucose:
1.	Feed immediately.
2.	Feed every 3 hr day and night (2 hr
if ill).
3.	Feed on time.
4.	Keep warm.
5.	Treat infections (they compete for
glucose).
Note: Hypoglycemia and hypothermia
often coexist and are signs of severe
infection.

If conscious:
1.	Give 10% glucose (50 mL), or a feed (see step 7), or 1 tsp sugar under
tongue, whichever is quickest.
2.	Feed every 2 hr for at least first day. Initially give 1⁄4 of feed every 30 min.
3.	Keep warm.
4.	Start broad-­spectrum antibiotics.
If unconscious:
1.	Immediately give sterile 10% glucose (5 mL/kg) rapidly by IV.
2.	Feed every 2 hr for at least first day. Initially give 1⁄4 of feed every 30 min.
Use nasogastric (NG) tube if unable to drink.
3.	Keep warm.
4.	Start broad-­spectrum antibiotics.

2.	Prevent/treat
hypothermia axillary
<35°C (95°F); rectal
<35.5°C (95.9°F).

Keep warm and dry and feed
frequently.
1.	Avoid exposure.
2.	Dress warmly, including head, and
cover with blanket.
3.	Keep room hot; avoid drafts.
4.	Change wet clothes and bedding.
5.	Do not bathe if very ill.
6.	Feed frequently day and night.
7.	Treat infections.

Actively rewarm.
1.	Feed.
2.	Skin-­to-­skin contact with caregiver (“kangaroo technique”) or dress in
warmed clothes, cover head, wrap in warmed blanket, and provide
indirect heat (e.g., heater; transwarmer mattress; incandescent lamp).
3.	Monitor temperature hourly (or every 30 min if using heater).
4.	Stop rewarming when rectal temperature is 36.5°C (97.7°F).

3.	Prevent/treat
dehydration.

Replace stool losses.
1.	Give ReSoMal after each watery
stool. ReSoMal (37.5 mmol Na/L) is
a low-­sodium rehydration solution
for malnutrition.

Do not give IV fluids unless the child is in shock.
1.	Give ReSoMal 5 mL/kg every 30 min for first 2 hr orally or NG tube.
2.	Then give 5-­10 mL/kg in alternate hours for up to 10 hr. Amount depends
on stool loss and eagerness to drink. Feed in the other alternate hour.
3.	Monitor hourly and stop if signs of overload develop (pulse rate increases
by 25 beats/min and respiratory rate by 5 breaths/min; increasing edema;
engorged jugular veins).
4.	Stop when rehydrated (≥3 signs of hydration: less thirsty, passing urine,
skin pinch less slow, eyes less sunken, moist mouth, tears, less lethargic,
improved pulse and respiratory rate).

4.	Correct electrolyte
imbalance—deficit
of potassium and
magnesium, excess
sodium.

1.	Give extra potassium (4 mmol/kg/day) and magnesium (0.6 mmol/kg/day)
for at least 2 wk (see Table 62.12).
Note: Potassium and magnesium are already added in Nutriset F75 and F100
packets.

5.	Prevent/treat
infections.

Minimize risk of cross-­infection.
1.	Avoid overcrowding.
2.	Wash hands.
3.	Give measles vaccine to
unimmunized children age >6 mo.

Infections are often silent. Starting on first day, give broad-­spectrum
antibiotics to all children.
1.	For antibiotic choices/schedule, see Table 62.9.
2.	Ensure all doses are given, and given on time.
3.	Cover skin lesions so that they do not become infected. Note: Avoid
steroids because they depress immune function.

6.	Correct micronutrient
deficiencies.

Note: Folic acid, multivitamins, zinc,
copper, and other trace minerals are
already added in Nutriset F75 and
F100 packets.

Do not give iron in the stabilization phase.
1.	Give vitamin A on day 1 (<6 mo 50,000 units; 6-­12 mo 100,000 units; >12
mo 200,000 units) if child has any eye signs of vitamin A deficiency or has
had recent measles. Repeat this dose on days 2 and 14.
2.	Give folic acid, 1 mg (5 mg on day 1).
3.	Give zinc (2 mg/kg/day) and copper (0.3 mg/kg/day). These are in the
electrolyte/mineral solution and Combined Mineral Vitamin mix (CMV) and
can be added to feeds and ReSoMal.
4.	Give multivitamin syrup or CMV.

7.	Start cautious
feeding.

1.	Give 8-­12 small feeds of F75 to provide 130 mL/kg/day, 100 kcal/kg/day,
and 1-­1.5 g protein/kg/day.
2.	If gross edema, reduce volume to 100 mL/kg/day.
3.	Keep a 24-­hr intake chart. Measure feeds carefully. Record leftovers.
4.	If child has poor appetite, coax and encourage to finish the feed. If unfinished,
reoffer later. Use NG tube if eating ≤80% of the amount offered.
5.	If breastfed, encourage continued breastfeeding but also give F75.
6.	Transfer to F100 when appetite returns (usually within 1 wk) and edema has
been lost or is reduced.
7.	Weigh daily and plot weight.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

430 Part V u Nutrition
Dehydration status is easily misdiagnosed in severely wasted children, because the usual signs (e.g., slow skin pinch, sunken eyes) may
be present even without dehydration. Rehydration must therefore be
closely monitored for signs of fluid overload. Serum electrolyte levels
can be misleading because of sodium leaking from the blood into cells
and potassium leaking out of cells. Keeping the intake of electrolytes
and nutrients constant (see Table 62.8) allows systems to stabilize more
quickly than adjusting intake in response to laboratory results.
Table 62.11 provides a recipe for the special rehydration solution used in severe malnutrition (ReSoMal). Therapeutic Combined
Table 62.9  Recommended Antibiotics for Malnourished
Children*
GIVE
If no complications

Amoxicillin, 25 mg/kg PO twice
daily for 5 days

If complications (shock,
hypoglycemia, hypothermia,
skin lesions, respiratory or
urinary tract infections, or
lethargy/sickly)

Gentamicin, 7.5 mg/kg IV or IM
once daily for 7 days
and
Ampicillin, 50 mg/kg IV or IM
every 6 hr for 2 days, then
amoxicillin, 25-­40 mg/kg PO
every 8 hr for 5 days

If specific infections are identified, add appropriate antibiotics.
For persistent diarrhea or small bowel overgrowth, add metronidazole, 7.5 mg/kg PO
every 8 hr for 7 days.
*Local resistance patterns may require these to be adjusted: Ensure that there is gram-­
negative coverage.
PO, Orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously.

Mineral Vitamin mix (CMV) contains electrolytes, minerals, and vitamins and is added to ReSoMal and feeds. If unavailable, potassium,
magnesium, zinc, and copper can be added as an electrolyte/mineral
stock solution (Table 62.12 provides a recipe), and a multivitamin supplement can be given separately.

Rehabilitation

The signals for entry to the rehabilitation phase are reduced or
minimal edema and return of appetite. A controlled transition over
3 days is recommended to prevent refeeding syndrome (see Chapter 63). After the transition, unlimited amounts should be given of
a high-­energy, high-­protein milk formula such as F100 (100 kcal
and 3 g protein per 100 mL), or a ready-­to-­use therapeutic food

Table 62.11  Recipe for Rehydration Solution for
Malnutrition (ReSoMal)
INGREDIENT

AMOUNT

Water

2L

WHO ORS

One 1-­L sachet*

Sucrose

50 g

Electrolyte/mineral solution†

40 mL

ReSoMal contains 37.5 mmol sodium and 40 mmol potassium/L.
*Sachet contains 2.6 g sodium chloride, 2.9 g trisodium citrate dihydrate, 1.5 g
potassium chloride, and 13.5 g glucose.
†See Table 62.12 for recipe, or use commercially available therapeutic Combined
Mineral Vitamin mix (CMV).
WHO ORS, World Health Organization Oral Rehydration Solution.

Table 62.10  Recipes for Milk Formulas F75 and F100
F75B
(STARTER)

F75C
(STARTER)
(CEREAL-­BASED)

F100D
(CATCH-­UP)

Dried skimmed milk (g)

25

25

80

Sugar (g)

100

70

50

Cereal flour (g)

—

35

—

Vegetable oil (g)

30

30

60

Electrolyte/mineral solution (mL)a

20

20

20

1000

1000

1000

Energy (kcal)

75

75

100

Protein (g)

0.9

1.1

2.9

Lactose (g)

1.3

1.3

4.2

Potassium (mmol)

4.0

4.2

6.3

Sodium (mmol)

0.6

0.6

1.9

Magnesium (mmol)

0.43

0.46

0.73

Zinc (mg)

2.0

2.0

2.3

Copper (mg)

0.25

0.25

0.25

% Energy from protein

5

6

12

Water: make up to (mL)
Content/100 mL

% Energy from fat

32

32

53

Osmolality (mOsm/L)

413

334

419

Whisk at high speed to prevent oil from separating out.
aSee Table 62.12 for recipe, or use commercially available therapeutic Combined Mineral Vitamin mix (CMV).
bA comparable F75 can be made from 35 g dried whole milk, 100 g sugar, 20 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1,000 mL or from 300 mL full-­cream cow’s milk, 100
g sugar, 20 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1,000 mL.
cThis lower-­osmolality formula may be helpful for children with dysentery or persistent diarrhea. Cook for 4 min.
dA comparable F100 can be made from 110 g dried whole milk, 50 g sugar, 30 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1000 mL or from 880 mL full-­cream cow’s milk, 75
g sugar, 20 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1,000 mL.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 63 u Refeeding Syndrome
Table 62.12  Recipe for Concentrated Electrolyte/Mineral
Solution*
INGREDIENT

g

mol/20 mL

Potassium chloride: KCl

224.0

24 mmol

Tripotassium citrate

81.0

2 mmol

Magnesium chloride: MgCl2•6H2O

76.0

3 mmol

Zinc acetate: Zn acetate•2H2O

8.2

300 μmol

Copper (cupric) sulfate: CuSO4•5H2O

1.4

45 μmol

Water: make up to

2500 mL

Add 20 mL when preparing 1 L of feed or ReSoMal.
*Make fresh each month. Use cooled boiled water.

431

Figure 62.8 shows the criteria for inpatient and outpatient care. To
maximize coverage and compliance, community-­based therapeutic
care has 4 main elements: community mobilization and sensitization,
active case finding, therapeutic care, and follow-­up after discharge.
Community-­based therapeutic care comprises steps 8-­10 (see Fig.
62.7), plus a broad-­spectrum antibiotic (step 5). RUTF is usually provided, especially in times of food shortage. RUTF is specially designed
for rehabilitating children with severe acute malnutrition at home. It
is high in energy and protein and has electrolytes and micronutrients
added. The most widely used RUTF is a thick paste that contains milk
powder, peanuts, vegetable oil, and sugar. Pathogens cannot grow in it
because of its low moisture content. Hospitalized children who have
completed steps 1-­7 can be transferred to community-­based care for
completion of their rehabilitation, thereby reducing their hospital stay
to about 7-­10 days.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Severe acute malnutrition

With complications

Severe edema (+++)
OR
MUAC 115 mm AND
any of the following:

Without complications

Edema (+/++)
OR

All of the following:
Good appetite
Clinically well
Alert

Inpatient care

Outpatient
therapeutic care

Fig. 62.8 Flow diagram for inpatient care (left) and outpatient care
(right) in the child with severe acute malnutrition. MUAC, Mid-­upper
arm circumference.

(RUTF), or family foods modified to have comparable energy and
protein contents.
To make the transition, for 2 days replace F75 with an equal volume of F100, then increase each successive feed by 10 mL until some
feed remains uneaten (usually at about 200 mL/kg/day). After this
transition, give 150-­220 kcal/kg/day and 4-­6 g protein/kg/day and
continue to give potassium, magnesium, and micronutrients. Add
iron (3 mg/kg/day). If breastfed, encourage continued breastfeeding. Children with severe malnutrition have developmental delays,
so loving care, structured play, and sensory stimulation during and
after treatment are essential to aid recovery of brain function.

Community-­Based Treatment

Refeeding Syndrome
Jason M. Nagata and Andrea K. Garber

MUAC 115 mm
AND

Anorexia
Clinically unwell
Not alert

Chapter 63

Many children with severe acute malnutrition can be identified in their
communities before medical complications arise. If these children have
a good appetite and are clinically well, they can be rehabilitated at home
through community-­based management of acute malnutrition, which
has the added benefit of reducing their exposure to nosocomial infections and providing continuity of care after recovery. It also reduces the
time caregivers spend away from home and their opportunity costs and
can be cost-­effective for health services.

Refeeding syndrome occurs in response to reintroduction of nutrition in the malnourished patient. Rapid electrolyte and fluid shifts
in response to the surge of insulin brought on by the presence of
nutrients can lead to numerous medical complications shown in
Table 63.1 and may progress to life-­threatening outcomes, including coma, heart failure, and sudden death. Early accounts of the
syndrome were among starved survivors of wartime sieges and concentration camps and among prisoners of war when given sudden
access to unlimited food. Refeeding syndrome occurs as a result
of oral, enteral, or parenteral (highest risk) feeding of malnourished individuals, especially in the setting of aggressive refeeding. Patient populations at risk for refeeding syndrome include
those with anorexia nervosa and other restrictive eating disorders,
chronic conditions causing malnutrition (cancer, congenital heart
disease), malabsorptive syndromes (inflammatory bowel disease,
cystic fibrosis), cerebral palsy, bariatric surgery, and bowel resections (Table 63.2).
In malnourished patients with anorexia nervosa, cases of refeeding
syndrome have been documented during refeeding. Risk is greatest
within the first 7 days of the start of feeding and is primarily indicated by serum hypophosphatemia (<3.0 ng/dL); hypokalemia (<3.5
mmol/L) and hypomagnesemia (<1.8 mg/dL) are also seen. Studies
have identified low weight, but not the caloric load, as the primary risk
factor for refeeding syndrome.
An increase in the supply of energy (usually carbohydrates) is
accompanied by an increase in sodium pump activity, and too sudden
a supply risks causing a rapid release of accumulated sodium from
cells, causing expansion of extracellular and plasma volumes. At the
same time, there is increased cellular uptake of glucose, potassium,
magnesium, and phosphate. Reactivation of metabolic pathways for
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production further depletes serum
phosphorus.
For decades, the key to preventing the syndrome was believed to
be lower-­calorie refeeding with cautious advancement. Diets starting at 1,000-­1,200 calories per day were recommended by multiple
organizations in the United States. Diets as low as 500 calories per
day were recommended in Europe. These cautious approaches are
still recommended for patients with extreme malnutrition (<60% of
median body mass index for age and sex) and children in developing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

432 Part V u Nutrition
Table 63.1  Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Refeeding Syndrome
VITAMIN/THIAMINE
DEFICIENCY

HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA

HYPOKALEMIA

HYPOMAGNESEMIA

Cardiac
Hypotension
Decreased stroke volume
Respiratory
Impaired diaphragm
contractility
Dyspnea
Respiratory failure
Neurologic
Paresthesia
Weakness
Confusion
Disorientation
Lethargy
Areflexic paralysis
Seizures
Coma
Hematologic
Leukocyte dysfunction
Hemolysis
Thrombocytopenia
Other
Death

Cardiac
Arrhythmias
Respiratory
Failure
Neurologic
Weakness
Paralysis
Gastrointestinal
Nausea
Vomiting
Constipation
Muscular
Rhabdomyolysis
Muscle necrosis
Other
Death

Cardiac
Arrhythmias
Neurologic
Weakness
Tremor
Tetany
Seizures
Altered mental status
Coma
Gastrointestinal
Nausea
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Other
Refractory hypokalemia
and hypocalcemia
Death

Encephalopathy
Lactic acidosis
Death

SODIUM
RETENTION
Fluid overload
Pulmonary
edema
Cardiac
compromise

HYPERGLYCEMIA
Cardiac
Hypotension
Respiratory
Hypercapnia
Failure
Other
Ketoacidosis
Coma
Dehydration
Impaired immune
function

Data from Kraft MD, Btaiche IF, Sacks GS. Review of RFS. Nutr Clin Pract. 2005;20:625–633. From Fuentebella J, Kerner JA. Refeeding syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2009;56:1201–1210.

Table 63.2  Refeeding Syndrome: National Institutes for
Clinical Excellence (NICE) Guidelines for
Management of Refeeding Syndrome
PATIENTS AT RISK FOR REFEEDING SYNDROME
ONE OR MORE OF THE —OR— TWO OR MORE OF THE
FOLLOWING
FOLLOWING
• BMI <16 kg/m2

• BMI <18.5 kg/m2

• Unintentional weight loss of
>15% in the previous 3-­6 mo

• Unintentional weight loss of
>10% in the previous 3-­6 mo

• Little or no nutritional intake
for >10 days

• Little or no nutritional intake
for >5 days

• Low levels of potassium,
phosphorus, or magnesium
before refeeding

• History of alcohol or drug use,
including insulin, chemotherapy,
antacids, or diuretics

From Sachs K, Andersen D, Sommer J, Winkelman A, Mehler PS. Avoiding medical
complications during the refeeding of patients with anorexia nervosa. Eat Disord.
2015;23(5):411–421, Table 1, p. 414.

nations, where the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines
for the treatment of malnutrition are still in place (see Chapter 62).
However, the majority of patients hospitalized in the United States
are adolescents with acute, moderate malnutrition. In this patient
population, studies have demonstrated the feasibility of higher-­
calorie refeeding beginning >1,400 calories per day. A randomized
clinical trial has demonstrated the efficacy and safety of starting

with 2,000 calories per day in hospitalized adolescents with moderate malnutrition secondary to anorexia nervosa. In the United
States, meal-­based refeeding is most common, with food served
on bedside trays, whereas higher-­calorie refeeding by nasogastric
tube is reported in Australia. Electrolyte shifts are much lower than
expected using these protocols; serum electrolyte levels can be
monitored daily in hospital settings and decreased electrolyte levels
may be corrected with supplementation.
The following guidance is a suggestion for possible electrolyte
repletion for refeeding syndrome in adolescents with eating disorders. For hypophosphatemia: Phos-­Na-­K 1 packet (250 mg) tid for
phosphorous 2.5-­2.9 mg/dL; Phos-­Na-­K 2 packets (500 mg) tid for
phosphorous 2.0-­2.4 mg/dL; IV Na-­K-­Phos 0.24 mmol/kg max 15
mmol/dose, and consider intensive care consultation for phosphorous <2.0 mg/dL. For hypokalemia: extended release KCl 20 mEq
PO for potassium 3.1-­3.4 mmol/L (recheck in 8-­12 hours); extended
release KCl 40 mEq PO for potassium 2.5-­3.0 mmol/L (recheck in
8-­12 hours); extended release KCl 40 mEq PO stat for potassium
2.2-­2.4 mmol/L; and IV KCl and consider intensive care consultation for potassium <2.2 mmol/L. For hypomagnesemia: Mag-­oxide
1 tablet (133-­200 mg elemental Mg each) bid for magnesium 1.3-­1.7
mg/dL; Mag-­oxide 2 tablets (133-­200 mg elemental Mg each) bid
for magnesium 1.0-­1.2 mg/dL; and IV Mg-­SO4 @50 mg/kg; max 2 g/
dose and consider intensive care consultation for magnesium <1.0
mg/dL. Declining electrolytes but within the normal range generally do not need to be treated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 64 u Malnutrition in High-­Resource Settings

433

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Chapter 64

Malnutrition in
High-­Resource Settings
Liliane K. Diab, Stephanie P. Gilley, and
Nancy F. Krebs
See Chapter 62 for malnutrition in low-­and middle-­income countries. Malnutrition refers to undernutrition and is defined as an
imbalance between nutrient requirements and intake or delivery
that then results in deficits—of energy, protein, or micronutrients—
that negatively affect growth and development. Malnutrition may be
illness related or nonillness related, or both. Illness-­related malnutrition may be caused by one or more diseases, infections, or congenital anomalies and by injury or surgery. Nonillness-­related causes
include environmental, psychosocial, or behavioral factors. Often,
one cause may be primary and exacerbated by another. Patients with
malnutrition may present with growth deceleration, or actual weight
loss, as measured by anthropometric parameters, including weight,
length/height, skinfolds, and mid-­upper arm circumference (see
Chapter 62). Wasting is defined as being too thin for height (weight
for length or body mass index [BMI] z score less than −2). Stunting
is defined as being too short for age (height or length z score less
than −2).
U.S. data suggest 10% of children seen by primary care physicians
are diagnosed with growth faltering. Malnutrition is a primary diagnosis in 1–5% of all hospital admissions. The prevalence of malnutrition
in hospitalized patients is ∼25%; malnutrition in children can contribute to poor outcomes, especially in intensive care units.
Although failure to thrive (FTT) has classically been the term used
to describe children who are not meeting weight gain targets based on
growth curves, the term malnutrition more accurately describes this
cohort of children and removes perceived accusations or blame from
the diagnosis.

The degree of malnutrition can be assessed by inadequate weight-­
for-­corrected age, failure to gain adequate weight over time (weight
gain velocity), height velocity, weight-­for-­length or BMI depending on age, and developmental outcomes (see Chapter 62). These
growth and anthropometric parameters are measured longitudinally and plotted on growth charts appropriate for the child’s sex,
age (corrected if premature), and, if known, genetic disorders, such
as trisomy 21 or Turner syndrome. The American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend the 2006 World Health Organization
(WHO) standards for infants up to 2 years of age who are measured
supine for length. The CDC 2000 growth references are recommended for children and adolescents (age 2-­20 years) when measured with a standing height. The severity of malnutrition (mild,
moderate, or severe) may be determined by plotting the z score
(standard deviation [SD] from the mean) for each of these anthropometric values on the age-­and sex-­
appropriate growth chart
(Table 64.1). Most electronic health records are able to calculate and
plot the z scores for measured anthropometrics. Z scores can also be
obtained by entering measurements in electronic applications such
as peditools.org. In infants less than 6 months old, a slow or slowing
weight gain velocity can indicate malnutrition even if weight/length
is preserved. The presence of bilateral pitting edema and low albumin triggers concern for edematous malnutrition (kwashiorkor)
in the absence of an alternative explanation (such as heart, liver, or
renal disease). Edema in the setting of malnutrition automatically
classifies as severe malnutrition (see Table 64.1).

ETIOLOGY AND DIAGNOSIS

The most common mechanisms of pediatric malnutrition are
nonillness related and are secondary to insufficient calorie intake,
whether the result of low maternal breast milk supply, psychosocial
factors such as food insecurity, or feeding difficulties. Picky eating, although common in young children, can occasionally be so
restrictive as to result in malnutrition and/or micronutrient deficiencies. Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder is one risk factor and is often seen in children with autism, food aversions, or
those on elimination diets for fear of food allergies or gluten sensitivity (Fig. 61.3) (Table 64.2). The most important illness-­related

Table 64.1  Comprehensive Malnutrition Indicators
INDICATORS*

SEVERE MALNUTRITION

MODERATE MALNUTRITION

MILD MALNUTRITION

Weight-­for-­length z score

≤−3

−2.0 to −2.99

−1.0 to −1.99†

BMI-­for-­age z score

≤−3

−2.0 to −2.99

−1.0 to −1.99†

Length z score

≤−3

No data

No data

Mid-­upper arm circumference

≤−3

−2.0 to −2.99

−1.0 to −1.99

†Weight gain velocity (<2 years

<75% of the norm for expected
weight gain

<50% of the norm for expected
weight gain

<25% of the norm for expected
weight gain

†Weight loss (2-­20 yr of age)

>10% of UBW

>7.5% UBW

>5% UBW

†Deceleration in weight-­for-­

Deceleration across 3 z score lines

Deceleration across 2 z score lines

Deceleration across 1 z score line

†Inadequate nutrient intake

≤25% of estimated energy/protein
need

26–50% of estimated energy/
protein need

51–75% of estimated energy/
protein need

^Edema

Present

Absent

Absent

of age)

length/height or BMI-­for-­age

Use clinical judgment when applying these diagnostic criteria.
*It is recommended that when a child meets more than one malnutrition acuity level, the highest acuity level is used for diagnosis to ensure that appropriate evaluation, monitoring,
and treatment are provided.
^The presence of bilateral pitting edema and low albumin is diagnostic for kwashiorkor, which is severe malnutrition regardless of any other indicator(s).
†Needs additional positive diagnostic criteria to make a malnutrition diagnosis.
BMI, Body mass index; UBW, usual body weight.
Adapted with modifications from Becker PJ, Nieman Carney L, Corkins MR, et al. Consensus statement of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics/American Society for Parenteral
and Enteral Nutrition: indicators recommended for the identification and documentation of pediatric malnutrition (undernutrition). J Acad Nutr Diet. 2014;114(12):1988–­2000.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

434 Part V u Nutrition

Table 64.2  DSM-­5 Diagnosis of Avoidant/Restrictive Food
Intake Disorder
A.	An eating or feeding disturbance (e.g., apparent lack of interest
in eating or food; avoidance based on the sensory characteristics
of food; concern about aversive consequences of eating) as
manifested by persistent failure to meet appropriate nutritional
and/or energy needs associated with one (or more) of the
following:
1.	Significant weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight
gain or faltering growth in children).
2.	Significant nutritional deficiency.
3.	Dependence on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements.
4.	Marked interference with psychosocial functioning.
B.	The disturbance is not better explained by lack of available food
or by associated culturally sanctioned practice.
C.	The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the
course of anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no
evidence of a disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight
or shape is experienced.
D.	The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurrent medical
condition or not better explained by another mental disorder.
When the eating disturbance occurs in the context of another
condition or disorder, the severity of the eating disturbance
exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder
and warrants additional clinical attention.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 947.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

ANTHROPOMETRY

Parameters
Weight, height
or length, skin
folds, mid
upper arm
circumference.

ETIOLOGY &
CHRONICITY

MECHANISM

NON-ILLNESS RELATED
Behavioral, socioeconomic
or environmental

STARVATION
Anorexia, socioeconomic, iatrogenic
feeding
interruptions, or
intolerance

extensive burn injuries, congenital heart disease, and thyroid disorders; (3) altered nutrient digestion, absorption, or utilization (e.g.,
cystic fibrosis, short bowel syndrome, celiac disease); and (4) some
chromosome abnormalities that can be associated with poor growth
such as Russel Silver syndrome. More than one mechanism can exist
simultaneously (Fig. 64.1). Chronic malnutrition is defined as malnutrition having a duration of ≥3 months (see Chapter 62).
A complete history includes information regarding the onset of
the growth faltering, a detailed review of systems, past medical history, and family history including parents’ heights and growth patterns. The perinatal history is also important to identify children
who are born small for gestational age (SGA). SGA infants who are
asymmetric (birthweight is disproportionally more depressed than
length or head circumference) have a better prognosis for catch-­up
growth than do infants who have symmetric intrauterine growth
restriction. A detailed nutritional history should include unusual
nutritional beliefs and the quantity, quality, and frequency of meals.
A comprehensive physical examination can help elucidate possible
underlying etiologies and manifestations of micronutrient deficiencies to guide laboratory or imaging evaluation if indicated (Table
64.3 and see Table 62.6). Tanner staging cannot be used as a marker
for nutritional status, but it is influenced and often delayed by malnourishment. Puberty will usually resume progression when the
malnourished state improves. A reasonable initial screen should
include a complete blood count, a comprehensive metabolic panel
(CMP), and urinalysis.
Additional measurements that are useful for classifying the
severity of malnutrition and following the progress of the acutely
malnourished child are mid-­upper arm circumference (MUAC)
and triceps skin folds (TSF). MUAC can be used as an independent anthropometric tool to screen for and diagnose malnutrition
(depletion of subcutaneous fat stores) when obtaining an accurate
length or height is difficult. The MUAC is used as a predictor of
malnutrition-­related mortality by the WHO (increased risk of death
from malnutrition if less than 11.5 cm in infants and children 6-­64

IMBALANCE OF NUTRIENTS

INTAKE

cause of insufficient growth is inability to consume sufficient calories or starvation. The differential diagnosis in this case is broad
and includes many health conditions such as cardiac and neurologic diseases. Oral aversion can sometimes be a manifestation of
eosinophilic esophagitis or dysphagia. Other causes of malnutrition
are (1) increased nutrient losses (e.g., protein-­losing enteropathy,
chronic diarrhea); (2) increased metabolic demands, as seen in

LOSS OF LEAN BODY
MASS
MUSCLE WEAKNESS

OR

MALNUTRITION
MALABSORPTION

Statistic

Reference
charts
WHO MGRS
(0-2 yr)

ACUTE (<3 months)
e.g.: Infection, trauma,
burns
CHRONIC (≥3 months)
e.g.: Cystic fibrosis,
chronic lung disease,
cancer

NUTRIENT LOSS

HYPERMETABOLISM
Energy expenditure

NUTRIENT REQUIREMENT

ILLNESS RELATED

Z-scores

OUTCOMES

DEVELOPMENTAL
OR INTELLECTUAL
DELAY
INFECTIONS

INTAKE < REQUIREMENT

IMMUNE
DYSFUNCTION

ENERGY +/ PROTEIN
IMBALANCE

DELAYED WOUND
HEALING

MICRONUTRIENT
DEFICIENCIES

PROLONGED
HOSPITAL STAY

+/

CDC 2000
(2-20 yr)

Altered utilization
of nutrients
INFLAMMATION

Fig. 64.1 Defining malnutrition in hospitalized children (ASPEN). CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MGRS, Multicenter Growth
Reference Study; WHO, World Health Organization. (From Mehta NM, Corkins MR, Lyman B, et al. Defining pediatric malnutrition: A paradigm shift
toward etiology-­related definitions. J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013;37[4]:460-­481.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 64 u Malnutrition in High-­Resource Settings

435

Table 64.3  Approach to Malnutrition Based on Review of Systems
CAUSE

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATION

Psychosocial

Lack of structure, poor sleep, permissive or
intrusive feeding, feeding difficulties and
food refusal starting in infancy

Low caloric intake secondary to home
feeding environment; in extreme
cases need to consider child neglect
or abuse
Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder
(ARFID)

May need blood tests to check
for certain micronutrient
deficiencies based on diet
history

WORKUP

CNS

Developmental delay, poor feeding,
vomiting, large head circumference,
abnormal neurologic exam

Brain tumor, intracranial bleeding
(consider child abuse)

Referral to developmental pediatrics
or neurology, MRI, EEG, specific
test for neuromuscular function

Gastrointestinal

Chronic vomiting or diarrhea, fatty
stool, crying with feedings, nocturnal
cough, snoring, history of travel to/from
developing countries

Malabsorption, intestinal parasites,
milk protein intolerance, pancreatic
insufficiency, cystic fibrosis, celiac
disease, immunodeficiency,
inflammatory bowel disease, small
bowel bacterial overgrowth

May need referral to
gastroenterology; stool studies
(reducing substance, occult
blood, fat stain), upper GI with
small bowel follow-­through; may
need endoscopic evaluation

Cardiac

Slow feeding, dyspnea, diaphoresis with
feeding, restless sleep, heat murmur

Congenital heart disease, heart failure

Referral to cardiology, ECG,
echocardiogram

Genetic

May have a positive family history of
developmental delay; often facies typical
of a syndrome, skeletal abnormalities,
heart murmur; consider in symmetric IUGR.

Noonan syndrome, William syndrome,
Turner syndrome, Russel Silver
syndrome

Specific genetic testing

Pulmonary

Dyspnea, tachypnea, recurrent wheezing,
pulmonary infections

Asthma, aspiration, food allergies,
cystic fibrosis, immunodeficiency,
neuroendocrine hyperplasia of infancy

Chest x-­ray, sweat chloride test;
specialty referral

Renal

History of recurrent UTI, abnormal urinalysis,
elevated BUN and creatinine

UTI, renal tubular acidosis

General chemistry with BUN and
creatinine, urinalysis, urine and
serum osmolality

Endocrine

Hypothyroidism is associated with
decreased activity level; diabetes is
associated with polyuria and polydipsia;
growth hormone deficiency is associated
with decreased linear growth velocity

Hypothyroidism, type 1 diabetes,
growth hormone deficiency

Thyroid function tests, blood
glucose and urinalysis, pituitary
function tests

BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; EEG, electroencephalogram; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; UTI,
urinary tract infection.
Adapted from Carrasco MM, Wolford JE. Child abuse and neglect. In Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018,
Table 6.6.

months of age). TSF is a measure of subcutaneous fat and is a sensitive indicator of total body fat. Both MUAC and TSF are especially useful tools for nutrition status assessment in children with
altered body composition such as low muscle mass due to cerebral
palsy. However, TSF needs to be done by experienced providers to
minimize errors. MUAC and TSF charts are available on the WHO
website.

TREATMENT

While an illness-­related etiology of malnutrition is being investigated, caloric supplementation can occur simultaneously. Both
the medical workup and the initiation of supplemental oral feeds
can occur in the outpatient setting with close follow-­up. Consider including a speech or occupational therapist for a suck-­and-­
swallow evaluation if the history suggests difficulty with oral feeds.
Hospitalization may be indicated for cases of severe malnutrition
because of the potential for refeeding syndrome (see Chapter 63),
or if a child with mild to moderate malnutrition has not responded
after 2-­3 months of outpatient management. Hospitalization may
include initiation of nasogastric tube feeds, further diagnostic and
laboratory evaluation, assessment and observed implementation
of adequate nutrition, and evaluation of the parent-­child feeding
interaction. The type of caloric supplementation is based on the age

of the child, the severity of malnutrition, and the underlying medical condition. Every effort to maximize the breastfeeding relationship in breastfed infants should be made, ideally involving lactation
support, expressing breast milk to increase supply if low, and fortification of maternal milk if indicated.
Feeding style is equally important to caloric intake. Parents
should be encouraged to respond to the child’s cues of hunger and
satiety and to have a structured schedule for meals and snacks
(every 2-­3 hours). A responsive feeding style that respects the toddler’s autonomy but retains parental control over food choices helps
establish healthy feeding habits (see Chapter 61). Grazing behaviors
with frequent small snacks interfere with eating at mealtimes. Commonly used spill-­proof and squeezable packaging foster eating “on
the go” and has been associated with poor self-­regulation of energy
intake.
Use of liquid oral nutritional supplements resulted in significantly
better catch-­up growth in children with moderate to severe malnutrition (Tables 64.4 and 64.5). Oral nutritional supplements are
most helpful when monitored and balanced with food intake. Start
with 30-­40 kcal per kg per day and serve them in small amounts
simultaneously with meals to allow intake of age-­appropriate food.
However, children with oral motor difficulties may need to consume a larger proportion of calories in a liquid form.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

436 Part V u Nutrition
Table 64.4  Nutritional Supplements
CATEGORY

BRAND EXAMPLES

FEATURES AND COMMENTS

ORAL SUPPLEMENTS
Standard, cow’s milk protein

Boost Kid Essentials 1.0 or 1.5 (with or without fiber)
PediaSure 1.0 or 1.5 (with or without fiber)
Nutren Jr 1.0 (with or without fiber)
Kate Farms Pediatric Standard 1.2
*EnfaGrow
*Nido
*Scandishake

May or may not contain lactose.

Semi-­elemental

Kate Farms Pediatric Peptide 1.5
PediaSure Peptide 1.0 or 1.5
Peptamen Jr

Used for malabsorption. Contains MCT.

Elemental

EleCare Junior
Neocate Splash
Neocate Jr
Puramino
Peptamen Jr

Used for malabsorption or severe protein allergy.
Contains MCT.

Soy protein

Bright Beginnings Soy
Pediasmart Soy

Cow-­milk protein free.

Clear liquid

*Boost Breeze
*Ensure Clear

Clear liquid, fruit flavored, fat free; cow’s milk protein
source. For supplemental nutrition only; none are a
complete nutrition supplement.

Wound healing supplement

Juven
Arginaid

Arginaid: l-­Arginine only. Juven: Arginine glutamine,
and betahydroxy-­betamethylbutyrate.

Boost Kid Essentials 1.0, 1.5
Nutren Junior
PediaSure 1.0

Isotonic, most available with or without additional
fiber.

High calorie

Boost Kid Essentials 1.5 (1.5 kcal/mL)
PediaSure 1.5 (1.5 kcal/mL)
Kate Farms Pediatric Peptide 1.5 (1.5 kcal/mL)

For increased caloric needs or fluid restriction.

Food-­based formulas

Compleat Pediatric (1.0 kcal/mL)
Compleat Pediatric Reduced Calorie (0.6 kcal/mL)
Compleat Pediatric Organic Blends (1.2 kcal/mL)
PediaSure Harvest (1.0 kcal/mL)
Kate Farms Pediatric Standard (1.2 kcal/mL)
Nourish (1.13 kcal/mL)

TUBE FEEDING
Standard, cow’s milk protein

List of products is not exhaustive and does not imply endorsement. Pediatric formulas are appropriate for children ages 1-­11 years and are not appropriate for use in infants. After 11
years, adult formulations (not listed) may be used.
*Does not provide complete sole source of nutrition.
Adapted from Pediatric Nutrition Handbook/internal guide at Children’s Hospital Colorado.

The response to feeding depends on the specific diagnosis, medical treatment, and severity of malnutrition. The same anthropometric measures used to diagnose malnutrition can be used to measure
progress and recovery from the malnourished state. Target recovery
growth is 150% of the normal rate of weight gain for age (Table
64.6). Many children with malnutrition require empiric micronutrient supplementation with zinc (and thiamine, if concerns about
refeeding). Iron deficiency is also common in young children, but
supplementation is most effective if initiated after resolution of any
acute inflammatory processes (such as infection) and is typically
not initiated until after 1-­2 weeks of successful weight restoration.
Additional supplementation for other micronutrients such as vitamin D and vitamin A can be considered based on symptoms and
laboratory evaluation.

Interventions for contributing psychosocial factors are ideally targeted to the underlying issue, such as maternal depression or insufficient funds for food. Some children who develop feeding aversion
behaviors will require treatment by a specialized feeding team. If abuse
or purposeful neglect is a concern, the family should be referred to the
child protective services team.
Kwashiorkor has a specific set of treatment guidelines from the
WHO, including empiric antibiotics and avoidance of intravenous
fluids and rapid repletion, as this can precipitate heart failure. Treatment of kwashiorkor in a low-­resource setting is discussed in more
detail in Chapter 62. In a high-­resource setting, treatment may involve
continuous feeds of a semi-­elemental formula through a nasogastric
tube to stabilize blood sugars in conjunction with close monitoring of
electrolytes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 64 u Malnutrition in High-­Resource Settings

437

Table 64.5  Calorie Boosters for Oral and Enteral Feeding
Kcal/g

Kcal/Tbsp

FEATURES AND COMMENTS

Cornstarch

3.8

33

Can add to formula or water to treat hypoglycemia in glycogen
storage disease or other disorders; dose per weight, age, and
glucose levels; suggested starting dose of 0.5 g per kg per feed.

Infant rice cereal

—­

15

Thickens formula, not human milk; start with 1 teaspoon rice
cereal/oz formula (adds 5 kcal/oz, dilutes other nutrients). Not
recommended to administer through feeding tube.

FAT
MCT oil

8.3

116

7.7 kcal/mL; does not mix well, can administer as small bolus.

Heavy whipping cream

50

3.3 kcal/mL can be added to milk or nutritional supplements.

Butter

100

Easy to mix and use in a variety of foods.

CARBOHYDRATE (CHO)

PROTEIN
Beneprotein

3.6

16.7

100% whey protein; 1 packet = 1 scoop = 7 g weight, 6 g protein,
25 kcal; can add to formula, human milk, food, or beverages.

COMBINATION
Duocal

4.9

42

Hydrolyzed corn starch and fat (35% MCT); can add to formula,
human milk, food, or beverages.

MCT Procal

6.6

—­

1 packet (16 g) = 105 kcal, 10 g MCT, 2 g protein. For altered fat
absorption or metabolism. Contains MCT and milk protein; can
add to formula, food, and beverages.
1 packet (36 g) = 140 kcal

Carnation Instant Breakfast

Table 64.6  Weight Gain Velocity (0-­2 Years of Age, g/day)
AGE (MONTHS)

EXPECTED GROWTH (g/DAY)

Preterm infant

30-­40

0-­3

20-­30

30-­45

3-­6

15-­20

20-­30

6-­9

10-­15

15-­20

9-­12

10

15

12-­24

6

10

PROGNOSIS

Malnutrition, regardless of cause, can potentially have a detrimental
effect on physical and intellectual growth and development, especially
in infants younger than 2 years old. Early diagnosis and treatment of
acute malnutrition may avoid long-­term consequences. Multiple studies point to a negative impact of chronic malnutrition and stunting on

CATCH-­UP GROWTH (g/DAY)

intelligence quotient (IQ) later in life. Pediatric medical providers are
encouraged to approach nutritional status in children as a controllable
factor that can have a profound influence on brain function throughout
life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

438 Part V u Nutrition
ETIOLOGY

Chapter 65

Overweight and Obesity
Sheila Gahagan
EPIDEMIOLOGY

Obesity is an important pediatric public health problem associated
with risk of complications in childhood and increased morbidity and
mortality throughout adult life. Obesity is linked to more deaths than
underweight. In 2016, according to the World Health Organization
(WHO), 39% of adults aged 18 years and older were overweight and
13% were obese.
In the United States, child and adolescent obesity prevalence has
increased by 300% over the past 40 years. In 2017–2018, the U.S.
prevalence of pediatric obesity was 19.3%, affecting about 14.4 million children and adolescents. Obesity prevalence increases by age-­
group, with 13.4% of 2-­to 5-­year-­olds, 20.3% of 6-­to 11-­year-­olds,
and 21.2% of 12-­to 19-­year-­olds affected. Some U.S. populations
have higher rates of childhood obesity than others do. Prevalence
of obesity in children was 25.6% among Hispanic children, 24.2%
among non-­Hispanic Black children, 16.1% in non-­Hispanic White
children, and 8.7% in non-­Hispanic Asian children. Higher maternal education confers protection against childhood obesity across all
ethnic groups.
The first 1,000 days, the period from conception to age 2 years, are
a modifiable period related to risk for childhood obesity. Recommendations for the first 1,000 days include (1) a healthy and nutritious
diet during pregnancy; (2) good care for all mothers during pregnancy; (3) exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months; (4) nurturing and
responsive care for infants and toddlers; (5) the right foods introduced to babies at the right time; (6) water and other healthy beverages with no added sugars for toddlers; (7) a healthy and nutritious
diet for babies and toddlers; (8) the right knowledge and skills for
parents and caregivers to properly nourish young children; (9) consistent access to enough nutritious food for families of young children; and (10) societal investments in the well-­being of every baby
and toddler (for further information see https://thousanddays.org/re
source/nourishing-­americas-­future/).
Parental obesity correlates with a higher risk for obesity in the
children. Prenatal factors, including high preconceptual weight, gestational weight gain, high birthweight, and maternal smoking, are associated with increased risk for later obesity. Paradoxically, intrauterine
growth restriction with early infant catch-­up growth is associated with
the development of central adiposity and adult-­onset cardiovascular (CV) risk. Breastfeeding is modestly protective for obesity based
on dose and duration. Infants with high levels of negative reactivity
(temperament) are more at risk for obesity than those with better self-­
regulation. The incidence of obesity in children was noted to increase
during the COVID-­19 pandemic.

BODY MASS INDEX

Obesity, or increased adiposity, is defined using the body mass index
(BMI), an excellent proxy for more direct measurement of body fat.
BMI = weight in kg/(height in meters)2. Adults with a BMI ≥30 meet
the criterion for obesity, and those with a BMI 25-­30 fall in the overweight range. During childhood, levels of body fat change beginning with high adiposity during infancy. Body fat levels decrease for
approximately 5.5 years until the period called adiposity rebound, when
body fat is typically at the lowest level. Adiposity then increases until
early adulthood (Fig. 65.1). Consequently, obesity and overweight are
defined using BMI percentiles for children ≥2 years old and weight/
length percentiles for infants <2 years old. The criterion for obesity is
BMI ≥95th percentile, and for overweight is BMI between 85th and
95th percentiles.

Humans have the capacity to store energy in adipose tissue, allowing
improved survival in times of famine. Simplistically, obesity results
from an imbalance of caloric intake and energy expenditure. Even
incremental but sustained caloric excess results in excess adiposity.
Individual adiposity is the result of a complex interplay among genetically determined body habitus, appetite, nutritional intake, physical
activity (PA), and energy expenditure. Environmental factors determine levels of available food, preferences for types of foods, levels of
PA, and preferences for types of activities. Food preferences play a role
in the consumption of energy-­dense foods. Humans innately prefer
sweet and salty foods and tend initially to reject bitter flavors, common
to many vegetables. Repeated exposure to healthy foods promotes their
acceptance and liking, especially in early life. This human characteristic
to adapt to novel foods can be used to promote healthy food selection.

Environmental Changes

Over more than 4 decades, the food environment changed dramatically related to urbanization and the food industry as fewer families
routinely prepare meals. Foods prepared by a food industry have
higher levels of calories, simple carbohydrates, and fat. The price of
many foods has declined relative to the family budget. These changes,
in combination with marketing pressure, have resulted in larger portion sizes and increased snacking between meals. The increased consumption of high-­
carbohydrate beverages, including sodas, sport
drinks, fruit punch, and juice, adds to these factors.
According to the National Center for Health Statistics, fast food is
consumed by 36.3% of 2-­to 19-­year-­old U.S. children each day and by
two thirds of children every week. A typical fast-­food meal can contain 2,000 kcal and 84 g of fat. Many children consume four servings
of high-­carbohydrate beverages per day, resulting in an additional 560
kcal of low nutritional value. Sweetened beverages have been linked
to increased risk for obesity. The dramatic increase in the use of high-­
fructose corn syrup to sweeten beverages and prepared foods is another
important environmental change, leading to availability of inexpensive
calories.
Since World War II, levels of PA in children and adults have declined.
According to the 2017 National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) survey, 26.1% of adolescents met PA guidelines of
60 minutes of PA per day. Only 20% met guidelines for aerobic PA and
muscle strengthening. The persistence of low levels of PA is related to
many factors, including changes in the built environment, more reliance on cars, lower levels of active transportation, safety issues, and
increasingly sedentary lifestyles. Many sectors of society do not engage
in PA during leisure time. For children, budgetary constraints and
pressure for academic performance have led to less time devoted to
physical education in schools. Perception of poor neighborhood safety
also leads to lower levels of PA. Furthermore, screens (televisions, tablets, smartphones, computers) offer compelling sedentary activities
that do not burn calories.
Sleep plays a role in the risk for obesity. Over the past 4 decades,
children and adults have decreased the amount of time spent sleeping. Reasons for these changes may relate to increased time at work,
increased time watching television, and a generally faster pace of life.
Chronic partial sleep loss can increase risk for weight gain and obesity,
with the impact possibly greater in children than in adults. In studies of young, healthy, lean men, short sleep duration was associated
with decreased leptin levels and increased ghrelin levels, along with
increased hunger and appetite. Sleep debt also results in decreased glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity related to alterations in glucocorticoids and sympathetic activity. Some effects of sleep debt might
relate to orexins, peptides synthesized in the lateral hypothalamus that
can increase feeding, arousal, sympathetic activity, and neuropeptide
Y activity.

Genetics

Genetic determinants also have a role in individual susceptibility to
obesity (Table 65.1). Findings from genome-­wide association studies
explain a very small portion of interindividual variability in obesity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 65 u Overweight and Obesity

2 to 20 years: Boys
Body mass index-for-age percentiles
Date

Age

Weight

Stature

NAME
RECORD #
Comments

BMI*

BMI
35
34
33
32
31
30
95

29
28

BMI
90

27

27
85

26

26

25

25
75

24

24

23

23
50

22

22

21

21
25

20

20
10

19

19

5

18

18

17

17

16

16

15

15

14

14

13

13

12

12

kg/m

2

AGE (YEARS)
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

kg/m

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00).
SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000).
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts

A
Fig. 65.1 A, Body mass index (BMI)-­for-­age profiles for boys and men.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

20

2

439

440 Part V u Nutrition

2 to 20 years: Girls
Body mass index-for-age percentiles
Date

Age

Weight

Stature

NAME
RECORD #
Comments

BMI*

BMI
35
34
33
32
31

95

30
29
BMI

28

90

27

27

26

26

85

25

25

24

24

75

23

23
22

22
50

21

21

20

20

25

19

19
10

18

18

5

17

17

16

16

15

15

14

14

13

13

12

12

kg/m

2

AGE (YEARS)
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

kg/m

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

2

20

Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00).
SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with
the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000).
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts

B
Fig. 65.1, cont’d B, BMI-­for-­age profiles for girls and women. Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2000. See www.cdc.gov/growthcharts.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 65 u Overweight and Obesity

Table 65.1  Endocrine and Genetic Causes of Obesity
DISEASE
ENDOCRINE
Cushing syndrome
GH deficiency
Hyperinsulinism
Hypothyroidism
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
GENETIC/SYNDROMIC
Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy
Alström syndrome
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
BDNF/TrkB deficiency
Biemond syndrome
Carpenter syndrome
Cohen syndrome
Deletion 9q34
Down syndrome
ENPP1 gene
Fragile X
Fröhlich syndrome
FTO gene polymorphism, plus
upstream regulatory and
downstream activation genes
Kabuki syndrome
Kleefstra syndrome
KSR2 deficiency
Leptin or leptin receptor gene
deficiency
Leptin variant (antagonistic)
Melanocortin 4 receptor gene
mutation
MEHMO
MORM
PCSK1 deficiency
Prader-­Willi syndrome

441

SYMPTOMS

LABORATORY

Central obesity, hirsutism, moon face, hypertension
Short stature, slow linear growth
Nesidioblastosis, pancreatic adenoma, hypoglycemia, Mauriac syndrome
Short stature, weight gain, fatigue, constipation, cold intolerance, myxedema
Short metacarpals, subcutaneous calcifications, dysmorphic facies,
intellectual disability, short stature, hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia

Dexamethasone suppression test
Evoked GH response, IGF-­1
Insulin level
TSH, FT4
Urine cAMP after synthetic PTH
infusion

Short stature, skeletal defects, PTH resistance

GNAS gene, in syndromic but also
in isolated nonsyndromic obesity
ALMS1 gene

Cognitive impairment, retinitis pigmentosa, insulin-­resistant diabetes
mellitus, hearing loss, hypogonadism, cardiomyopathy
Retinitis pigmentosa, renal abnormalities, polydactyly, syndactyly,
hypogonadism
Hyperactivity, impaired concentration, limited attention span, impaired
short-­term memory and pain sensation
Cognitive impairment, iris coloboma, hypogonadism, polydactyly
Polydactyly, syndactyly, cranial synostosis, intellectual disability
Mid-­childhood-­onset obesity, short stature, prominent maxillary incisors,
hypotonia, intellectual disability, microcephaly, decreased visual activity,
neutropenia, joint laxity
Early-­onset obesity, intellectual disability, brachycephaly, synophrys,
prognathism, behavior and sleep disturbances
Short stature, dysmorphic facies, intellectual disability
Insulin resistance, childhood obesity
Long facies, large, prominent ears, macroorchidism, autism
Hypothalamic tumor
Dysregulation of orexigenic hormone acyl-­ghrelin, poor postprandial
appetite suppression
Characteristic facies, intellectual disability, visceral and skeletal malformations
Intellectual disability, autism-­like behavior, hypotonia, cardiac defects
Mild hyperphagia and reduced basal metabolic rate, insulin resistance
often with acanthosis nigricans, irregular menses, early development of
type 2 diabetes mellitus
Early-­onset severe obesity, infertility (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism),
hyperphagia, infections
Hyperphagia, obesity; treatment with high dose recombinant leptin
Early-­onset severe obesity, increased linear growth, hyperphagia,
hyperinsulinemia; most common known genetic cause of obesity;
homozygous worse than heterozygous
Intellectual disability, epilepsy, hypogonadism, microcephaly, obesity
Intellectual disability, obesity, retinal dystrophy, micropenis
Small bowel enteropathy, hypoglycemia, hypothyroidism, ACTH
deficiency, diabetes insipidus
Neonatal hypotonia, slow infant growth, small hands and feet, intellectual
disability, hypogonadism, hyperphagia leading to severe obesity,
paradoxically elevated ghrelin

∼21 different genes
BDNF/TrkB gene
RAB23 gene, located on
chromosome 6 in humans
VPS13B gene (often called COH1)
at locus 8q22
Deletion 9q34
Trisomy 21
Gene on chromosome 6q
FMR1; CGG repeat expansion >200
Homozygous for FTO AA allele
KMT2D, MLL2, ALR, KABUK1
EHMT1
KSR2 gene
Leptin
High leptin levels
MC4R variant
Xp22.13-­p21.1
INPP5E
PCSK1 gene
Partial deletion of chromosome 15
or loss of paternally expressed
genes: MKRN3, ZNF127,
MAGEL2, SNRPN
Loss-­of-­function of POMC gene

Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
deficiency

Obesity, red hair, pale skin, adrenal insufficiency due to ACTH deficiency,
hyperproinsulinemia, hyperphagia, cholestatic jaundice

Rapid-­onset obesity with
hypothalamic dysfunction,
hypoventilation, and
autonomic dysregulation
(ROHHAD); ROHHADNET (with
neuroendocrine tumor)
Rubinstein-­Taylor syndrome
SH2B1 deficiency

Often confused with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome
(CCHS); presentation ≥1.5 yr with weight gain, hyperphagia,
hypoventilation, cardiac arrest, central diabetes insipidus,
hypothyroidism, GH deficiency, pain insensitivity, hypothermia,
precocious puberty, and neural crest tumors

Unknown genes
May be a paraneoplastic disorder

Short stature, visual impairment, scoliosis, dysmorphic facies
Hyperphagia, disproportionate hyperinsulinemia, early speech and language
delay that often resolves, behavioral problems including aggression
Hyperphagia with autonomic dysfunction (characterized by low systolic
blood pressure), speech and language delay, neurobehavioral
abnormalities including autistic-­type behaviors
Intellectual disability, delayed speech, facial dysmorphology
Retinal dystrophy, deafness
Ovarian dysgenesis, lymphedema, web neck, short stature, cognitive
impairment
Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, mental retardation, obesity

CREBBP, EP300
SH2B1 gene

SIM1 deficiency
(Prader-­Willi–like)
Smith-­Magenis syndrome
TUB deficiency
Turner syndrome
WAGRO

SIM1gene
RAI1
TUB gene
XO chromosome
BDNF

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; FT4, free thyroxine; GH, growth hormone; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor; PTH, parathyroid hormone;
TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

442 Part V u Nutrition
One important example, the FTO gene at 16q12, is associated with adiposity in childhood, probably explained by increased energy intake.
Monogenic forms of obesity have also been identified, including melanocortin-­4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency, associated with early-­onset
obesity and food-­seeking behavior. Pathogenic variants in MC4R are
a common cause of monogenetic obesity but a rare (0.1%) cause of
obesity in general. Deficient activation of MC4R is also seen in patients
with proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency, a prohormone precursor of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and melanocyte-­
stimulating hormone (MSH), resulting in adrenal insufficiency, light
skin, red hair, hyperphagia, and obesity. Leptin releases MSH, which
can then activate MC4R, affecting appetite.
In addition, evidence suggests that appetitive traits are moderately
heritable. Some genes associated with appetite also relate to weight, and
vice-­versa. In addition, there are genetic conditions associated with
obesity, such as Prader-­Willi syndrome, which results from absence
of paternally expressed imprinted genes in the 15q11.2-­q13 region.
Prader-­Willi syndrome is characterized by insatiable appetite and food
seeking. In the era of genomic medicine, it will be increasingly possible to identify risks according to specific genes and consider gene-­
environment interactions. Epigenetic environmental modification of
genes may have a role in the development of obesity, especially during
fetal and early life.

Endocrine and Neural Physiology

Monitoring of “stored fuels” and short-­term control of food intake
(appetite and satiety) occurs through neuroendocrine feedback loops
linking adipose tissue, the GI tract, and the CNS (Figs. 65.2 and 65.3).
GI hormones, including cholecystokinin, glucagon-­like peptide 1, peptide YY (PYY), and vagal neuronal feedback, promote satiety. Ghrelin
stimulates appetite. Adipose tissue provides feedback regarding energy
storage levels to the brain through hormonal release of adiponectin and
leptin. These hormones act on the arcuate nucleus in the hypothalamus
and on the solitary tract nucleus in the brainstem and in turn activate
distinct neuronal networks. Adipocytes secrete adiponectin into the
blood, with reduced levels in response to obesity and increased levels
in response to fasting. Reduced adiponectin levels are associated with
lower insulin sensitivity and adverse CV outcomes. Leptin is directly
involved in satiety; low leptin levels stimulate food intake, and high
leptin levels inhibit hunger in animal models and in healthy human
volunteers. However, the negative feedback loop from leptin to appetite
may be more adapted to preventing starvation than excess intake.
Numerous neuropeptides in the brain, including PYY agouti-­related
peptide, and orexin, appear to affect appetite stimulation, whereas
melanocortins and α-­melanocortin–stimulating hormone are involved
in satiety (see Fig. 65.3). The neuroendocrine control of appetite and
weight involves a negative feedback system, balanced between short-­
term control of appetite and long-­term control of adiposity (including
leptin). PYY reduces food intake via the vagal-­brainstem-­hypothalamic
pathway. Developmental changes in PYY are evident, as infants have
higher PYY levels than school-­aged children and adults. Obese children have lower fasting levels of PYY than adults. Weight loss may
restore PYY levels in children, even though this does not happen in
adults. In addition, patients homozygous for the FTO obesity-­risk allele
demonstrate poor regulation of the orexigenic hormone acyl-­ghrelin
and have poor postprandial appetite suppression.

COMORBIDITIES

Complications of pediatric obesity occur during childhood and adolescence and persist into adulthood. An important reason to prevent and
treat pediatric obesity is the increased risk for morbidity and mortality
later in life. Males who are overweight during adolescence are twice as
likely to die from CV disease as those who have normal weight. More
immediate comorbidities include type 2 diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (Table 65.2).
Insulin resistance increases with increasing adiposity and independently affects lipid metabolism and CV health. Metabolic syndrome
(central obesity, hypertension, glucose intolerance, and hyperlipidemia) increases the risk for CV morbidity and mortality. NAFLD has

been reported in 34% of patients treated in a pediatric obesity clinic.
NAFLD is the most common chronic liver disease in U.S. children and
adolescents. It can present with advanced fibrosis or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and may result in cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Insulin resistance is often associated. NAFLD is also independently
associated with increased risk of CV disease.
Obesity may also be associated with chronic inflammation. Adiponectin, a peptide with antiinflammatory properties, occurs in reduced
levels in obese patients compared with insulin-­sensitive, lean persons.
Low adiponectin levels correlate with elevated levels of free fatty acids
and plasma triglycerides in addition to a high BMI, and high adiponectin levels correlate with peripheral insulin sensitivity. Adipocytes secrete
peptides and cytokines into the circulation, and proinflammatory peptides such interleukin (IL)-­6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α occur
in higher levels in obese patients. Specifically, IL-­6 stimulates production
of CRP in the liver. CRP is a marker of inflammation and might link
obesity, coronary disease, and subclinical inflammation.
Some complications of obesity are mechanical, including obstructive
sleep apnea and orthopedic complications. Orthopedic complications
include Blount disease and slipped femoral capital epiphysis (see Chapters 718 and 719.4).
Mental health problems can coexist with obesity, with the possibility of bidirectional effects. These associations are modified by gender,
ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Self-­esteem may be lower in obese
adolescent females than in nonobese peers. Some studies have found
an association between obesity and adolescent depression. There is
considerable interest in the co-­occurrence of eating disorders and obesity. Obese youth are also at risk for bullying.

IDENTIFICATION

Overweight and obese children are often identified as part of routine
medical care. The child and family may be unaware that the child has
increased adiposity. They may be unhappy with the medical provider
for raising this issue and may respond with denial or apparent lack of
concern. It is often necessary to begin by helping the family understand
the importance of healthy weight for current and future health. Forging
a good therapeutic relationship is important because obesity intervention requires a chronic disease management approach. Intervention
and successful resolution of this problem require considerable effort
by the family and the child over an extended period in order to change
eating and activity behaviors.

EVALUATION

The evaluation of the overweight or obese child begins with examination of the growth chart for weight, height, and BMI trajectories;
consideration of possible medical causes of obesity; and detailed exploration of family eating, nutritional, and activity patterns. A complete
pediatric history is used to uncover comorbid disorders. The family
history focuses on the adiposity of other family members and the family history of obesity-­associated disorders. The physical examination
adds data that can lead to important diagnoses. Laboratory testing is
guided by the need to identify comorbidities.
Examination of the growth chart reveals the severity, duration, and
timing of obesity onset. Children who are overweight (BMI in 85th-­
95th percentile) are less likely to have developed comorbid conditions
than those who are obese (BMI ≥95th percentile). Those with a BMI
≥99th percentile are most likely to have coexisting medical problems.
Once obesity severity is determined, the BMI trajectory is examined to
elucidate when the child became obese. Several periods during childhood are considered sensitive periods, or times of increased risk for
developing obesity, including infancy, adiposity rebound (when body
fat is lowest at approximately age 5.5 years), and adolescence. An
abrupt change in BMI might signal the onset of a medical problem
or a period of family or personal stress for the child. Examination of
the weight trajectory can further reveal how the problem developed.
A young child might exhibit high weight and high height because linear growth can increase early in childhood if a child consumes excess
energy. At some point the weight percentile exceeds the height percentile, and the child’s BMI climbs into the obese range. Another example

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 65 u Overweight and Obesity

443

Behavioral Outputs

Hypothalamus

Au
O tono
ut m
pu ic
ts

Brainstem
Pituitary
Metabolic
Regulation
Autonomic
Afferents

Leptin
Endocrine
Outputs

Insulin
Ghrelin
PYY
CCK
GLP-1
Bombesin
Nutrients

Autonomic
Outputs

Fat
Autonomic
Outputs

Stomach
Liver

Pancreas

Nutrients

Fig. 65.2 Regulation of energy homeo-

stasis by the brain-­gut-­adipose axis. CCK,
Cholecystokinin; GLP-­1, glucagon-­like
peptide 1; PYY, peptide YY. (From Melmed
S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg
HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016,
p. 1610.)

Muscle,
Other Tissues

is a child whose weight rapidly increases when they reduce their activity level and consume more meals away from home. Examination of
the height trajectory can reveal endocrine problems, which often occur
with slowing of linear growth.
Consideration of possible medical causes of obesity is essential, even
though endocrine, syndromic, and monogenetic causes are rare (see
Table 65.1). Growth hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism, and Cushing
syndrome are examples of endocrine disorders that can lead to obesity.
In general, these disorders manifest with slow linear growth. Because
children who consume excessive amounts of calories tend to experience accelerated linear growth, short stature warrants further evaluation. Genetic disorders associated with obesity may manifest extreme
hyperphagia, or they can have coexisting dysmorphic features, cognitive
impairment, vision and hearing abnormalities, or short stature. In some
children with congenital disorders such as myelodysplasia or muscular

Autonomic
Outputs

dystrophy, lower levels of PA can lead to secondary obesity. Some medications, such as atypical antipsychotics, can cause excessive appetite and
hyperphagia, resulting in obesity (Table 65.3). Rapid weight gain in a
child or adolescent taking one of these medications might require its discontinuation. Poor linear growth and rapid changes in weight gain are
indications for evaluation of possible medical causes.
Exploration of family eating, nutritional, and activity patterns begins
with a description of regular meal and snack times and family habits for walking, bicycle riding, active recreation, and screen time (TV,
computer, video games). It is useful to request a 24-­hour dietary recall
with special attention to intake of fruits, vegetables, and water, as well
as high-­calorie foods and high-­carbohydrate beverages. When possible, evaluation by a nutritionist is extremely helpful. This information
will form the basis for incremental changes in eating behavior, caloric
intake, and PA during the intervention.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

444 Part V u Nutrition

CNS
LPB

AP
NTS
DMV

PVN

CEA
BST

LH

POMC

RET

ARC
ME
POMC/AGRP

Vagal
afferent

Adiposity signals
Satiety signals
Leptin
CCK
Fig. 65.3 Brain structures involved in energy homeostasis. Receipt of long-­term adipostatic signals and acute satiety signals by neurons in arcuate nucleus and brainstem, respectively. Pale-­blue boxes indicate nuclei containing proopiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons; tan boxes indicate
nuclei containing melanocortin-­4 receptor (MC4R) neurons that may serve to integrate adipostatic and satiety signals; and darker-­blue boxes
show some circumventricular organs involved in energy homeostasis. Magenta arrows designate a subset of projections of POMC neurons; blue
arrows show a subset of projections of agouti-­related peptide (AGRP) neurons. AP, Area postrema; ARC, arcuate nucleus; BST, bed nucleus of
stria terminalis; CCK, cholecystokinin; CEA, central nucleus of amygdala; CNS, central nervous system; DMV, dorsal motor nucleus of vagus; LH,
lateral hypothalamic area; LPB, lateral parabrachial nucleus; ME, median eminence; NTS, nucleus tractus solitarius; PVN, paraventricular nucleus
of hypothalamus; RET, reticular formation. (Modified from Fan W, Ellacott KL, Halatchev IG, Takahashi K, Yu P, Cone RD. Cholecystokinin-­mediated
suppression of feeding involves the brainstem melanocortin system. Nat Neurosci. 2004;7[4]:335–336.)

Table 65.2

Obesity-­Associated Comorbidities

DISEASE

POSSIBLE SYMPTOMS

LABORATORY CRITERIA

CARDIOVASCULAR
Dyslipidemia
Hypertension

HDL <40, LDL >130, total cholesterol >200 mg/dL
SBP >95% for sex, age, height

Fasting total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, triglycerides
Serial testing, urinalysis, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen,
creatinine

ENDOCRINE
Type 2 diabetes mellitus

Acanthosis nigricans, polyuria, polydipsia

Fasting blood glucose >110, hemoglobin A1c, insulin
level, C-­peptide, oral glucose tolerance test
Fasting glucose, LDL and HDL cholesterol

Metabolic syndrome
Polycystic ovary syndrome
GASTROINTESTINAL
Gallbladder disease
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD)
NEUROLOGIC
Pseudotumor cerebri
Migraines
ORTHOPEDIC
Blount disease (tibia vara)
Musculoskeletal problems
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
PSYCHOLOGIC
Behavioral complications

PULMONARY
Asthma
Obstructive sleep apnea

Central adiposity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia,
hypertension, glucose intolerance
Irregular menses, hirsutism, acne, insulin
resistance, hyperandrogenemia

Pelvic ultrasound, free testosterone, LH, FSH

Abdominal pain, vomiting, jaundice
Hepatomegaly, abdominal pain, dependent
edema, ↑ transaminases
Can progress to fibrosis, cirrhosis

Ultrasound
AST, ALT, ultrasound, CT, or MRI

Headaches, vision changes, papilledema
Hemicrania, headaches

Cerebrospinal fluid opening pressure, CT, MRI
None

Severe bowing of tibia, knee pain, limp
Back pain, joint pain, frequent strains or sprains,
limp, hip pain, groin pain, leg bowing
Hip pain, knee pain, limp, decreased mobility of hip

Knee radiographs
Radiographs

Anxiety, depression, low self-­esteem, disordered
eating, signs of depression, worsening school
performance, social isolation, problems with
bullying or being bullied

Child Behavior Checklist, Children’s Depression Inventory,
Peds QL, Eating Disorder Inventory 2, subjective ratings
of stress and depression, Behavior Assessment System
for Children, Pediatric Symptom Checklist

Shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing,
exercise intolerance
Snoring, apnea, restless sleep, behavioral
problems

Pulmonary function tests, peak flow

Hip radiographs

Polysomnography, hypoxia, electrolytes (respiratory
acidosis with metabolic alkalosis)

ALT, Alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; CT, computed tomography; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; HDL, high-­density lipoprotein; LDL, low-­density lipoprotein;
LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; Peds QL, Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory; SBP, systolic blood pressure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 65 u Overweight and Obesity
Table 65.3

Medications Associated with Obesity

Prednisone and other glucocorticoids
Thioridazine
Olanzapine
Clozapine
Quetiapine
Risperidone
Lithium
Amitriptyline and other tricyclic antidepressants
Paroxetine
Valproate
Carbamazepine
Gabapentin
Cyproheptadine
Propranolol and other β blockers

445

Table 65.4  Normal Laboratory Values for
Recommended Tests
LABORATORY TEST

NORMAL VALUE

Glucose

<110 mg/dL

Insulin

<15 mU/L

Hemoglobin A1c

<5.7%

AST (age 2-­8 yr)

<58 U/L

AST (age 9-­15 yr)

<46 U/L

AST (age 15-­18 yr)

<35 U/L

ALT

<35 U/L

Total cholesterol

<170 mg/dL

LDL

<110 mg/dL

HDL

>45 mg/dL

Triglycerides (age 0-­9 yr)

<75 mg/dL

Triglycerides (age 10-­19 yr)

<90 mg/dL

AST, Aspartate transaminase; ALT, alanine transaminase; LDL, low-­density lipoprotein;
HDL, high-­density lipoprotein.
From Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin. The NEW (nutrition, exercise and weight
management) kids program. http://www.chw.org/display/displayFile.asp?docid=33672&
filename=/Groups/NEWKids/NewKidsReferral.PDF.

Fig. 65.4 Acanthosis nigricans. From Gahagan S. Child and adolescent obesity. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. 2004;34:6–43.

Initial assessment of the overweight or obese child includes a complete review of bodily systems, focusing on the possibility of comorbid
conditions (see Table 65.2). Developmental delay and visual and hearing impairment can be associated with genetic disorders. Difficulty
sleeping, snoring, or daytime sleepiness suggests sleep apnea. Abdominal pain might suggest NAFLD. Symptoms of polyuria, nocturia, or
polydipsia may be the result of type 2 diabetes. Hip or knee pain can
be caused by secondary orthopedic problems, including Blount disease
and slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Irregular menses may be associated with polycystic ovary syndrome. Acanthosis nigricans can suggest
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (Fig. 65.4).
The family history begins with identifying other obese family
members. Parental obesity is an important risk for child obesity. If
all family members are obese, focusing the intervention on the entire
family is reasonable. The child may be at increased risk for developing type 2 diabetes if a family history exists. Identification of a family
history of hypertension, CV disease, or metabolic syndrome indicates
increased risk for developing these obesity-­associated conditions. If
the clinician helps the family to understand that childhood obesity
increases the risk for developing these chronic diseases, this educational intervention might serve as motivation to improve their nutrition and PA.
Physical examination should be thorough, focusing on possible
comorbidities (see Table 65.2). Careful screening for hypertension
using an appropriately sized blood pressure cuff is important. Systematic examination of the skin can reveal acanthosis nigricans,
suggesting insulin resistance, or hirsutism, suggesting polycystic
ovary syndrome. Tanner staging can reveal premature adrenarche
secondary to advanced sexual maturation in overweight and obese
females.
Laboratory testing for fasting plasma glucose, triglycerides, low-­
density lipoprotein and high-­density lipoprotein cholesterol, and liver

function tests are recommended as part of the initial evaluation for
newly identified pediatric obesity (Table 65.4). Overweight children
(BMI 85th-­95th percentile) who have a family history of diabetes mellitus or signs of insulin resistance should also be evaluated with a fasting plasma glucose test. Other laboratory testing should be guided by
history or physical examination findings. Figure 65.5 provides a recommended approach to categorization, evaluation, and treatment.

INTERVENTION

Evidence shows that some interventions result in modest but significant
and sustained improvement in body mass. Based on behavior change
theories (see Chapter 18), treatment includes specifying target behaviors,
self-­monitoring, goal setting, stimulus control, and promotion of self-­
efficacy and self-­management skills. Behavior changes associated with
improving BMI include drinking lower quantities of sugar-­sweetened
beverages, consuming higher-­quality diets, increasing exercise, decreasing screen time, and self-­weighing. Most successful interventions have
been family based and consider the child’s developmental age. “Parent-­
only” treatment may be as effective as “parent–child” treatment. Because
obesity is multifactorial, not all children and adolescents will respond to
the same approach. For example, loss-­of-­control eating, associated with
weight gain and obesity, predicts poor outcome in response to family-­
based treatment. Furthermore, clinical treatment programs are expensive and not widely available. Therefore interest has grown in novel
approaches such as internet-­based treatments and guided self-­help.
It is important to begin with clear recommendations about appropriate caloric intake for the obese child (Table 65.5). Working with a
dietitian is essential. Meals should be based on fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, lean meat, fish, and poultry. Prepared foods should be chosen
for their nutritional value, with attention to calories and fat. Foods that
provide excessive calories and low nutritional value should be reserved
for infrequent treats. The World Health Organization recommends
avoiding artificial sweeteners (aspartame, sucralose, stevia).
Weight reduction diets in adults generally do not lead to sustained
weight loss. Therefore the focus should be on changes that can be maintained for life. Attention to eating patterns is helpful. Families should
be encouraged to plan family meals, including breakfast. It is almost
impossible for a child to make changes in nutritional intake and eating patterns if other family members do not make the same changes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

446 Part V u Nutrition
BMI ≥ 85th Percentile

History and physical examination
Abnormal

Normal

Additional evaluations
based on findings

Attenuated
growth
velocity

Neurodevelopmental
abnormalities
or severe
hyperphagia

Anti-psychotic
drug use

CNS injury

Evaluate for obesity
comorbidities (Table 65.2)

Reevaluate
drug therapy/
choice

Present

Absent

Initiate lifestyle
changes and
specific
treatment of
co-morbidity

Initiate
lifestyle
changes

Continued
weight gain
> 6 months

Endocrine
evaluation

Genetic
evaluation

Hypothalamic
obesity

Reevaluate pituitary
function and/or
hormone therapy

Weight loss/
stabilization

Maintain
Consider
support for
pharmacotherapy lifestyle changes
and/or surgery
and comorbidity
treatment

Continued
weight gain

Data supporting use of these
interventions are limited to
pubertal individuals

Is there developmental delay?
Yes

Negative

Karyotype: DNA methylation studies
Positive

Prader-Willi
syndrome

Negative

Is there evidence of
retinal dystrophy,
photophobia, or nystagmus?
Positive

Negative

Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Alstrom syndrome
TUB deficiency

Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy
BDNF, TrkB, SIM1
deficiency

Measure leptin, insulin*, and proinsulin*
Positive

Negative

Congenital leptin
deficiency
PCSK1 deficiency

Molecular genetic
studies

Leptin/leptin receptor deficiency
POMC deficiency
MC4R deficiency
SH2B1 deficiency
KSR2 deficiency

Fig. 65.5 Diagnostic and treatment algorithm for the evaluation of the overweight or obese child. *Measure insulin and proinsulin in patients

with clinical features of PCSK1 deficiency. BMI, Body mass index; CNS, central nervous system. (From Farooqi SOR, O’Rahilly S. Genetic obesity
syndromes. In Grant S, ed. The Genetics of Obesity. New York: Springer; 2014, pp. 23–32; originally adapted from August GP, Caprio S, Fennoy
I, et al. Prevention and treatment of pediatric obesity: An Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline based on expert opinion. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2008;93:4576–4599.)

Dietary needs also change developmentally; adolescents require greatly
increased calories during their growth spurts, and adults who lead
inactive lives need fewer calories than active, growing children.
Psychologic strategies are helpful. The “traffic light” diet groups
foods into those that can be consumed without any limitations
(green), in moderation (yellow), or reserved for infrequent treats

(red) (Table 65.6). The concrete categories are very helpful to children and families. This approach can be adapted to any ethnic group
or regional cuisine. Motivational interviewing begins with assessing
how ready the patient is to make important behavioral changes. The
professional then engages the patient in developing a strategy to take
the next step toward the ultimate goal of healthy nutritional intake.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 65 u Overweight and Obesity
Table 65.5  	

447

Recommended Caloric Intake Designated by Age and Gender

AGE (YR)

RELATIVELY SEDENTARY
LEVEL OF ACTIVITY
(KCAL)

MODERATE LEVEL OF
ACTIVITY (KCAL)

ACTIVE (KCAL)

Child

2-­3

1,000

1,000-­1,400

1,000-­1,400

Female

4-­8

1,200

1,400-­1,600

1,400-­1,800

9-­13

1,600

1,600-­2,000

1,800-­2,200

14-­18

1,800

2,000

2,400

4-­8

1,400

1,400-­1,600

1,600-­2,000

9-­13

1,800

1,800-­2,200

2,000-­2,600

14-­18

2,200

2,400-­2,800

2,800-­3,200

LIFE-­STAGE GROUP

Male

Adapted from U.S. Department of Agriculture. Dietary guidelines for Americans, 2005. http://www.health.gov/DIETARYGUIDELINES/dga2005/document/html/chapter2.htm.

Table 65.6  “Traffic Light” Diet Plan
FEATURE

GREEN LIGHT FOODS

YELLOW LIGHT FOODS

RED LIGHT FOODS

Quality

Low-­calorie, high-­fiber, low-­fat,
nutrient-­dense

Nutrient-­dense, but higher in calories
and fat

High in calories, sugar, and fat

Types of food

Fruits, vegetables

Lean meats, dairy, starches, grains

Fatty meats, sugar, sugar-­sweetened
beverages, fried foods

Quantity

Unlimited

Limited

Infrequent or avoided

This method allows the professional to take the role of a coach,
helping the child and family reach their goals. Other behavioral
approaches include family rules about where food may be consumed
(e.g., “not in the bedroom”).
Increasing PA without decreasing caloric intake is unlikely to
result in weight loss. However, aerobic exercise training improves
metabolic profiles in obese children and adolescents. Furthermore, it
can increase aerobic fitness and decrease percent body fat even without weight loss. Therefore increasing PA can decrease risk for CV
disease, improve well-­being, and contribute to weight loss. Increased
PA can be accomplished by walking to school, engaging in PA during leisure time with family and friends, or enrolling in organized
sports. Children are more likely to be active if their parents are active;
family PA is recommended. When adults lose significant weight, they
may regain that weight despite eating fewer calories. The body may
adapt to weight loss by reducing the basal metabolic rate (BMR), thus
requiring fewer calories. One approach to this phenomenon is to
increase PA.
Active pursuits can replace more sedentary activities. The American
Academy of Pediatrics recommends that screen time be restricted to no
more than 2 hours/day for children >2 years old and that children <2
years old not watch television. Screen time in general, and TV watching
in particular, is often associated with eating and poorer-­quality diets,
as many highly caloric food products are marketed directly to children
during child-­oriented television programs.
Pediatric healthcare providers should assist families to develop goals
to change nutritional intake and PA. They can also provide the child
and family with needed information. The family should not expect
immediate lowering of BMI percentile related to behavioral changes,
but can instead count on a gradual decrease in the rate of BMI percentile increase until it stabilizes, followed by a gradual decrease. Referral to multidisciplinary, comprehensive pediatric weight management
programs is ideal for obese children whenever possible.
Pharmacotherapy for weight loss in the pediatric population is
understudied. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have evaluated

many medications, including metformin, orlistat, sibutramine,
and exenatide (Table 65.7). Available medications result in modest
weight loss or BMI improvement, even when combined with behavioral interventions. Various classes of drugs are of interest, including those that decrease energy intake or act centrally as anorexiants,
those that affect the availability of nutrients through intestinal or
renal tubular reabsorption, and those that affect metabolism. One
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved medication
for obesity in children <16 years old is orlistat, which decreases
absorption of fat, resulting in modest weight loss. Complications
include flatulence, oily stools, and spotting. This agent offers little
benefit to severely obese adolescents.
Saxenda (liraglutide) and semaglutide are also FDA approved for
chronic weight management among pediatric patients aged 12 and
older who are obese. Both drugs are glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, are approved for children ≥12 years old, and have been
effective in reducing weight. In addition, semaglutide improves
adverse cardiometabolic features associated with obesity. Adverse
reactions include headache, abdominal pain, emesis, and diarrhea.
Long-term therapy may increase the risk of medullary thyroid carcinoma and pancreatitis. This class of medication has produced the
most significant weight loss of drug-treated obesity.
Because multiple redundant neural mechanisms act to protect
body weight, promoting weight loss is extremely difficult. Thus
there is considerable interest in combining therapies that simultaneously target multiple weight-­regulating pathways. One promising
example is the combination of amylin analogs (decreases food intake
and slows gastric emptying) with leptin, which has no anorexigenic
effects when given alone. This combination requires injection and is
in clinical trials in adults. Another FDA-­approved drug for adults is
lorcaserin, a selective serotonin 2α receptor agonist. Some medications approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, such as other
glucagon-­like peptide-­1 (GLP-­1) agonists and sodium-­glucose contransporter-­2 (SGLT-­2) inhibitors, are being evaluated for treatment
of obesity in adults. Establishing long-­term safety and tolerability

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

448 Part V u Nutrition
Table 65.7  	

Medications for Weight Management with Mechanism of Action, Availability, and Dosing

MEDICATION

MECHANISM OF
ACTION

AVAILABLE FOR
CHRONIC USE
USA

EU

MEAN PERCENTAGE
WEIGHT LOSS
PLACEBO

DRUG

ADVANTAGES

DISADVANTAGES

Phentermine, 15-­
30 mg PO

Sympathomimetic

For short-­
term
use

No

Not stated in
label

Not stated in
label

Inexpensive

Side effect profile;
no long-­term
data*

Orlistat, 120 mg PO
tid before meals

Pancreatic lipase
inhibitor

Yes

Yes

−2.6%†

−6.1%†

Not absorbed;
long-­term data*

Modest weight loss;
side effect profile

Lorcaserin, 10 mg
PO bid

5-­HT2c serotonin agonist
with little affinity for
other serotonergic
receptors

Yes

No

−2.5%

−5.8%

Mild side effects;
long-­term data*

Expensive; modest
weight loss

Phentermine/
topiramate ER,
7.5 mg/46 mg
or 15 mg/92 mg
PO indicated as
rescue (requires
titration)

Sympathomimetic
anticonvulsant (GABA
receptor modulation,
carbonic anhydrase
inhibition, glutamate
antagonism)

Yes

No

−1.2%

−7.8% (mid-­
dose)
−9.8% (full
dose)

Robust weight
loss; long-­term
data*

Expensive;
teratogen

Naltrexone SR/
bupropion SR,
32 mg/360 mg PO
(requires titration)

Opioid receptor
antagonist; dopamine
and noradrenaline
reuptake inhibitor

Yes

Yes

−1.3%

−5.4%

Reduces food
craving; long-­
term data*

Moderately
expensive; side
effect profile

Liraglutide, 3.0 mg
injection (requires
titration)

GLP-­1 receptor agonist

Yes

Yes

−3%

−7.4% (full
dose)

Side effect profile;
long-­term data*

Expensive;
injectable

Semaglutide, 2.4 mg GLP-1 receptor agonist
once weekly
injection

Yes

Yes

−1%

−10 to −15%

As above

As above

Information is from US product labels, except where noted. The data supporting these tables are derived from the prescribing information labeling approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration.
*Data from randomized controlled trials lasting >52 wk.
†Assuming the average patient in the orlistat and placebo groups weighed 100 kg at baseline.
ER, Extended release; GLP-­1, glucagon-­like peptide-­1; SR, sustained release; PO, orally; bid, twice daily; tid, 3 times daily.
Adapted from Bray GA, Frühbeck G, Ryan DH, Wilding JPH. Management of obesity. Lancet. 2016;387:1947–1965, p. 1950.

in children is a challenge because medications of interest have CNS
effects or interfere with absorption of nutrients. Teratologic effects
must be considered for use in adolescent females. Setmelanotide,
which binds to and activates MC4R, is approved to treat proopiomelanocortin deficiency, leptic receptor deficiency, and proprotein
subtilisin/kexin type 1 disorder. Hormone replacement therapy is
available for patients with leptin deficiency and may become available for patients with POMC deficiency.
In some cases, it is reasonable to refer adolescents for bariatric surgery evaluation. The American Pediatric Surgical Association guidelines
recommend that surgery be considered only in children with complete
or near-­complete skeletal maturity, a BMI ≥40, and a medical complication resulting from obesity, after they have failed 6 months of a multidisciplinary weight management program. Surgical approaches include the
Roux-­en-­Y and the adjustable gastric band (Fig. 65.6). Endoscopically
placed space-­occupying fluid or air-­filled gastric balloons(s) is approved
for adults and may be a nonsurgical intervention. In obese adults, bariatric surgery reduces the risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus.
In obese adult patients with existing type 2 diabetes, bariatric surgery
improves diabetic control. Nutritional complications of bariatric surgery
include malabsorption and vitamin (A, B1, B2, B6, B12, D, E, K) and mineral (copper, iron) deficiencies that require supplementation.

PREVENTION

Prevention of child and adolescent obesity is essential for public health
in the United States and most other countries (Tables 65.8 and 65.9).
Efforts by pediatric providers can supplement national and community

public health programs. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) and
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend
a variety of initiatives to combat the current obesogenic environment,
including promotion of breastfeeding, access to fruits and vegetables,
walkable communities, and 60 minutes/day of activity for children. The
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) sponsors programs promoting 5.5 cups of fruits and vegetables per day. Incentives for the food
industry to promote consumption of healthier foods should be considered. Marketing of unhealthy foods to children is now being regulated.
Changes in federal food programs are expected, including commodity foods, the Women, Infant, and Children Supplemental Food Program (WIC), and school lunch programs, to meet the needs of today’s
children.
Pediatric prevention efforts begin with careful monitoring of weight
and BMI percentiles at healthcare maintenance visits. Attention to
changes in BMI percentiles can alert the pediatric provider to increasing adiposity before the child becomes overweight or obese. All families
should be counseled about healthy nutrition for their children, because
the current prevalence of overweight and obesity in adults is 65%. Therefore approximately two thirds of all children can be considered at risk
for becoming overweight or obese at some time in their lives. Those who
have an obese parent are at increased risk. Prevention efforts begin with
promotion of exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months and total breastfeeding
for 12 months. Introduction of infant foods at 6 months should focus on
cereals, fruits, and vegetables. Lean meats, poultry, and fish may be introduced later in the first year of life. Parents should be specifically counseled to avoid introducing highly sugared beverages and foods in the first

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 65 u Overweight and Obesity

Laparoscopic Adjustable
Gastric Banding

Vertical Banded
Gastroplasty

Roux-en-Y
Gastric Bypass

Biliopancreatic
Diversion

Biliopancreatic Diversion
with Duodenal Switch

Vertical Sleeve
Gastrectomy

Ileal Interposition
with Sleeve Gastrectomy

Santoro III

449

Fig. 65.6 Bariatric surgical procedures, including laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, Roux-­en-­Y gastric bypass, and vertical sleeve gastrectomy techniques.

year of life. Instead, they should expose their infants and young children
to a rich variety of fruits, vegetables, grains, lean meats, poultry, and fish
to facilitate acceptance of a diverse and healthy diet. Parenting matters,
and authoritative parents are more likely to have children with a healthy
weight than those who are authoritarian or permissive. Families who eat
regularly scheduled meals together are less likely to have overweight or
obese children. Child health professionals can address a child’s nutritional status and provide expertise in child growth and development.
Child health professionals can also promote PA during regular
healthcare maintenance visits. Parents who spend some of their leisure time in PA promote healthy weight in their children. Beginning
in infancy, parents should be cognizant of their child’s developmental
capability and need for PA. Because TV, computer, and video game
time can replace health-­
promoting PA, physicians should counsel parents to limit screen time for their children. Snacking during
TV watching should be discouraged. Parents can help their children
to understand that television commercials intend to sell a product.

Children can learn that their parents will help them by responsibly
choosing healthy foods.
Because obesity is determined by complex multifactorial conditions, prevention will take efforts at multiple levels of social organization. Successful programs include EPODE (Ensemble Prévenons
l’Obésité Des Enfants), a multilevel prevention strategy that began
in France and has been adopted by more than 500 communities in 6
countries. Shape Up Somerville is a citywide campaign to increase
daily PA and healthy eating in Somerville, Massachusetts, since 2002.
The “Let’s Move” campaign was championed by former First Lady
Michelle Obama. Because community and environmental factors
are related to pediatric obesity risk, changes in local environments,
daycare centers, schools, and recreational settings can have a public
health impact. Programs can empower families to adopt practices
that promote healthy lifestyles for children and adolescents. The
most successful programs are comprehensive and rely on four strategies: political commitment to change, resources to support social

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

450 Part V u Nutrition
Table 65.8

Proposed Suggestions for Preventing Obesity

PREGNANCY
Normalize body mass index (BMI) before pregnancy.
Do not smoke.
Maintain moderate exercise as tolerated.
In women with gestational diabetes, provide meticulous glucose
control.
Monitor gestational weight gain within Institute of Medicine (IOM)
recommendations.

COMMUNITIES
Increase family-­friendly exercise and safe play facilities for children
of all ages.
Develop more mixed residential-­
commercial developments for
walkable and bicyclable communities.
Discourage the use of elevators and moving walkways.
Provide information on how to shop and prepare healthier versions of
culture-­specific foods.

POSTPARTUM AND INFANCY
Breastfeeding: exclusive for 4-­6 mo; continue with other foods for 12
mo.
Postpone introduction of baby foods to 4-­6 mo and juices to 12 mo.

HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS
Explain the biologic and genetic contributions to obesity.
Give age-­appropriate expectations for body weight in children.
Work toward classifying obesity as a disease to promote recognition,
reimbursement for care, and willingness and ability to provide treatment.

FAMILIES
Eat meals as a family in a fixed place and time.
Do not skip meals, especially breakfast.
Do not allow television during meals.
Use small plates and keep serving dishes away from the table.
Avoid unnecessary sweet or fatty foods and sugar-­
sweetened
drinks.
Remove televisions from children’s bedrooms; restrict times for TV
viewing and video games.
Do not use food as a reward.
SCHOOLS
Eliminate candy and cookie sales as fundraisers.
Review the contents of vending machines and replace with healthier
choices; eliminate sodas.
Avoid financial support for sports teams from beverage and food
industries.
Install water fountains and hydration stations.
Educate teachers, especially physical education and science
faculty, about basic nutrition and the benefits of physical
activity (PA).
Educate children from preschool through high school on appropriate
diet and lifestyle.
Mandate minimum standards for physical education, including 60 min
of strenuous exercise 5 times weekly.
Encourage “the walking school bus”: groups of children walking to
school with adult supervision.

INDUSTRY
Mandate age-­appropriate nutrition labeling for products aimed at
children (e.g., “red light/green light” foods, with portion sizes).
Encourage marketing of interactive video games in which children
must exercise to play.
Use celebrity advertising directed at children for healthful foods to
promote breakfast and regular meals.
Reduce portion size (drinks and meals).
GOVERNMENT AND REGULATORY AGENCIES
Classify childhood obesity as a legitimate disease.
Find novel ways to fund healthy lifestyle programs (e.g., with revenues
from food and drink taxes).
Subsidize government-­
sponsored programs to promote the
consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Provide financial incentives to the industry to develop more healthful
products and to educate the consumer on product content.
Provide financial incentives to schools that initiate innovative PA and
nutrition programs.
Allow tax deductions for the cost of weight loss and exercise programs.
Provide urban planners with funding to establish bicycle, jogging, and
walking paths.
Ban advertising of fast foods, non-­
nutritious foods, and sugar-­
sweetened beverages directed at preschool children, and restrict
advertising to school-­aged children.
Ban toys as gifts to children for purchasing fast foods.

Adapted from Speiser PW, Rudolf MCJ, Anhalt H, et al. Consensus statement: Childhood obesity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:1871–1887.

Table 65.9  	

Anticipatory Guidance: Establishing Healthy Eating Habits in Children

Do not punish a child during mealtimes with regard to eating. The
emotional atmosphere of a meal is very important. Interactions
during meals should be pleasant and happy.
Do not use foods as rewards.
Parents, siblings, and peers should model healthy eating, tasting
new foods, and eating a well-­balanced meal.
Children should be exposed to a wide range of foods, tastes, and
textures.
New foods should be offered multiple times. Repeated exposure
leads to acceptance and liking.

Forcing a child to eat a certain food will decrease the child’s
preference for that food. Children’s wariness of new foods is
normal and should be expected. Offering a variety of foods with
low-­energy density helps children balance energy intake.
Parents should control what foods are in the home. Restricting
access to foods in the home will increase rather than decrease a
child’s desire for that food.
Children tend to be more aware of satiety than adults, so allow
children to respond to satiety and stop eating. Do not force
children to “clean their plate.”

Adapted from Benton D. Role of parents in the determination of food preferences of children and the development of obesity. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004;28:858–869.

marketing and changes, support services, and evidence-­based practices. Community-­wide programs are important because neighborhood environmental factors (e.g., poverty) have been associated with
obesity in its residents. There is considerable interest in focusing these
efforts early in the life cycle. Beginning obesity prevention during

pregnancy and engaging health systems, early childhood programs,
and community systems to support healthier life cycles is an approach
with great promise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 66 u Vitamin A Deficiencies and Excess

used for the synthesis of two essential metabolites of vitamin A.
All-­trans retinoic acid is the form required for cell differentiation
and regulation of gene transcription and is the most bioactive form
of vitamin A; 11-­cis retinal is the form required for vision as the
light-­absorbing chromophore of the visual pigments rhodopsin and
iodopsin.

Chapter 66

Vitamin A Deficiencies
and Excess

METABOLISM OF VITAMIN A

Libo Tan and A. Catharine Ross
OVERVIEW OF VITAMIN A

Vitamin A is a fat-­soluble micronutrient that cannot be synthesized
de novo by mammals; thus it is an obligatory dietary factor. The
term vitamin A is generally used to refer to a group of compounds
that possess the biologic activity of all-­trans retinol (Fig. 66.1). Vitamin A is recognized as being essential for all vertebrates for normal
vision, reproduction, cell and tissue differentiation, and immune
system functions. Vitamin A plays critical roles in neonatal development. It is required for normal embryonic development, hematopoiesis, and growth and differentiation of many types of cells.
Vitamin A can be obtained from the diet from preformed vitamin
A (retinyl esters, such as retinyl palmitate) primarily in foods of
animal origin. Organ meats (especially liver and kidney) are very
rich in vitamin A, whereas other meats, milk, and cheese contain
moderate levels. Other sources of vitamin A include several provitamin A carotenoids, which are found naturally in many fruits and
vegetables, especially yellow-­orange vegetables (pumpkin, squash,
sweet potato) and leafy green vegetables (chard, spinach, broccoli).
One of the most abundant carotenoids is β-­carotene. Several cultivars, or biofortified forms, of sweet potatoes have been introduced
to elevate carotene intake in areas of the world where vitamin A
deficiency still is prevalent. α-carotene and oxygenated carotenoids,
such as β-­cryptoxanthin, found in oranges, also possess vitamin A
activity, but at a lower bioactivity. In the body, these precursors are

Vitamin A compounds in foods must first be released through normal digestive processes. Retinyl esters must first be hydrolyzed in
the intestinal lumen to liberate unesterified retinol for absorption
across the mucosal barrier. Once in the enterocyte, most of the retinol is reesterified, forming new retinyl esters for inclusion in chylomicrons. Approximately 70–90% of dietary preformed vitamin A
is absorbed provided there is approximately 10 g of fat in the meal;
otherwise, the absorption efficiency is lower. Chronic intestinal disorders or lipid malabsorption can result in vitamin A deficiency.
Provitamin-­
A carotenoids are transported from the intestinal
lumen into the enterocytes by specific transporters and then either
incorporated intact into chylomicrons or cleaved to form retinal,
a precursor for retinol; β-­carotene becomes retinol through this
process. The estimated efficiency of absorption of carotenoids is
20–50%, lower than for preformed vitamin A. Moreover, the efficiency is reduced when the body’s vitamin A status is high, and
because vitamin A status may vary, there is significant interindividual variability in absorption efficiency. The carotene cleavage
enzyme β-­carotene monooxygenase, present in the enterocyte and
in other tissues at lower levels, exhibits certain single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that, at least in vitro, reduce the efficiency
of conversion of β-­carotene to retinol. Clinical studies suggest a
similar effect in vivo.
Once retinol is esterified in the enterocyte, retinyl ester is then
packaged into nascent chylomicrons, which are secreted into the
lymphatic vessels, enter the systemic circulation, and are then
transported to and taken up by various tissues. When vitamin A
status is adequate, in most mammals, including humans, the liver

-Carotene

Retinol
R

A

R = CH2OH, retinol
R = CH2O-fatty acyl group, retinyl ester
R = COOH, retinoic acid

Dietary
forms:

Intestinal
hydrolysis
Esterification
and storage

RE

Hydrolysis,
[chylomicron mobilization
transport,
storage in liver,
eyes (RPE), kidneys,
testes, etc.]

B

-carotene and
provitamin A
carotenoids

Preformed
vitamin A

Absorption:
Intracellular
metabolism:

451

Intestinal
cleavage

Oxidation

Retinol

Oxidation

Retinal
Reduction

RA

Oxidized
metabolites
Conjugation
reactions

Deactivation products
Excretion

Fig. 66.1 A, Vitamin A structures. B, Overview of vitamin A metabolism. RA, All-­trans retinoic acid; RE, retinyl ester; RPE, retinal pigment
epithelium.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

452 Part V u Nutrition
is the major site of chylomicron vitamin A uptake and storage, with
potentially high levels of retinyl esters within hepatic stellate cells
(HSCs). As vitamin A status deteriorates into the deficient range,
vitamin A stores are mobilized from the HSCs, such that the released
retinol can be taken up and used by extrahepatic tissues. Circulating retinol is bound to a specific transport protein, retinol-­binding
protein (RBP), which in turn binds to the thyroid hormone transport protein, transthyretin (TTR); this complex delivers plasma
retinol (and the thyroid hormone) to a large number of vitamin A
target tissues. The major physiologic mediator of retinol uptake by
cells in many tissues is Stra6, a widely expressed multitransmembrane domain protein that functions as a cell surface receptor for
retinol bound to RBP. Stra6 is not significantly expressed in the
liver, but a homologous receptor may perform the similar function.
Within target tissues, retinol is either esterified into retinyl esters
for storage or oxidized into retinoic acid for function. In the eye,
11-­cis-­retinal is formed and bound to the protein rhodopsin (rods)
or iodopsin (cones), where it functions as a light-­sensing receptor.

Inflammation Causing Low Plasma Retinol

Inflammation is a cause of reduced levels of plasma retinol as a
result of reduced synthesis of RBP and TTR. This condition may
mimic a lack of vitamin A, but will not be corrected by supplementation. In U.S. adults, those with moderately elevated levels of CRP,
indicative of mild inflammation, had lower average plasma retinol
levels. The extent to which inflammation is a factor in low plasma
retinol in children is uncertain but likely significant in acute infectious diseases such as measles, and possibly in chronic inflammatory conditions such as cystic fibrosis.

FUNCTIONS OF VITAMIN A AND MECHANISMS OF
ACTION

Except for its role in vision, the pleiotropic actions of this micronutrient are mediated by all-­trans-­retinoic acid (RA), which is a ligand
for specific nuclear transcription factors, retinoic acid receptor
(RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR), that regulate the expression of several hundred genes. When an RAR is activated by RA,
an RAR-­R XR complex is formed, which binds to and activates specific DNA sequences present in retinoid-­responsive genes, RAREs
and RXREs. Genes can be either induced or repressed, depending
on additional co-­activators or co-­repressors recruited to the RAR-­
RXR complex. Retinoid-­regulated genes are involved in several fundamental biologic activities, including regulation of cell division,
death, and differentiation. The term retinoids is now applied to both
natural and synthetic compounds with vitamin A activity, although
it is most often used in the context of vitamin A and RA acting at
the gene level. Numerous synthetic retinoids have gained clinical
acceptance in the treatment of skin disorders and certain cancers.
During embryonic development, RA is among the most important
signaling molecules that determine body patterning (morphogenesis).
Many physiologic processes are sensitive to a deficiency or excess of
vitamin A or RA, including reproduction, growth, bone development,
and the functions of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, hematopoietic,
and immune systems. Vitamin A supplementation may be particularly important in developing countries, where it reduces morbidity
and mortality, presumably by enhancing immune function and host
defense, from various infectious diseases, including measles (see Chapter 293).
Vitamin A plays a critical role in vision, mediated by 11-­cis retinal. The human retina contains two distinct photoreceptor systems:
the rods, in which rhodopsin senses light of low-­intensity, and the
cones, in which iodopsins detect different colors; 11-­cis-­retinal is
the prosthetic group on both these visual proteins. The mechanism
of vitamin A action is similar for rods and cones, based on photoisomerization of 11-­cis to all-­trans retinal (change shape when

exposed to light), which initiates signal transduction via the optic
nerve to the brain, resulting in visual sensation. After isomerization (also known as photobleaching), a series of reactions serves to
regenerate the 11-­cis retinal for resynthesis of rhodopsin and iodopsin, as is necessary for an efficient visual process. Accessory cells,
including retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells and Müller cells,
are involved in this recycling process.

VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY

If the growing child has a well-­balanced diet and obtains vitamin A
from foods rich in vitamin A or provitamin A (Table 66.1), the risk
of vitamin A deficiency is small. However, even subclinical vitamin A
deficiency can have serious consequences.
Deficiency states in developed countries are rare, except in some
impoverished populations (see Chapter 62) or after mistakes in
food preparation or with fad diets or restrictive/elimination diets,
but are common in many developing countries and often associated with global malnutrition. In the clinical setting, vitamin deficiencies can also occur as complications in children with various
chronic disorders or diseases. Information obtained in the medical history related to dietary habits can be important in identifying
the risk of such nutritional problems. Except for vitamin A, toxicity
from excess intake of vitamins is rare. Table 66.1 summarizes the
food sources, functions, and deficiency and excess symptoms of the
vitamin.

Vitamin A Status in Neonates

Neonates begin life with low levels of vitamin A in plasma, liver,
and extrahepatic tissues compared with those in adults. Normal
plasma levels of retinol are 20-­50 μg/dL in infants and increase
gradually as children become older. Median serum retinol values
are 1.19 μmol/L in both males and females ages 4-­8 years; 1.4 and
1.33 μmol/L in males and females, respectively, ages 9-­13; and 1.71
and 1.57 μmol/L in males and females, ages 14-­18 (for conversion, 1
μmol/L = 28.6 μg/dL). Values of 1.96 and 1.85 μmol/L are found in
19-­to 30-­year-­old adult men and women, respectively. Figure 66.2
shows the distribution of serum retinol concentrations in U.S. children. Few healthy children are severely vitamin A deficient, but the
5th percentile of children 4-­8 years and 9-­13 years of age, respectively, in the National Health and Examination Survey (NHANES)
fell below 1.05 μmol/L, which is interpreted as mild vitamin A
deficiency.
Retinol levels are even lower in neonates in developing countries,
where vitamin A intakes may be low and vitamin A deficiency is a
common nutritional problem. Lower vitamin A stores and plasma
retinol concentrations are also seen in low birthweight infants and
in preterm newborns, and poor vitamin A status (plasma retinol
concentrations <0.35 μmol/L) may contribute to the development
of chronic lung disease, such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD;
see Chapter 127).

Clinical Manifestations of Vitamin A Deficiency

The most obvious symptoms of vitamin A deficiency are associated
with changes in epithelial cell morphology and functions. In the
intestines, mucus-­secreting goblet cells are affected, and loss of an
effective barrier against pathogens can cause diarrhea or impairment of epithelial barrier function. Similarly, mucus secretion by
the epithelium is essential in the respiratory tract for the disposal of
inhaled pathogens and toxicants. Characteristic epithelial changes
result from vitamin A deficiency, including proliferation of basal
cells, hyperkeratosis, and formation of stratified cornified squamous epithelium. Squamous metaplasia of the renal pelvis, ureters, vaginal epithelium, and the pancreatic and salivary ducts can
lead to increased infections in these areas. In the urinary bladder,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 66 u Vitamin A Deficiencies and Excess

453

Table 66.1  Vitamin A Characteristics
NAMES AND
SYNONYMS

CHARACTERISTICS

Retinol (vitamin A1);
1 μg retinol = 3.3 IU
vitamin A = 1 RAE
Provitamins A: the
plant pigments α-­,
β-­, and γ-­carotenes
and cryptoxanthin
have partial retinol
activity: 12 μg β-­
carotene, or 24 μg
other provitamin A
carotenoids = 1 μg
retinol

Fat-­soluble; heat-­
stable; destroyed by
oxidation, drying
Bile necessary for
absorption
Stored in liver
Protected by
vitamin E

BIOCHEMICAL
ACTION

EFFECTS OF
DEFICIENCY

EFFECTS OF
EXCESS

In vision, as retinal,
for synthesis of the
visual pigments
rhodopsin and
iodopsin
In growth, reproduction,
embryonic and fetal
development, bone
growth, immune and
epithelial functions,
via retinoic acid as
a ligand for specific
nuclear transcription
factors, regulating
genes involved in
many fundamental
cellular processes

Nyctalopia
Photophobia,
xerophthalmia, Bitôt
spots, conjunctivitis,
keratomalacia leading
to blindness
Faulty epiphyseal
bone formation
Defective tooth
enamel
Keratinization of
mucous membranes
and skin
Stunted growth
Impaired resistance
to infection, anemia,
reproductive failure,
fetal abnormalities

Anorexia, slow
growth, drying and
cracking of skin,
enlargement of
liver and spleen,
swelling and pain of
long bones, bone
fragility, increased
intracranial pressure,
alopecia, carotenemia
Fetal abnormalities

SOURCES
Liver, fish liver oils
Dairy products,
except skim milk
Egg yolk, fortified
margarine, fortified
skim milk
Carotenoids from
plants: green
vegetables, yellow
fruits, and vegetables

RAE, Retinol activity equivalent.

3.5

Serum retinol, micromole/liter

3.0

Male, 5th
Male, 50th
Male, 95th

Female, 5th
Female, 50th
Female, 95th

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

Fig. 66.3 Advanced xerophthalmia with an opaque, dull cornea and

0.5

some damage to the iris in a 1-yr-old boy. (From Oomen HAPC. Vitamin
A deficiency, xerophthalmia and blindness. Nutr Rev. 1974;6:161–166.)

0.0
M F
4–8 y

M F
M F
M F
M F
M F
M F
9–13 y 14–18 y 19–30 y 31–50 y 51–70 y >71 y
Age and sex groups

Fig. 66.2 Distribution of serum retinol concentrations in U.S. children
and adults by age and sex in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).

loss of epithelial integrity can result in pyuria and hematuria. In
the skin, vitamin A deficiency manifests as dry, scaly, hyperkeratotic patches, typically on the arms, legs, shoulders, and buttocks.
The combination of defective epithelial barriers to infection, low
immune response, and lowered response to inflammatory stress,
all from insufficient vitamin A, can cause poor growth and serious
health problems in children.
The most characteristic and specific signs of vitamin A deficiency
are eye lesions, but these may manifest rather late in the progression
of vitamin A deficiency, develop insidiously, and rarely occur before
age 2 years. An earlier symptom of vitamin A deficiency is delayed

dark adaptation as a result of reduced resynthesis of rhodopsin;
this may progress to night blindness. Photophobia is a common
symptom. The RPE, one of the structural elements of the retina,
undergoes keratinization. When the RPE degenerates, the rods and
cones have no support and eventually break down, resulting in
blindness.
As vitamin A deficiency progresses, the corneal and conjunctival
epithelial tissues of the eye become severely altered because of a lack
of sufficient RA for normal epithelial cell differentiation. The cornea protects the eye from the environment and is also important in
light refraction. Stages in vitamin A deficiency include corneal keratinization and opacity, susceptibility to infection, and formation of
dry, scaly layers of cells (xerophthalmia) (Figs. 66.3 and 66.4). The
conjunctival membrane undergoes keratinization and may develop
foamy-­appearing plaques (Bitôt spots; Fig. 66.5). When lymphocytes infiltrate the cornea in later stages of infection, it degenerates
irreversibly (keratomalacia and corneal ulceration), resulting in
irreversible blindness. These eye lesions are primarily diseases of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

454 Part V u Nutrition
the young and are a major cause of blindness in developing countries. Although rates of xerophthalmia have fallen, the number of
affected children is still too high. Treatment with vitamin A, up to
the stage of keratomalacia, is effective in rapidly repleting the individual and saving vision.
Other clinical signs of vitamin A deficiency include poor overall
growth, diarrhea, susceptibility to infections, anemia, apathy, intellectual impairment, and increased intracranial pressure, with wide separation of the cranial bones at the sutures. There may be vision problems

Fig. 66.4 Recovery from xerophthalmia, showing a permanent eye le-

sion. (From Bloch CE. Blindness and other disease arising from deficient
nutrition [lack of fat soluble A factor]. Am J Dis Child. 1924;27:139.)

as a consequence of bone overgrowth causing pressure on the optic
nerve.
Malnutrition, particularly protein deficiency, can cause vitamin
A deficiency through impaired synthesis of retinol transport protein.
In developing countries, subclinical or clinical zinc deficiency can
increase the risk of vitamin A deficiency. There is also some evidence
of marginal zinc intakes in U.S. children.

Diagnosis

Dark adaptation tests can be used to assess early-­stage vitamin
A deficiency. Although Bitôt spots develop relatively early, those
related to active vitamin A deficiency are usually confined to
preschool-­
age children. Xerophthalmia is a very characteristic
lesion of vitamin A deficiency. For detection of less severe deficiency (marginal vitamin A status), methods include conjunctival
impression cytology, relative dose response, and modified relative
dose response tests. A diet history is useful in suggesting or ruling
out low intake as a cause of symptoms. Marginal vitamin A status is relatively prevalent among pregnant and lactating women in
low-­resource (and therefore poor dietary intake) areas of the world.
Although plasma retinol level is not a completely accurate indicator of vitamin A status, various guidelines have been proposed for
categorizing vitamin A status based on serum retinol. In children,
plasma retinol <0.35 μmol/L is considered very deficient, 0.35-­0.7
μmol/L deficient, 0.7-­1.05 μmol/L marginal, and >1.05 μmol/L adequate. It has long been thought that a liver vitamin A concentration >20 μg/g is needed to support a normal rate of secretion of
retinol-­RBP into plasma, and therefore normal delivery of retinol
to peripheral tissues.

Epidemiology and Public Health Issues

Vitamin A deficiency and xerophthalmia still occur throughout much of the developing, income-­poor world and are linked
to undernourishment and complicated by illness. Various public
health programs to provide large doses of vitamin A periodically
have been instituted. Vitamin A supplementation is considered part
of the strategy of the World Health Organization (WHO) Millennium Development Goals to reduce <5 year mortality. Neonatal
supplementation may be most effective in populations with a high
incidence of maternal vitamin A deficiency. Other strategies being
tested include improving the content of β-­carotene in staple foods
through plant breeding (biofortification).

Dietary Reference Intakes for the Healthy Population

Fig. 66.5 Bitôt spots with hyperpigmentation seen in a 10-mo-old
Indonesian boy. (From Oomen HAPC. Vitamin A deficiency, xerophthalmia and blindness. Nutr Rev 1974;6:161–166.)

Table 66.2 summarizes the dietary reference intakes for infants and
children. Dietary reference intake values include the estimated average requirement (EAR), which is the mean biologic requirement for
the nutrient for the age/sex-­group of interest; the recommended
dietary allowance (RDA), which is set to cover the physiologic
needs of >97% of the population (thus the needs of many people
are more than met by consuming the RDA); and the upper level

Table 66.2  Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A in Children
AGE RANGE

RECOMMENDED DIETARY
ALLOWANCE (RDA)*

0-­6 mo
7-­12 mo
1-­3 yr
4-­8 yr
9-­13 yr
14-­18 yr

400
500
300
400
600
900, male; 700, female

UPPER LEVEL (UL)*

COMMENTS

600
600
600
900
1,700
2,800

The recommended intake for infants is an adequate intake, based
on the amount of vitamin A normally present in breast milk.
The UL applies only to preformed vitamin A (retinol).

*μg retinol equivalents per day.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 66 u Vitamin A Deficiencies and Excess

455

of normal (UL), an intake level above which risk of adverse effects
may increase; the UL pertains only to chronic consumption of
preformed vitamin A. The RDA is expressed as retinol activity equivalents (RAEs; 1 RAE = 1 μg all-­trans retinol; equivalents
for provitamin-­A in foods = 12 μg β-­carotene, 24 μg α-­carotene,
or 24 μg β-­cryptoxanthin). From infancy to age 18 years, the RDA
increases as a result of increased body size, becoming higher for
males than for females during adolescence. During pregnancy the
RDA is 750-­770 μg, and during lactation it increases to 1,200-­1,300
μg to ensure sufficient vitamin A content during breastfeeding.
It is noteworthy that, especially for young children, the UL is only
about two times higher than the RDA. This suggests that for children
whose diet is good, care should be taken not to overuse dietary supplements (vitamin-­mineral supplements) containing preformed vitamin
A and/or to avoid excessive consumption of foods that are very rich in
vitamin A, such as liver.

Vitamin A for Treatment of Deficiency

A daily supplement of 1,500 μg of vitamin A is sufficient for treating latent vitamin A deficiency, after which intake at the RDA level
should be the goal. In children without overt signs of vitamin A
deficiency but suspected low reserves of vitamin A, rates of morbidity and mortality, as from viral infections such as measles, have been
reduced by a weekly dose of vitamin A at the RDA level. More often,
higher doses of 30-­60 mg of retinol (100,000-­200,000 IU/child) are
given once or twice, under careful monitoring to avoid toxicity
associated with excess vitamin A. Xerophthalmia is treated by giving 1,500 μg/kg body weight orally for 5 days, followed by intramuscular injection of 7,500 μg of vitamin A in oil, until recovery.

HYPERVITAMINOSIS A

Chronic hypervitaminosis A results from excessive ingestion of
preformed vitamin A (retinol or retinyl ester), generally for several weeks or months. Hypervitaminosis A is most often caused
by vitamin A–containing supplements or food faddism, including
high intakes of organ meats. Chronic daily intakes of 15,000 μg and
6,000 μg can be toxic in adults and children, respectively. Because
there is no antidote for hypervitaminosis A, and vitamin A is readily
stored in liver and other tissues, it is most important to prevent toxicity. Symptoms may subside rapidly on withdrawal of the vitamin,
but the rate of improvement depends on the amount of vitamin
A stored in tissues. Extreme hypervitaminosis A is fatal. Signs of
subacute or chronic toxicity can include headache; vomiting (early
signs); anorexia; dry, itchy, desquamating skin; and seborrheic cutaneous lesions. With chronic hypervitaminosis A, one may observe
fissuring at the corners of the mouth; alopecia and coarsening of
the hair; bone abnormalities, including swelling and resorption;
enlargement of the liver and spleen; diplopia; increased intracranial
pressure; dryness of the mucous membranes; and desquamation of
the palms and the soles of the feet. Radiographs may show hyperostosis affecting several long bones, especially in the middle of the
shafts (Fig. 66.6). Manifestations of hypervitaminosis A may also
include nonspecific changes in affect, including severe headache,
irritability, stupor, and limited motion. Serum levels of vitamin A
are elevated, mostly in the form of retinyl esters carried in lipoproteins, which may result in tissue damage and release of liver
enzymes into plasma. Hypercalcemia and/or liver cirrhosis may be
present. Hypervitaminosis A is distinct from cortical hyperostosis
(see Chapter 741).
In young children, signs of vitamin A toxicity include vomiting
and bulging fontanels, neither of which is specific. Combined with
anorexia, pruritus, and a lack of weight gain, vitamin A toxicity should
be considered. Less common symptoms include diplopia, papilledema,

A

B

Fig. 66.6 Hyperostosis of the ulna and tibia in 21-­mo-­old infant, re-

sulting from vitamin A positioning. A, Long, wavy cortical hyperostosis
of the ulna (arrow). B, Long, wavy cortical hyperostosis of the right tibia
(arrow), with a striking absence of metaphyseal changes. (From Caffey
J. Pediatric X-­Ray Diagnosis, 5th ed. Chicago: Year Book;1967: 994.)

cranial nerve palsies, and other symptoms suggesting pseudotumor
cerebri.
If high levels of vitamin A or synthetic retinoids are taken early
in pregnancy, severe congenital malformations may occur in the
fetus. Teratogenicity has been associated with therapeutic doses
(0.5-­1.5 mg/kg) of oral 13-­cis-­retinoic acid (e.g., Accutane), generally taken for the treatment of acne or cancer, during the first
trimester of pregnancy. A high incidence (>20%) of spontaneous
abortions and birth defects, including characteristic craniofacial
abnormalities, has prompted the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to enact more stringent prescription regulations for
such drugs in women of childbearing age to attempt to reduce these
birth defects.
Carotenoids, even in high doses, are not associated with toxicity but can cause yellowing of the skin (carotenodermia), including palms of the hands, and high levels in serum (carotenemia);
this relatively benign state disappears slowly when carotene intake
is reduced. Children with liver disease, diabetes mellitus, or hypothyroidism are more susceptible. Food faddism, such as excessive
consumption of carotene-­rich foods and juices, may be a cause of
carotenodermia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

456 Part V u Nutrition

Chapter 67

Vitamin B Complex
Deficiencies and Excess
H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Vitamin B complex includes a number of water-­soluble nutrients,
including thiamine (vitamin B1), riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), pyridoxine (B6), folate (B9), cobalamin (B12), biotin (B7), and pantothenic

acid (B5). Choline and inositol are also considered parts of the B complex and are important for normal body functions, but specific deficiency syndromes have not been attributed to a lack of these factors in
the diet (Table 67.1).
B-­complex vitamins serve as coenzymes in many metabolic pathways that are functionally closely related. Consequently, a lack of
one of the vitamins has the potential to interrupt a chain of chemical processes, including reactions that are dependent on other vitamins, and ultimately can produce diverse clinical manifestations.
Because diets deficient in any one of the B-­complex vitamins are
often poor sources of other B vitamins, manifestations of several
vitamin B deficiencies usually can be observed in the same person.
It is therefore a general practice in a patient who has evidence of deficiency of a specific B vitamin to treat with the entire B-­complex group
of vitamins.

Table 67.1  Water-­Soluble Vitamins
NAMES
AND
SYNONYMS BIOCHEMICAL ACTION

EFFECTS OF
DEFICIENCY

TREATMENT
OF
DEFICIENCY

DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES
BY AGE

CAUSES OF
DEFICIENCY

DIETARY
SOURCES

Thiamine
Coenzyme in carbohydrate Neurologic (dry
3-­5 mg/
(vitamin B1) metabolism
beriberi): irritability, day PO
Nucleic acid
peripheral neuritis, thiamine
synthesis
muscle tenderness, for 6 wk
Neurotransmitter synthesis ataxia
Cardiac (wet
beriberi):
tachycardia,
edema,
cardiomegaly,
cardiac failure

Polished rice–
based diets
Malabsorptive
states
Severe
malnutrition
Malignancies
Alcoholism

Meat,
especially
pork; fish;
liver
Rice
(unmilled),
wheat germ;
enriched
cereals;
legumes

0-­6 mo: 0.2 mg/day 1-­3 yr:
7-­12 mo: 0.3 mg/
0.4 mg/day
day
4-­8 yr: 0.5
1-­3 yr: 0.5 mg/day
mg/day
4-­8 yr: 0.6 mg/day 9-­13 yr: 0.7
9-­13 yr: 0.9 mg/day mg/day
14-­18 yr:
14-­18 yr:
Females: 1.0 mg/ Females: 0.9
day
mg/day
Males: 1.2 mg/day Males: 1.0
mg/day

Riboflavin
Constituent of flavoprotein Glossitis,
(vitamin B2) enzymes important
photophobia,
in redox reactions:
lacrimation,
amino acid, fatty acid,
corneal
and carbohydrate
vascularization,
metabolism and cellular poor growth,
respiration
cheilosis

Severe
Milk, milk
malnutrition
products,
Malabsorptive
eggs,
states
fortified
Prolonged
cereals,
treatment with green
phenothiazines, vegetables
probenecid, or
OCPs

0-­6 mo: 0.3 mg/day 1-­3 yr:
7-­12 mo: 0.4 mg/
0.4 mg/day
day
4-­8 yr: 0.5
1-­3 yr: 0.5 mg/day
mg/day
4-­8 yr: 0.6 mg/day 9-­13 yr: 0.8
9-­13 yr: 0.9 mg/day mg/day
14-­18 yr:
14-­18 yr:
Females: 1.0 mg/ Females: 0.9
day
mg/day
Males: 1.3 mg/day Males: 1.1
mg/day

Predominantly
maize-­based
diets
Anorexia
nervosa
Carcinoid
syndrome

Meat, fish,
poultry
Cereals,
legumes,
green
vegetables

0-­6 mo: 2 mg/day 1-­3 yr: 5 mg/
7-­12 mo: 4 mg/day day
1-­3 yr: 6 mg/day
4-­8 yr: 6 mg/
4-­8 yr: 8 mg/day
day
9-­13 yr: 12 mg/day 9-­13 yr: 9
14-­18 yr:
mg/day
Females: 14 mg/
14-­18 yr:
day
Females: 11
Males: 16 mg/day
mg/day
Males: 12
mg/day

5-­25 mg/
Prolonged
Fortified
day PO for
treatment
ready-­to-­
deficiency
with INH,
eat cereals,
states
penicillamine,
meat, fish,
100 mg IM
OCPs
poultry, liver,
or IV for
bananas,
pyridoxine-­
rice,
dependent
potatoes
seizures

0-­6 mo: 0.1 mg/day 1-­3 yr:
7-­12 mo: 0.3 mg/
0.4 mg/day
day
4-­8 yr: 0.5
1-­3 yr: 0.5 mg/day
mg/day
4-­8 yr: 0.6 mg/day 9-­13 yr: 0.8
9-­13 yr: 1.0 mg/day mg/day
14-­18 yr:
14-­18 yr:
Females: 1.2 mg/ Females: 1.0
day
mg/day
Males: 1.3 mg/day Males: 1.1
mg/day

3-­10 mg/
day PO
riboflavin

Niacin
Constituent of NAD and Pellagra manifesting 50-­300 mg/
(vitamin B3) NADP, important in
as diarrhea,
day PO
respiratory chain, fatty
symmetric scaly
niacin
acid synthesis, cell
dermatitis in sun-­
differentiation, and DNA exposed areas,
processing
and neurologic
symptoms of
disorientation and
delirium

Pyridoxine
Constituent of coenzymes Irritability,
(vitamin B6) for amino acid and
convulsions,
glycogen metabolism,
hypochromic
heme synthesis, steroid
anemia
action, neurotransmitter Failure to thrive
synthesis
Oxaluria

RDA*

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

EAR**

Chapter 67 u Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess

457

Table 67.1  Water-­Soluble Vitamins—cont’d
NAMES
AND
SYNONYMS BIOCHEMICAL ACTION
Biotin
(vitamin B7)

EFFECTS OF
DEFICIENCY

TREATMENT
OF
DEFICIENCY

Cofactor for carboxylases, Scaly periorificial
1-­10 mg/day
important in
dermatitis,
PO biotin
gluconeogenesis, fatty
conjunctivitis,
acid and amino acid
alopecia, lethargy,
metabolism
hypotonia,
and withdrawn
behavior

CAUSES OF
DEFICIENCY

DIETARY
SOURCES

Consumption
Liver, organ
of raw eggs
meats, fruits
for prolonged
periods
Parenteral
nutrition with
infusates
lacking biotin
Valproate
therapy

DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES
BY AGE
RDA*

EAR**

0-­6 mo: 5 μg/day
Not
7-­12 mo: 6 μg/day
established
1-­3 yr: 8 μg/day
4-­8 yr: 12 μg/day
9-­13 yr: 20 μg/day
14-­18 yr: 25 μg/day

Pantothenic Component of coenzyme Experimentally
acid
A and acyl carrier protein produced
(vitamin B5) involved in fatty acid
deficiency in
metabolism
humans: irritability,
fatigue, numbness,
paresthesias
(burning feet
syndrome),
muscle cramps

Isolated
Beef, organ
0-­6 mo: 1.7 mg/day Not
deficiency
meats,
7-­12 mo: 1.8 mg/
established
extremely rare poultry,
day
in humans
seafood, egg 1-­3 yr: 2 mg/day
yolk
4-­8 yr: 3 mg/day
Yeast,
9-­13 yr: 4 mg/day
soybeans,
14-­18 yr: 5 mg/day
mushrooms

Folic acid
(vitamin B9)

Coenzymes in amino
acid and nucleotide
metabolism as an
acceptor and donor of
1-­carbon units

Malnutrition
Malabsorptive
states
Malignancies
Hemolytic
anemias
Anticonvulsant
therapy

Enriched
cereals,
beans, leafy
vegetables,
citrus fruits,
papaya

0-­6 mo: 65 μg/day 1-­3 yr:
7-­12 mo: 80 μg/day 120 μg/day
1-­3 yr: 150 μg/day 4-­8 yr: 160
4-­8 yr: 200 μg/day
μg/day
9-­13 yr: 300 μg/day 9-­13 yr: 250
14-­18 yr: 400 μg/
μg/day
day
14-­18 yr: 330
μg/day

Cobalamin
(vitamin
B12)

As
Megaloblastic
500-­1,000 μg Vegan diets
deoxyadenosylcobalamin, anemia, irritability, IM or oral
Malabsorptive
acts as cofactor for
developmental
vitamin B12 states
lipid and carbohydrate
delay,
Crohn disease
metabolism
developmental
Intrinsic factor
As methylcobalamin,
regression,
deficiency
important for conversion
involuntary
(pernicious
of homocysteine to
movements,
anemia)
methionine and folic acid hyperpigmentation
metabolism

Organ meats,
seafood,
poultry, egg
yolk, milk,
fortified
ready-­to-­eat
cereals

0-­6 mo: 0.4 μg/day
7-­12 mo: 0.5 μg/
day
1-­3 yr: 0.9 μg/day
4-­8 yr: 1.2 μg/day
9-­13 yr: 1.8 μg/day
14-­18 yr: 2.4 μg/
day

1-­3 yr: 0.7 μg/
day
4-­8 yr: 1.0
μg/day
9-­13 yr: 1.5
μg/day
14-­18 yr: 2.0
μg/day

Citrus fruits
and fruit
juices,
peppers,
berries,
melons,
tomatoes,
cauliflower,
leafy green
vegetables

0-­6 mo: 40 mg/day
7-­12 mo: 50 mg/
day
1-­3 yr: 15 mg/day
4-­8 yr: 25 mg/day
9-­13 yr: 45 mg/day
14-­18 yr:
Females: 65 mg/
day
Males: 75 mg/day

1-­3 yr: 13 mg/
day
4-­8 yr: 22
mg/day
9-­13 yr: 39
mg/day
14-­18 yr:
Females: 56
mg/day
Males: 63
mg/day

Megaloblastic
0.5-­1 mg/day
anemia
PO folic
Growth stunting,
acid
glossitis
Neural tube defects
in progeny

Ascorbic
Important for
Scurvy manifesting 100-­200 mg/
acid
collagen
as irritability,
day PO
(vitamin C)
synthesis, metabolism
tenderness
ascorbic
of cholesterol and
and swelling of
acid for up
neurotransmitters
legs, bleeding
to 3 mo
Antioxidant functions and gums, petechiae,
nonheme iron absorption ecchymoses,
follicular
hyperkeratosis,
and poor wound
healing

Predominantly
milk-­based
(non–human
milk) diets
Severe
malnutrition

*For healthy breastfed infants, the values represent adequate intakes (AI), that is, the mean intake of apparently “normal” infants. For biotin and pantothenic acid also, the values
represent AI, as the RDA has not been established.
**Values have not been established for infants (0-­12 mo).
PO, Orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; INH, isoniazid; NAD, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADP, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; OCP, oral
contraceptive pill; RDA, recommended dietary allowance (average daily nutrient intake level estimated to meet the requirements of nearly all the healthy individuals); EAR,
estimated average requirement (average daily nutrient intake level estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of the healthy individuals).
From The National Academies Press. Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline (https://www
.nap.edu/catalog/6015/dietary-­reference-­intakes-­for-­thiamin-­riboflavin-­niacin-­vitamin-­b6-­folate-­vitamin-­b12-­pantothenic-­acid-­biotin-­and-­choline) and Dietary Reference Intakes for
Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/9810/dietary-­reference-­intakes-­for-­vitamin-­c-­vitamin-­e-­selenium-­and-­carotenoids)

67.1 Thiamine (Vitamin B1)
H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Thiamine diphosphate, the active form of thiamine, serves as a cofactor for several enzymes involved in carbohydrate catabolism such as
pyruvate dehydrogenase, transketolase, and α-­ketoglutarate. These

enzymes also play a role in the hexose monophosphate shunt that
generates nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP)
and pentose for nucleic acid synthesis. Thiamine is also required
for the synthesis of acetylcholine (ACh) and γ-­aminobutyric acid
(GABA), which have important roles in nerve conduction. Thiamine is absorbed efficiently in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

458 Part V u Nutrition
Table 67.2  Genetic Pathogenic Variants Affecting Thiamine Metabolism
PROTEIN

AGE AT
ONSET

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS

MANAGEMENT
(DOSE)

DISEASE

VARIANT

TRMA/Rogers
syndrome

SLC19A2

THTR1

Birth to
adolescence

Megaloblastic anemia, diabetes mellitus,
sensorineural deafness, optic atrophy,
congenital heart defects, short stature

Thiamine (50-­200 mg/
day)

Biotin–thiamine-­
responsive basal
ganglia disease

SLC19A3

THTR2

Birth to
adolescence

Episodic encephalopathy associated
with febrile illness, seizures, external
ophthalmoplegia,
dysphagia, gait ataxia, bilateral lesions
of the basal ganglia

Biotin (5-­10 mg/kg/day),
thiamine (up to 40 mg/
kg/day)

Amish lethal
microcephaly/
THMD3

SLC25A19 Mitochondrial TPP
carrier

Birth

Episodic encephalopathy associated with
lactic acidosis and alpha-­ketoglutaric
aciduria,
microcephaly, delayed psychomotor
development, seizures, increased urinary
lactate

Phenobarbital (for
seizures) and physical
therapy
High-­fat diet

Thiamine metabolism SLC25A19
dysfunction
syndrome 4/THMD4
(progressive
polyneuropathy
type)

MTPC

Adolescence

Episodic encephalopathy associated
with febrile illness, transient neurologic
dysfunction, residual weakness,
progressive axonal polyneuropathy,
bilateral striatal degeneration

High-­dose (600 mg/day)
thiamine may prevent
acute episodes

Thiamine metabolism TPK1
dysfunction
syndrome
5 (episodic
encephalopathy
type) THMD5

Thiamine
phosphokinase
1

Early
childhood

Episodic encephalopathy (Leigh-­like)
associated with high serum and CSF
lactate with progressive neurologic and
motor dysfunctions (gait disturbances,
ataxia, dystonia, and spasticity, which, in
some cases, may result in loss of ability to
walk) triggered by infections
Cognitive function usually preserved; some
developmental delay; some patients may
recover from some neurologic deficits; in
others, the outcome is fatal.

Oral thiamine
(100-­200 mg/day)

Modified from Dhir S, Tarasenko M, Napoli E, Giulivi C. Neurological, psychiatric, and biochemical aspects of thiamine deficiency in children and adults. Front Psychiatry. 2019;10:207, Table 1.

may be deficient in persons with GI or liver disease. The requirement of thiamine is increased when carbohydrates are taken in large
amounts and during periods of increased metabolism, such as fever,
muscular activity, hyperthyroidism, pregnancy, and lactation. Alcohol affects various aspects of thiamine transport and uptake, contributing to the deficiency in alcoholics.
Pork (especially lean), fish, and poultry are good dietary sources
of thiamine. Main sources of thiamine for vegetarians are rice,
oat, wheat, and legumes. Most ready-­to-­eat breakfast cereals are
enriched with thiamine. Thiamine is water soluble and heat labile;
most of the vitamin is lost when the rice is repeatedly washed and
the cooking water is discarded. The breast milk of a well-­nourished
mother provides adequate thiamine; breastfed infants of thiamine-­
deficient mothers are at risk for deficiency. Thiamine antagonists
(coffee, tea, carbonated caffeinated beverages) and thiaminases
(fermented fish) may contribute to thiamine deficiency. Most
infants and older children consuming a balanced diet obtain an
adequate intake of thiamine from food and do not require
supplements.

THIAMINE DEFICIENCY

Deficiency of thiamine is associated with severely malnourished
states, including malignancy and after surgery. The disorder (or
spectrum of disorders) is classically associated with a diet consisting
largely of polished rice (oriental beriberi); it can also arise if highly

refined wheat flour forms a major part of the diet, in persons with
alcoholic use disorder, and in food faddists (occidental beriberi). Thiamine deficiency has often been reported from inhabitants of refugee
camps consuming the polished rice–based monotonous diets and in
breastfed infants of mothers on a predominantly polished rice–based
diet. Low thiamine concentrations are also noted during critical
illnesses.
Thiamine-­
responsive megaloblastic anemia (TRMA) syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by
megaloblastic anemia, diabetes mellitus, and sensorineural hearing loss, responding in varying degrees to thiamine treatment. The
syndrome occurs because of pathologic variants of the SLC19A2
gene, encoding a thiamine transporter protein, leading to abnormal thiamine transportation and cellular vitamin deficiency (Table
67.2). Another dependency state, biotin-­thiamine–responsive
basal ganglia disease (BTBGD), results from pathologic variants
of the SLC19A3 gene (see Table 67.2). It classically presents in children with recurrent episodes of subacute encephalopathy manifesting as lethargy, dystonia, rigidity, dysphagia, and convulsions
and responds to combined treatment with biotin (5-­10 mg/kg/day)
and thiamine (up to 40 mg/kg/day). An infantile form manifesting
with acidosis, lethargy, poor feeding, and infantile spasms is also
described. Other genetic disorders are noted in Table 67.2. Thiamine and related vitamins may improve the outcome in children
with Leigh encephalomyelopathy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 67 u Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess
Clinical Manifestations

Thiamine deficiency can develop within 2-­3 months of a deficient
intake. Early symptoms of thiamine deficiency are nonspecific, such
as fatigue, apathy, irritability, depression, drowsiness, poor mental
concentration, anorexia, nausea, and abdominal discomfort. As
the condition progresses, more specific manifestations of beriberi
develop, such as peripheral neuritis (manifesting as tingling, burning, and paresthesias of the toes and feet), decreased deep tendon
reflexes, loss of vibration sense, tenderness and cramping of the leg
muscles, heart failure, and psychologic disturbances. Patients can
have ptosis of the eyelids and atrophy of the optic nerve. Hoarseness
or aphonia caused by paralysis of the laryngeal nerve is a characteristic sign. Muscle atrophy and tenderness of the nerve trunks are
followed by ataxia, loss of coordination, and loss of deep sensation.
Later signs include increased intracranial pressure, meningismus,
and coma. The clinical picture of nutritional thiamine deficiency
is usually divided into a dry (neuritic) type and a wet (cardiac)
type. The disease is wet or dry depending on the amount of fluid
that accumulates in the body because of cardiac and renal dysfunction, even though the exact cause for this edema is unknown. Many
cases of thiamine deficiency show a mixture of both features and
are more properly termed thiamine deficiency with cardiopathy
and peripheral neuropathy. A fulminant form of beriberi (Shoshin
beriberi) manifesting acutely with severe metabolic acidosis, hypotension, and cardiogenic shock has also been described.
The classic clinical triad of Wernicke encephalopathy—mental status changes, ocular signs, and ataxia—is rarely reported in
infants and young children with severe deficiency secondary to
malignancies or feeding of defective formula. An epidemic of life-­
threatening thiamine deficiency was seen in infants fed a defective
soy-­based formula that had undetectable thiamine levels. Manifestations included emesis, lethargy, restlessness, ophthalmoplegia,
abdominal distention, developmental delay, failure to thrive (malnutrition), lactic acidosis, nystagmus, diarrhea, apnea, seizures,
and auditory neuropathy. An acute presentation with tachycardia,
aphonia/hoarse cry, pulmonary hypertension, and severe metabolic
acidosis responding to parenteral thiamine has been reported in
infants of mothers consuming polished and frequently washed rice.
Death from nutritional thiamine deficiency usually is secondary
to cardiac involvement. The initial signs are cyanosis and dyspnea,
but tachycardia, enlargement of the liver, loss of consciousness,
and convulsions can develop rapidly. The heart, especially the right
side, is enlarged. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows an increased
QT interval, inverted T waves, and low voltage. These changes, as
well as the cardiomegaly, rapidly revert to normal with treatment,
but without prompt treatment, cardiac failure can develop rapidly
and result in death. In fatal cases of beriberi, lesions are principally
located in the heart, peripheral nerves, subcutaneous tissue, and
serous cavities. The heart is dilated, and fatty degeneration of the
myocardium is common. Generalized edema or edema of the legs,
serous effusions, and venous engorgement are often present. Degeneration of myelin and axon cylinders of the peripheral nerves, with
Wallerian degeneration beginning in the distal locations, is also
common, particularly in the lower extremities. Lesions in the brain
include vascular dilation and hemorrhage.

459

Table 67.3  Suggested Criteria for the Diagnosis of
Inherited Thiamine Defects with Prominent
Neurologic Involvement
REQUIRED
1.	Clinical criteria
a.	
SLCI9A3: Acute or recurrent episodes of encephalopathy
(decreased consciousness, irritability) with two or more of the
following: (a) dystonia, (b) hypotonia, (c) bulbar dysfunction, (d)
ataxia, and (e) seizures. Of note, 16% of patients may have an
insidious onset of symptoms (psychomotor regression, clumsy
or abnormal gait, and stiff limbs).
b.	
SLC25AI9: Acute or recurrent episodes of encephalopathy with
(a) progressive peripheral neuropathy or (b) severe congenital
microcephaly with brain malformations.
c.	
TPK1: Acute or recurrent episodes of encephalopathy, with
two or more of the following: (a) dystonia, (b) hypotonia, (c)
ataxia, (d) seizures, and (e) developmental delay. Of note,
some patients may have a nonepisodic early-­onset global
developmental delay.
2.	Biochemical criteria
a.	Normal total thiamine blood levels
b.	Low free-­thiamine in CSF and/or fibroblasts (SLC19A3)
c.	Low TPP in blood, muscle, and/or fibroblasts (TPK1)
d.	High excretion of alpha-­ketoglutaric acid in urine (common in
TPK1 and SLC25A19, rare in SLC19A3)
3.	Radiologic criteria
a.	MRI pattern compatible with Leigh syndrome (SLC19A3,
SLC25A19, TPK1) or Wernicke encephalopathy (SLC19A3)
i.	SLC19A3: Symmetric T2W hyperintensity of caudate,
putamen, cortico/subcortical areas, and/or ventromedial
thalamus. No involvement of mammillary bodies. Diffuse
T2W hyperintensity of brain white matter (single adult
patient reported).
ii.	SLC25A19: Symmetric T2W hyperintensity in the caudate
and putamen.
iii.	TPK1: Symmetric T2W hyperintensity in basal ganglia and
cerebellum (dentate nuclei).
4.	Therapeutic criteria
a.	Clinical improvement after thiamine supplementation
SUPPORTIVE
1.	Consanguinity
2.	Trigger event (e.g., infection, vaccination, trauma, intense physical
activity)
3.	Absence of predisposing factors of beriberi or Wernicke
encephalopathy
4.	Absence of systemic features of mitochondrial disease
(cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia/conduction defects, renal
tubulopathy, or dysmorphic features)
5.	Increased lactate in blood and/or CSF or presence of a lactate
peak on MRS
6.	Normal OXPHOS and PDHc activity in muscle and fibroblast
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OXPHOS, oxidative
phosphorylation: PDHc, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; MRS, magnetic
resonance spectroscopy; TPP, thiamine pyrophosphate; T2W, T2-­weighted.
From Marcé-­Grau A, Martí-­Sánchez L, Baide-­Mairena H, Ortigoza-­Escobar JD, Pérez-­
Dueñas B. Genetic defects of thiamine transport and metabolism: A review of clinical
phenotypes, genetics, and functional studies. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019;42(4):581–597,
Table 3, p. 586.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis is often suspected based on clinical setting and compatible symptoms. A high index of suspicion in children presenting with unexplained cardiac failure may sometimes be lifesaving.
Objective biochemical tests of thiamine status include measurement of erythrocyte transketolase activity and the thiamine pyrophosphate effect. The biochemical diagnostic criteria of thiamine
deficiency consist of low erythrocyte transketolase activity and high
thiamine pyrophosphate effect (normal range: 0–14%). Urinary
excretion of thiamine or its metabolites (thiazole or pyrimidine)

after an oral loading dose of thiamine may also be measured to help
identify the deficiency state. A diagnostic approach to genetic thiamine deficiencies is noted in Table 67.3. MRI changes of nutritional
and genetic thiamine deficiency in infants are characterized by
bilateral symmetric hyperintensities of the basal ganglia and frontal
lobe, in addition to the lesions in the mammillary bodies, periaqueductal region, and thalami described in adults (Fig. 67.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

460 Part V u Nutrition
SLC19A3

SLC25A19

TPK1

Fig. 67.1 MRI patterns in pa-

tients with inherited thiamine defects. SLC19A3, Axial and coronal
T2-­
weighted images show bilateral symmetric involvement of the
putamen and thalamus along with
patchy cortical and subcortical hyperintensities. SLC25A19, Axial
T2-­weighted and T1-­weighted images show cystic necrosis of the
caudate and putamen. TPK1, Axial
and coronal T2-­weighted spin-­echo
images show involvement of the
posterior putamen and dentate
nuclei (gray arrow). (Modified from
Ortigoza-­
Escobar JD, Alfadhel
M, Molero-­Luis M, et al. Thiamine
deficiency in childhood with attention to genetic causes: Survival and
outcome predictors. Ann Neurol.
2017;82[3]:317-­330, Fig. 3, p. 322.)

Prevention

A maternal diet containing sufficient amounts of thiamine prevents
thiamine deficiency in breastfed infants, and infant formulas marketed in all developed countries provide recommended levels of
intake. During complementary feeding, adequate thiamine intake
can be achieved with a varied diet that includes meat and enriched
or whole-­grain cereals. When the staple cereal is polished rice,
special efforts need to be made to include legumes and/or nuts in
the ration. Thiamine and other vitamins can be retained in rice by
parboiling, a process of steaming the rice in the husk before milling. Improvement in cooking techniques, such as not discarding the
water used for cooking, minimal washing of grains, and reduction
of cooking time, helps to minimize the thiamine losses during the
preparation of food. Thiamine supplementation should be ensured
during total parenteral nutrition (TPN).

Treatment

In the absence of GI disturbances, oral administration of thiamine is
effective. Children with cardiac failure, convulsions, or coma should
be given 10-50 mg of thiamine intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously
(IV) daily for the first week. This treatment should then be followed by
3-­5 mg/day of thiamine orally (PO) for at least 6 weeks. The response
is dramatic in infants and in those having predominantly cardiovascular manifestations, whereas the neurologic response is slow and often
incomplete. Epilepsy, mental disability, and language and auditory
problems of varying degrees have been reported in survivors of severe
infantile thiamine deficiency.
Patients with beriberi often have other B-­complex vitamin deficiencies; therefore all other B-­complex vitamins should also be

administered. Treatment of TRMA syndrome and other genetic
pathogenic variants of thiamine metabolism require higher dosages (Table 67.2). The anemia responds well to thiamine administration, and insulin for associated diabetes mellitus can also be
discontinued in many patients with TRMA syndrome. Patients with
BTBGD need lifelong supplementation.

THIAMINE TOXICITY

There are no reports of adverse effects from consumption of excess
thiamine by ingestion of food or supplements. A few isolated cases of
pruritus and anaphylaxis have been reported in patients after parenteral administration of vitamin B1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

67.2 Riboflavin (Vitamin B2)
H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Riboflavin is part of the structure of the coenzymes flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and flavin mononucleotide, which participate in oxidation-­
reduction (redox) reactions in numerous metabolic pathways and in
energy production via the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Specific transporter proteins direct riboflavin intracellularly for these functions. Riboflavin is stable to heat but is destroyed by light. Milk and dairy products,
eggs, organ meats, legumes, and mushrooms are rich dietary sources of
riboflavin. Most commercial cereals, flours, and breads are enriched with
riboflavin.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 67 u Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess

461

RIBOFLAVIN DEFICIENCY

The causes of riboflavin deficiency (ariboflavinosis) are mainly related
to malnourished and malabsorptive states, including GI infections.
Treatment with some drugs, such as probenecid, phenothiazine, doxorubicin, or oral contraceptives (OCs), can also cause the deficiency.
Phototherapy for hyperbilirubinemia can contribute to deficiency as
the side chain of the vitamin is photochemically destroyed because it
is involved in the photosensitized oxidation of bilirubin to more polar
excretable compounds.
Brown-­Vialetto-­Van Laere syndrome (BVVLS) and Fazio-­Londe
syndrome are clinically overlapping conditions related to riboflavin
transporter deficiency (RTD). Pathologic variants (autosomal recessive) of the SLC52A1 (type 1), SLC52A2 (type 2), and SLC52A3 (type 3)
genes, which encode intestinal human riboflavin transporter proteins,
have been demonstrated in these disorders characterized by progressive
neurologic deterioration, peripheral neuropathy, hypotonia, ataxia,
sensorineural hearing loss (usually the first symptom), optic atrophy,
pontobulbar palsy, and respiratory insufficiency. Age of onset is variable; the later the onset, the milder the symptoms. Treatment with high
doses (10-­80 mg/kg/day) of riboflavin lead to clinical improvement in
the majority of cases, especially if treated early in the disease course.
Prophylaxis with riboflavin has been demonstrated to be effective in
the reduction of frequency of headache in adult migraine; the evidence
is insufficient in children and adolescents.

Fig. 67.2 Clinical photograph of a child showing angular cheilosis with
ulceration and crusting in riboflavin deficiency. (Courtesy National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research, Hyderabad, India.)

Clinical Manifestations

Clinical features of nutritional riboflavin deficiency include cheilosis, glossitis, keratitis, conjunctivitis, photophobia, lacrimation, corneal vascularization, and seborrheic dermatitis. Cheilosis begins with pallor at the
angles of the mouth and progresses to thinning and maceration of the epithelium, leading to fissures extending radially into the skin (Fig. 67.2). In
glossitis the tongue becomes smooth, with loss of papillary structure (Fig.
67.3). Normochromic, normocytic anemia may also be seen because of the
impaired erythropoiesis. A low riboflavin content of the maternal diet has
been linked to congenital heart defects, but the evidence is weak.

Diagnosis

Most often, the diagnosis is based on the clinical features of angular cheilosis
in a malnourished child, who responds promptly to riboflavin supplementation. A functional test of riboflavin status is done by measuring the activity
of erythrocyte glutathione reductase (EGR), with and without the addition
of FAD. An EGR activity coefficient (ratio of EGR activity with added FAD
to EGR activity without FAD) of >1.4 is used as an indicator of deficiency.
Urinary excretion of riboflavin <30 μg/24 hr also suggests low intake.
Riboflavin transporter deficiency may be detected by genetic testing.

Prevention

Table 67.1 lists the recommended daily allowance of riboflavin for
infants, children, and adolescents. Adequate consumption of milk,
milk products, and eggs prevents riboflavin deficiency. Fortification of
cereal products is helpful for those who follow vegan diets or who are
consuming inadequate amounts of milk products for other reasons.

Treatment

Treatment includes oral administration of 3-­10 mg/day of riboflavin, often as an ingredient of a vitamin B–complex mix. The child
should also be given a well-­balanced diet, including milk and milk
products.

RIBOFLAVIN TOXICITY

No adverse effects associated with riboflavin intake from food or supplements have been reported, and the upper safe limit for consumption
has not been established. Although the photosensitizing property of
vitamin B2 suggests some potential risks, limited absorption in high-­
intake situations precludes such concerns.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 67.3 Papillary atrophy, inflammation, and ulceration of the

tongue as seen in riboflavin deficiency. (From Zappe HA, Nuss S, Becker
K, et al. Riboflavin deficiency in Baltistan. http://www.rzuser.uni-­heidelb
erg.de/%7Ecn6/baltista/ribofl_e.htm.)

67.3 Niacin (Vitamin B3)
H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Niacin (nicotinamide or nicotinic acid) forms part of two cofactors, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), which are important in several biologic reactions,
including the respiratory chain, fatty acid and steroid synthesis, cell differentiation, and DNA processing. Niacin is rapidly absorbed from the stomach
and the intestines and can also be synthesized from tryptophan in the diet.
Major dietary sources of niacin are meat, fish, and poultry for nonvegetarians and cereals, legumes, and green leafy vegetables for vegetarians. Enriched
and fortified cereal products and legumes also are major contributors to niacin
intake. Milk and eggs contain little niacin but are good sources of tryptophan,
which can be converted to NAD (60 mg tryptophan = 1 mg niacin).

NIACIN DEFICIENCY

Pellagra, the classic niacin deficiency disease, occurs chiefly in populations where corn (maize), a poor source of tryptophan, is the major foodstuff. A severe dietary imbalance, such as in anorexia nervosa and in war
or famine conditions, also can cause pellagra. Pellagra is rare outside the
African subcontinent; however, consumption of a highly restrictive diet,
such as in autism, has led to some resurgence in high-­income countries.
Pellagra can also develop in conditions associated with disturbed tryptophan metabolism, such as carcinoid syndrome and Hartnup disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

462 Part V u Nutrition

A

Fig. 67.4 A, Symmetric, well-­
demarcated, erythematous, eroded
plaques with desquamation over
hands and forearms. B, Brownish
plaques with desquamation in the
distribution of neck collar (Casal necklace) because of pellagra in a child
with autism on highly restrictive diet.
(From Zaenglein A, Martin A, Carlson
L, Williams KE. Pellagra secondary to
selective eating in a child with autism.
Pediatr Dermatol. 2020;37:698–700.)

B

Clinical Manifestations

The early symptoms of pellagra are vague: anorexia, lassitude, weakness, burning sensation, numbness, and dizziness. After a long period
of deficiency, the classic triad of dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia
appears. Dermatitis, the most characteristic manifestation of pellagra,
can develop suddenly or insidiously and may be initiated by irritants,
including intense sunlight. The lesions first appear as symmetric areas
of erythema on exposed surfaces, resembling sunburn, and might go
unrecognized. The lesions are usually sharply demarcated from the
surrounding healthy skin, and their distribution can change frequently.
The lesions on the hands and feet often have the appearance of a glove
or stocking (Fig. 67.4A). Similar demarcations can also occur around
the neck (Casal necklace) (see Fig. 67.4B). In some cases, vesicles and
bullae develop (wet type). In others there may be suppuration beneath
the scaly, crusted epidermis; in still others the swelling can disappear
after a short time, followed by desquamation (Fig. 67.5). The healed
parts of the skin might remain pigmented. The cutaneous lesions may
be preceded by or accompanied by stomatitis, glossitis, vomiting, and
diarrhea. Swelling and redness of the tip of the tongue and its lateral
margins is often followed by intense redness, even ulceration, of the
entire tongue and the papillae. Central nervous system symptoms
include depression, disorientation, insomnia, and delirium.
The classic symptoms of pellagra usually are not well developed in
infants and young children, but anorexia, irritability, anxiety, and apathy
are common. Young patients might also have sore tongues and lips and
usually have dry scaly skin. Diarrhea and constipation can alternate, and
anemia can occur. Children who have pellagra often have evidence of
other nutritional deficiency diseases.

Diagnosis

Because of lack of a good functional test to evaluate niacin status, the
diagnosis of deficiency is usually made from the physical signs of glossitis, GI symptoms, and a symmetric dermatitis. Rapid clinical response to
niacin is an important confirmatory test. A decrease in the concentration
and/or a change in the proportion of the niacin metabolites N1-­methyl-­
nicotinamide and 2-­pyridone in the urine provide biochemical evidence
of deficiency and can be seen before the appearance of overt signs of deficiency. Histopathologic changes from the affected skin include dilated
blood vessels without significant inflammatory infiltrates, ballooning of
the keratinocytes, hyperkeratosis, and epidermal necrosis.

A

B
Fig. 67.5 Clinical manifestations of niacin deficiency before (A) and
after (B) therapy. (From Weinsier RL, Morgan SL. Fundamentals of Clinical Nutrition. St Louis: Mosby; 1993:99.)

Prevention

Adequate intake of niacin is easily met by consumption of a diet that consists of a variety of foods and includes meat, eggs, milk, and enriched or
fortified cereal products. The dietary reference intake (DRI) is expressed
in milligram niacin equivalents (NE) in which 1 mg NE = 1 mg niacin or
60 mg tryptophan. The DRI is summarized in Table 67.1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 67 u Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess
Treatment

Children usually respond rapidly to treatment. A liberal and varied diet
should be supplemented with 50-­300 mg/day of niacin; in severe cases
or in patients with poor intestinal absorption, 100 mg may be given IV.
The diet should also be supplemented with other vitamins, especially
other B-­complex vitamins. Sun exposure should be avoided during
the active phase of pellagra, and the skin lesions may be covered with
soothing applications. Other coexisting nutrient deficiencies such as
iron-­deficiency anemia should be treated. Even after successful treatment, the diet should continue to be monitored to prevent recurrence.

NIACIN TOXICITY

No toxic effects are associated with the intake of naturally occurring niacin in foods. Shortly after the ingestion of large doses of nicotinic acid
taken as a supplement or a pharmacologic agent, a person often experiences a burning, tingling, and itching sensation, as well as flushing on
the face, arms, and chest. Large doses of niacin also can have nonspecific
GI effects and can cause cholestatic jaundice or hepatotoxicity. Tolerable
upper intake levels for children are 10 mg/day for 1-­3 years, 15 mg/day
for 4-­8 years, 20 mg/day for 9-­13 years, and 30 mg/day for 14-­18 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

67.4 Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine)
H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Vitamin B6 includes a group of closely related compounds: pyridoxine, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and their phosphorylated
derivatives. Pyridoxal 5′-­phosphate (PLP) and, to a lesser extent,
pyridoxamine phosphate function as coenzymes for many enzymes
involved in amino acid metabolism, neurotransmitter synthesis,
glycogen metabolism, and steroid action. If vitamin B6 is lacking,
glycine metabolism can lead to oxaluria. The major excretory product in the urine is 4-­pyridoxic acid.
The vitamin B6 content of human milk and infant formulas is adequate. Good food sources of the vitamin include fortified ready-­to-­eat
cereals, meat, fish, poultry, liver, bananas, rice, and certain vegetables.
Large losses of the vitamin can occur during high-­temperature processing of foods or milling of cereals, whereas parboiling of rice prevents its loss.

VITAMIN B6 DEFICIENCY

Because of the importance of vitamin B6 in amino acid metabolism, high protein intake can increase the requirement for the vitamin; the recommended daily allowances are sufficient to cover
the expected range of protein intake in the population. The risk of
deficiency is increased in persons taking medications that inhibit
the activity of vitamin B6 (e.g., isoniazid, penicillamine, corticosteroids, phenytoin, carbamazepine), in young women taking oral
progesterone-­
estrogen contraceptives, and in patients receiving
maintenance dialysis.

Clinical Manifestations

The vitamin B6 deficiency symptoms seen in infants are listlessness,
irritability, seizures, vomiting, and failure to thrive. Peripheral neuritis is a feature of deficiency in adults but is not usually seen in children. EEG abnormalities have been reported in infants and in young
adults in controlled depletion studies. Skin lesions include cheilosis, glossitis, and seborrheic dermatitis around the eyes, nose, and
mouth. Microcytic anemia can occur in infants but is not common.
Oxaluria, oxalic acid bladder stones, hyperglycinemia, lymphopenia,
decreased antibody formation, and infections also are associated with
vitamin B6 deficiency.
Several types of vitamin B6 dependence syndromes, presumably resulting from errors in metabolism or transport of PLP or

463

pyridoxine, respond to large doses of pyridoxine. These syndromes
include pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy, a vitamin B6–responsive
anemia, xanthurenic aciduria, cystathioninuria, and homocystinuria. Pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy involves pathologic variants in the ALDH7A1 gene causing deficiency of antiquitin, an
enzyme involved in dehydrogenation of α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde. Pathologic variants of the genes PROSC, which encodes a
PLP binding protein, and PNPO encoding for the pyridoxamine
5-­phosphate oxidase enzyme also cause epilepsy responsive to
PLP or high doses of pyridoxine. Neonatal epileptic encephalopathy and hypophosphatasia are associated with impaired import of
PLP into the neuronal cells, and seizures occurring in these conditions also respond to pyridoxine therapy.

Diagnosis

The activity of aspartate (glutamic-­oxaloacetic) transaminase (AST)
and alanine (glutamic-­pyruvic) transaminase (ALT) is low in vitamin
B6 deficiency; tests measuring the activity of these enzymes before and
after the addition of PLP may be useful as indicators of vitamin B6
status. Abnormally high xanthurenic acid excretion after tryptophan
ingestion also provides evidence of deficiency. Plasma PLP assays are
being used more often, but factors such as inflammation, renal function, and hypoalbuminemia can influence the results. Ratios between
substrate-­product pairs (e.g., PAr index, 3-­hydroxykynurenine/xanthurenic acid ratio, oxoglutarate/glutamate ratio) may attenuate such
influence. Quantification of a large number of metabolites, using mass
spectrometry–based metabolomics, are being evaluated as functional
biomarkers of pyridoxine status.
Vitamin B6 deficiency or dependence should be suspected in all
infants with seizures. If more common causes of infantile seizures have
been eliminated, 100 mg of pyridoxine can be injected, with EEG monitoring if possible. If the seizure stops, vitamin B6 deficiency should be
suspected. In older children, 100 mg of pyridoxine may be injected IM
while the EEG is being recorded; a favorable response of the EEG suggests pyridoxine deficiency.

Prevention

Deficiency is unlikely in children consuming diets that meet their
energy needs and contain a variety of foods. Parboiling of rice prevents the loss of vitamin B6 from the grains. The dietary reference
intake for vitamin B6 is shown in Table 67.1. Infants whose mothers have received large doses of pyridoxine during pregnancy are at
increased risk for seizures from pyridoxine dependence, and supplements during the first few weeks of life should be considered. Any
child receiving a pyridoxine antagonist, such as isoniazid, should be
carefully observed for neurologic manifestations; if these develop,
vitamin B6 should be administered or the dose of the antagonist
should be decreased.

Treatment

Intramuscular or intravenous administration of 100 mg of pyridoxine
is used to treat convulsions caused by vitamin B6 deficiency. One dose
should be sufficient if adequate dietary intake follows. For pyridoxine-­
dependent children, daily doses of 2-­10 mg IM or 10-­100 mg PO may
be necessary.

VITAMIN B6 TOXICITY

Adverse effects have not been associated with high intakes of vitamin B6 from food sources. However, ataxia and sensory neuropathy
have been reported with dosages above 200 mg/day in adults taking
vitamin B6 supplements for several months. Tolerable upper intake
levels for children are 30 mg/day for 1-­3 years, 40 mg/day for 4-­8
years, 60 mg/day for 9-­13 years, and 80 mg/day for 14-­18 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

464 Part V u Nutrition

67.5 Biotin
H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Biotin (vitamin B7 or vitamin H) functions as a cofactor for enzymes
involved in carboxylation reactions within and outside mitochondria. These biotin-­dependent carboxylases catalyze key reactions in
gluconeogenesis, fatty acid metabolism, and amino acid catabolism.
There is limited information on the biotin content of foods; biotin
is believed to be widely distributed, making a deficiency unlikely.
Avidin found in raw egg whites acts as a biotin antagonist. Signs
of biotin deficiency have been demonstrated in persons who consume large amounts of raw egg whites over long periods. Deficiency
also has been described in infants and children receiving enteral
and parenteral nutrition formula that lacks biotin. Treatment with
valproic acid may result in a low biotinidase activity and/or biotin
deficiency.
The clinical findings of biotin deficiency include scaly periorificial dermatitis, conjunctivitis, thinning of hair, and alopecia (Fig.
67.6). Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities seen with biotin
deficiency are lethargy, hypotonia, seizures, ataxia, and withdrawn
behavior. Biotin deficiency can be successfully treated using 1-­10
mg of biotin orally daily. The dietary reference intake for biotin is
shown in Table 67.1. No toxic effects have been reported with very
high doses.
Biotin-­responsive basal ganglia disease or biotin and thiamine–
responsive basal ganglia disease is a rare childhood neurologic disorder characterized by encephalopathy, seizures, extrapyramidal
manifestations, altered signals in basal ganglia (bilateral involvement
of caudate nuclei and putamen with sparing of globus pallidus) on
MRI, and homozygous pathologic variation in the SLC19A3 gene (see
Table 67.2). Chapter 105 describes conditions involving deficiencies in
the enzymes holocarboxylase synthetase and biotinidase that respond
to treatment with biotin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

structure of pteroylglutamic acid but vary in their state of reduction,
the single-­carbon moiety they bear, or the length of the glutamate
chain. These polyglutamates are broken down and reduced in the small
intestine to dihydrofolates and tetrahydrofolates, which are involved as
coenzymes in amino acid and nucleotide metabolism as acceptors and
donors of 1-­carbon units. Folate is important for CNS development
during embryogenesis.
Rice and cereals are rich dietary sources of folate, especially if
enriched. Beans, leafy vegetables, and fruits such as oranges and
papaya are good sources as well. The vitamin is readily absorbed
from the small intestine and is broken down to monoglutamate
derivatives by mucosal polyglutamate hydrolases. A high-­affinity
proton-­coupled folate transporter (PCFT) seems to be essential
for absorption of folate in the intestine and in various cell types at
low pH. The vitamin is also synthesized by colonic bacteria, and
its half-­l ife is prolonged by enterohepatic recirculation.

FOLATE DEFICIENCY

Because of folate’s role in protein, DNA, and RNA synthesis, the
risk of deficiency is increased during periods of rapid growth or
increased cellular metabolism. Folate deficiency can result from
poor nutrient content in the diet, inadequate absorption (celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease), increased requirement (sickle
cell anemia, psoriasis, malignancies, periods of rapid growth as in
infancy and adolescence), or inadequate use (long-­term treatment
with high-­dose nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; anticonvulsants such as phenytoin and phenobarbital; methotrexate). Rare
causes of deficiency are hereditary folate malabsorption, inborn
errors of folate metabolism (methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase,
methionine synthase reductase, and glutamate formiminotransferase deficiencies), and cerebral folate deficiency. A loss-­of-­function
pathologic variant in the gene coding for PCFT is the molecular
basis for hereditary folate malabsorption. A high-­affinity blocking
autoantibody against the membrane-­bound folate receptor in the
choroid plexus preventing its transport across the blood-­brain barrier is the likely cause of infantile cerebral folate deficiency.

Clinical Manifestations

67.6 Folate
H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Folate exists in different chemical forms (Fig. 67.7). Folic acid (pteroylglutamic acid) is the synthetic form used in fortified foods and supplements. Naturally occurring folates in foods retain the core chemical

Folic acid deficiency results in megaloblastic anemia and hypersegmentation of neutrophils. Nonhematologic manifestations include
glossitis, listlessness, and growth retardation not related to anemia.
An association exists between low maternal folic acid status and neural tube defects, primarily spina bifida and anencephaly, and the role
of periconceptional folic acid in their prevention is well established
(see Chapter 503.1).
Hereditary folate malabsorption manifests at 1-­3 months of age
with recurrent or chronic diarrhea, failure to thrive (malnutrition), oral
ulcerations, neurologic deterioration, megaloblastic anemia, and opportunistic infections. Cerebral folate deficiency manifests at 4-­6 months
of age with irritability, microcephaly, developmental delay, cerebellar
ataxia, pyramidal tract signs, choreoathetosis, ballismus, seizures, and
blindness as a result of optic atrophy. 5-­Methyltetrahydrofolate levels
are normal in serum and red blood cells (RBCs) but greatly depressed
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

Diagnosis

A

B

Fig. 67.6 A, Scalp rash in an infant with biotin deficiency before treatment with biotin. B, After 3 weeks of biotin treatment. (From Ito T, Nishie W, Fujita Y, et al. Infantile eczema caused by formula milk. Lancet.
2013;381:1958.)

The diagnosis of folic acid deficiency anemia is made in the presence of macrocytosis along with low folate levels in serum or RBCs.
Normal serum folic acid levels are 5-­20 ng/mL; with deficiency, levels
are <3 ng/mL. Levels of RBC folate are a better indicator of chronic
deficiency. The normal RBC folate level is 150-­600 ng/mL of packed
cells. The bone marrow is hypercellular because of erythroid hyperplasia, and megaloblastic changes are prominent. Large, abnormal
neutrophilic forms (giant metamyelocytes) with cytoplasmic vacuolation also are seen.
Cerebral folate deficiency is associated with low levels of
5-­methyltetrahydrofolate in CSF and normal folate levels in the plasma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 67 u Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess

465

Folic acid
DHFR

DHF

DHFR
Folinic acid

THF
Food folates
Serine
Glycine

MTHFR

MTFS

SHMT
MTHFD

5-MTHF

5,10ME-THF

Homocysteïne methionine cycle

Thymidine synthesis
(pyrimidine)

5,10MY-THF

MTHFD

10-FTHF

Purine
biosynthesis

Methylation reactions
(SAM)
Fig. 67.7 Simplified scheme of folate metabolism; 5-­MTHF is the predominant form in which dietary folate enters the circulation. Synthetic
folic acid first has to be metabolized in two steps to the biologically active form THF, whereas the biologically derived folinic acid is already
reduced and easily converted to 5,10-­methenyl-­THF. Serine is an important one carbon donor and allows entry of THF into the active one-­carbon
pool of intermediates by way of 5,10-­methylene-­THF, which functions as a cofactor for the synthesis of thymidine. 5,10-­Methylene-­THF can be
metabolized to 5-­MTHF for the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine, or it can be converted to 10-­formyl-­THF for use in purine synthesis.1 DHF, dihydrofolate; DHFR, dihydrofolate reductase; THF, tetrahydrofolate; 5-­MTHF, 5-­methyltetrahydrofolate; SAM, S-­adenosylmethionine;
5,10-­ME-­THF, 5,10-­methylene-­THF; 5,10-­MYTHF, 5,10-­methenyl-­THF; 10-­F-­THF, 10-­formyl-­THF; MTFS, 5,10-­methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase.
(From Lubout CMA, Goorden SMI, van den Hurk K, et al. Successful treatment of hereditary folate malabsorption with intramuscular folinic acid.
Pediatr Neurol. 2020;102:62-­66, Fig. 2, p. 64.)

and RBCs. Pathologic variants of the PCFT gene are demonstrated in
hereditary folate malabsorption.

Prevention

Breastfed infants have better folate nutrition than nonbreastfed
infants throughout infancy. Consumption of folate-­rich foods and
food fortification programs are important to ensure adequate intake
in children and in women of childbearing age. The dietary reference intakes (DRIs) for folate are 65 μg of dietary folate equivalents (DFE) for infants 0-­6 months of age and 80 μg of DFE for
infants 6-­12 months. (1 DFE = 1 μg food folate = 0.6 μg of folate
from fortified food or as a supplement consumed with food = 0.5 μg
of a supplement taken on an empty stomach.) For the DRIs in older
children, see Table 67.1. All women desirous of becoming pregnant
should consume 400-­800 μg folic acid daily; the dose is 4 mg/day in
those having delivered a child with a neural tube defect. To be effective, supplementation should be started at least 1 month before conception and continued through the first 2-­3 months of pregnancy.
The benefit of periconceptional folate supplementation in prevention of congenital heart defects, orofacial clefts, childhood cancers,
and autism spectrum disorders are unclear. Preconceptional folate
supplementation continued throughout pregnancy may marginally
reduce the risk of delivering a preterm or small-­for-­gestational-­age
infant. Providing iron and folic acid tablets for prevention of anemia in children and pregnant women is a routine strategy in at-­risk
populations. Mandatory fortification of cereal flours with folic acid

coupled with health education programs has been associated with
a substantial reduction in incidence of neural tube defects in many
countries.

Treatment

When the diagnosis of folate deficiency is established, folic acid may
be administered orally or parenterally at 0.5-­1.0 mg/day. Folic acid
therapy should be continued for 3-­4 weeks or until a definite hematologic response has occurred. Maintenance therapy with 0.2 mg/day of
folate is adequate. Prolonged treatment with oral or parenteral folinic
acid is required in cerebral folate deficiency, and the response may be
incomplete. High-­dose intravenous folinic acid may help in refractory
cases. Treatment of hereditary folate malabsorption may be possible
with intramuscular folinic acid; some patients may respond to high-­
dose oral folinic acid therapy.

FOLATE TOXICITY

No adverse effects have been associated with consumption of the
amounts of folate normally found in fortified foods. Tolerable
upper intake levels for children are 300 μg/day for 1-­3 years, 400 μg/
day for 4-­8 years, 600 μg/day for 9-­13 years, and 800 μg/day for 14-­
18 years. Excessive intake of folate supplements might obscure and
potentially delay the diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency. Massive
doses given by injection have the potential to cause neurotoxicity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

466 Part V u Nutrition

67.7 Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin)

VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY

H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah
Vitamin B12, in the form of deoxyadenosylcobalamin, functions as a
cofactor for isomerization of methylmalonyl-­CoA to succinyl-­CoA,
an essential reaction in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Methylcobalamin is another circulating form of vitamin B12 and is essential
for methyl group transfer during the conversion of homocysteine to
methionine. This reaction also requires a folic acid cofactor and is
important for protein and nucleic acid biosynthesis. Vitamin B12 is
important for hematopoiesis, CNS myelination, and mental and psychomotor development (Fig. 67.8).
Dietary sources of vitamin B12 are almost exclusively from animal
foods. Organ meats, muscle meats, seafood (mollusks, oysters, fish),
poultry, and egg yolk are rich sources. Fortified ready-­to-­eat cereals
and milk and their products are the important sources of the vitamin
for vegetarians. Human milk is an adequate source for breastfeeding
infants if the maternal serum B12 levels are adequate. Vitamin B12 is
absorbed from ileum at alkaline pH after binding with intrinsic factor.
Enterohepatic circulation, direct absorption, and synthesis by intestinal bacteria are additional mechanisms helping to maintain the vitamin B12 nutriture.

Deficiency of vitamin B12 caused by inadequate dietary intake
occurs primarily in persons consuming strict vegetarian or vegan
diets. Prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency is high in predominantly vegetarian or lactovegetarian populations. Breastfeeding
infants of B12-­deficient mothers are also at risk for significant deficiency. Malabsorption of B12 occurs in celiac disease, ileal resections, Crohn disease, Helicobacter pylori infection, and autoimmune
atrophic gastritis (pernicious anemia). Obesity, type 1 diabetes,
and use of metformin and proton pump inhibitors histamine (H2)
receptor antagonists and misuse of nitrous oxide—usually in the
form of inhaling aerosol whipped cream (whippits)—may increase
the risk of deficiency. Hereditary intrinsic factor deficiency and
Imerslund-­Gräsbeck disease are inborn errors of metabolism
leading to vitamin B12 malabsorption. Pathologic variants of the
hereditary intrinsic factor gene cause hereditary intrinsic factor
deficiency, whereas pathologic variation in any of the two subunits (cubilin and amnionless) of the intrinsic factor receptor cause
Imerslund-­Gräsbeck disease. Maternal vitamin B12 deficiency may
produce neonatal B12 deficiency, which may be detected by elevated levels of homocysteine and methylmalonic acid on the newborn screen.

cbIG
Methionine

Homocysteine

HCFC1

MS-MeCbl
cbIX
MSR

cbIE

LMBD1
MMADHC

MS-cob(II)alamin
cbIDv1

ABCD4
MMACHCcob(II)alamin

cbID

Cbl

Cbl
cbIC

TCbIR

TC

Cbl
TC

cbIF
cbIJ

cbIDv2

cob(II)alamin
cbIB

ATR
AdoCbl
MMAA
cbIA
MCM-AdoCbl

Methylmalonyl-CoA

Succinyl-CoA
mut

Fig. 67.8 Scheme of cobalamin (Cbl) metabolism. The sites affected by methylmalonyl-­CoA mutase deficiency (mut) and inborn errors of cobala-

min metabolism (cblA-­cblG, cblJ, and cblX) are shown in red. The cblA disorder is caused by defects in the MMAA protein; the cblB disorder by
defects in the cob(I)alamin adenosyltransferase (MMAB) protein; the cblC disorder by defects in the MMACHC protein; the cblD, cblD variant 1
(cblDv1), and cblD variant 2 (cblDv2) disorders are caused by defects in the MMADHC protein; cblE disorder is caused by defects in the methionine
synthase reductase (MSR) protein; cblG disorder by defects in the methionine synthase (MS) protein; cblJ disorder by pathologic variants in the
ABCD4 protein; cblX disorder by pathologic variation in the HCFC1 protein, and the mut disorder by defects in methylmalonyl-­CoA mutase (MCM).
The protein affected in the cblF disorder is unknown. MCM-­AdoCbl, Holomethylmalonyl-­CoA mutase (mutase with bound adenosylcobalamin);
MS-­cob(II)alamin, methionine synthase with bound cob(II)alamin; MS-­MeCbl, holomethionine synthase (synthase with bound methylcobalamin); TC,
transcobalamin. (From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:318.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 67 u Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess

467

A

Fig. 67.9 MRI of the cervical spine illustrating a long segment of T2
hyperintensity involving the dorsal column of virtually the entire cervical spinal cord consistent with a diagnosis of subacute combined degeneration from vitamin B12 deficiency. (From Stockton L, Simonsen C,
Seago S. Nitrous oxide-­induced vitamin B12 deficiency. Proc [Bayl Univ
Med Cent]. 2017;30[2]:171–172.)

Clinical Manifestations

The hematologic manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency are
similar to manifestations of folate deficiency and are discussed in
Chapter 503.2. Irritability, hypotonia, developmental delay, developmental regression, and involuntary movements (predominantly
coarse tremors) are the common neurologic symptoms in infants.
Older children with vitamin B12 deficiency may show poor growth
and poor school performance, whereas sensory deficits, paresthesias, peripheral neuritis, and psychosis are seen in adolescents and
adults (Fig. 67.9). Hyperpigmentation of the knuckles, palms, and
soles is another common observation with B12 deficiency in children and adolescents (Fig. 67.10).

Diagnosis

See Chapter 503.2.
Vitamin B12 deficiency may be present with vitamin B12 levels in the
normal or low normal range and without macrocytosis. Ancillary testing of
methylmalonic acid and homocysteine levels may enhance the diagnosis.

Treatment

The hematologic symptoms respond promptly to parenteral administration of 250-­1,000 μg vitamin B12. Children with severe deficiency and those with neurologic symptoms need repeated doses,
daily or on alternate days in the first week, followed by weekly for
the first 1-­2 months and then monthly. Children with only hematologic presentation recover fully within 2-­3 months, whereas those
with neurologic disease need at least 6 months of therapy. Children
with a continuing malabsorptive state and those with inborn errors
of vitamin B12 malabsorption need lifelong treatment. Daily treatment with high-­dose (500-­1,000 μg) oral vitamin B12 preparations
has also been shown to be equally effective in correcting biochemical vitamin B12 deficiency in a few trials in children, but data are
inadequate to support use of the oral route in children with neurologic manifestations and severe anemia. The sublingual route has
recently been explored in infants and children and has been found
to be effective in normalizing serum vitamin B12 levels.

B
Fig. 67.10 Hyperpigmentation of (A) knuckles and (B) soles in an adolescent female with severe anemia and vitamin B12 deficiency.

Prevention

Vitamin B12 dietary reference intakes (DRIs) are shown in Table
67.1. In pregnancy the DRI is 2.6 μg/day and in lactation 2.8 μg/
day. Pregnant and breastfeeding women should ensure an adequate
consumption of animal products to prevent cobalamin deficiency
in infants. Strict vegetarians, especially vegans, should ensure regular consumption of vitamin B12. Food fortification with the vitamin
helps to prevent deficiency in predominantly vegetarian populations. Though metabolic derangements suggestive of vitamin B12
deficiency are present in a high proportion of infants and children
from low-­income country settings, routine supplementation with
vitamin B12 does not seem to significantly improve their growth,
development, or hemoglobin status.

Toxicity

Administration of therapeutic doses, both in oral and parenteral
forms, is usually safe. Transient erythroderma and chromaturia have been reported with administration of adult-­equivalent
doses of intravenous hydroxycobalamin in a child. Acneiform
eruptions, palpitations, headache, and insomnia have been occasionally reported in young adults receiving repeated high parenteral
doses.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

468 Part V u Nutrition

Chapter 68

Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid)
Deficiency and Excess
Dheeraj Shah and H.P.S. Sachdev
Vitamin C is important for synthesis of collagen at the level of hydroxylation of lysine and proline in precollagen. It is also involved in neurotransmitter metabolism (conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine and
tryptophan to serotonin), cholesterol metabolism (conversion of cholesterol to steroid hormones and bile acids), and the biosynthesis of carnitine.
Vitamin C functions to maintain the iron and copper atoms, cofactors of
the metalloenzymes, in a reduced (active) state. Vitamin C is an important
antioxidant (electron donor) in the aqueous milieu of the body. Vitamin C
enhances nonheme iron absorption, the transfer of iron from transferrin
to ferritin, and the formation of tetrahydrofolic acid and thus can affect the
cellular and immunologic functions of the hematopoietic system. Though
vitamin C has antiinflammatory and immunomodulating effects, there is
no evidence of clinical benefit of vitamin C supplementation in pediatric
critical illnesses and respiratory tract infections, including COVID-­19.

DIETARY NEEDS AND SOURCES OF VITAMIN C

Humans depend on dietary sources for vitamin C. An adequate
intake is 40 mg for ages 0-­6 months and 50 mg for 6-­12 months. For
older children, the recommended dietary allowance is 15 mg for ages
1-­3 years, 25 mg for 4-­8 years, 45 mg for 9-­13 years, and 65-­75 mg
for 14-­18 years. The recommended dietary allowances during pregnancy and lactation are 85 mg/day and 120 mg/day, respectively.
The requirement for vitamin C is increased during infectious and
diarrheal diseases. Children exposed to smoking or environmental
tobacco smoke also require increased amounts of foods rich in vitamin C. The best food sources of vitamin C are citrus fruits and fruit
juices, peppers, berries, melons, guava, kiwifruit, tomatoes, cauliflower, and green leafy vegetables. Vitamin C is easily destroyed by
prolonged storage, overcooking, and processing of foods.
Absorption of vitamin C occurs in the upper small intestine by an active
process or by simple diffusion when large amounts are ingested. Vitamin
C is not stored in the body but is taken up by all tissues; the highest levels
are found in the pituitary and adrenal glands. The brain ascorbate content in the fetus and neonate is markedly higher than the content in the
adult brain, a finding probably related to its function in neurotransmitter
synthesis.
When a mother’s intake of vitamin C during pregnancy and
lactation is adequate, the newborn will have adequate tissue levels of vitamin C related to active placental transfer, subsequently
maintained by the vitamin C in breast milk or commercial infant
formulas. Breast milk contains sufficient vitamin C to prevent
deficiency throughout infancy. Infants consuming pasteurized or
boiled animal milk are at significant risk of developing deficiency
if the other sources of vitamin C are also lacking in the diet. Neonates whose feeding has been delayed because of a clinical condition can also have ascorbic acid deficiency. For patients receiving
total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 80 mg/day is recommended for
full-­term infants and 25 mg/kg/day for preterm infants. Parents
and children who choose a limited (selective) diet or those on fad
diets are at risk for vitamin C deficiency.

VITAMIN C DEFICIENCY

A deficiency of vitamin C results in the clinical presentation of
scurvy. Children fed predominantly heat-­
treated (ultrahigh-­
temperature or pasteurized) milk or unfortified formulas and not
receiving fruits and fruit juices are at significant risk for symptomatic

disease. In the last decade, most cases of scurvy from North America and Europe have been reported in children with developmental
and behavioral disorders, especially autism spectrum disorders, on
highly restrictive diets. Such dietary patterns occur mainly due to
severe self-­imposed dietary restrictions due to child preference or
parental belief in unsubstantiated claims of benefit of such restrictions in autism and other developmental disorders. In scurvy, there
is defective formation of connective tissues and collagen in skin,
cartilage, dentine, bone, and blood vessels, leading to their fragility.
In the long bones, osteoid is not deposited by osteoblasts, the cortex
is thin, and the trabeculae become brittle and fracture easily.

Clinical Features

The early manifestations of vitamin C deficiency are irritability, loss
of appetite, low-­grade fever, musculoskeletal pain, and tenderness in
the legs. These signs and symptoms are followed by leg swelling—most
marked at the knees and the ankles—and pseudoparalysis. The infant
might lie with the hips and knees semiflexed and the feet rotated outward. Subperiosteal hemorrhages in the lower-­limb bones sometimes
acutely increase the swelling and pain, and the condition might mimic
acute osteomyelitis or arthritis. A “rosary” at the costochondral junctions and depression of the sternum are other typical features (Fig.
68.1). The angulation of scorbutic beads is usually sharper than that of a
rachitic rosary. Gum changes are seen in older children after teeth have
erupted, manifested as bluish purple, spongy swellings of the mucous
membrane, especially over the upper incisors (Fig. 68.2). Anemia, a
common finding in infants and young children with scurvy, is related
to impaired iron absorption and coexistent hematopoietic nutrient
deficiencies, including iron, vitamin B12, and folate. Hemorrhagic
manifestations of scurvy include petechiae, purpura, and ecchymoses at pressure points; epistaxis; gum bleeding; and the characteristic
perifollicular hemorrhages (Fig. 68.3). Other manifestations are poor
wound and fracture healing, hyperkeratosis of hair follicles, arthralgia,
and muscle weakness.

Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis

The diagnosis of vitamin C deficiency is usually based on the characteristic clinical picture, the radiographic appearance of the long
bones, and a history of poor vitamin C intake. A high index of
suspicion is required in children on restrictive diets, particularly
those with autism and other developmental disorders, and they
should be evaluated for scurvy whenever they present with difficulty in walking or bone pains. The typical radiographic changes
occur at the distal ends of the long bones and are particularly common at the knees. The shafts of the long bones have a ground-­glass
appearance because of trabecular atrophy. The cortex is thin and
dense, giving the appearance of pencil outlining of the diaphysis
and epiphysis. The white line of Fränkel, an irregular but thickened
white line at the metaphysis, represents the zone of well-­calcified
cartilage. The epiphyseal centers of ossification also have a ground-­
glass appearance and are surrounded by a sclerotic ring (Fig. 68.4).
The more specific but late radiologic feature of scurvy is a zone
of rarefaction under the white line at the metaphysis. This zone of
rarefaction (Trümmerfeld zone), a linear break in the bone that is
proximal and parallel to the white line, represents an area of debris
of broken-­down bone trabeculae and connective tissue. A Pelkan
spur is a lateral prolongation of the white line and may be present at
the cortical ends. Epiphyseal separation can occur along the line of
destruction, with either linear displacement or compression of the
epiphysis against the shaft (Fig. 68.5). Subperiosteal hemorrhages
are not visible using plain radiographs during the active phase of
scurvy. However, during healing, the elevated periosteum becomes
calcified and radiopaque (see Fig. 68.5), sometimes giving a dumbbell or club shape to the affected bone. MRI can demonstrate both
acute and healing subperiosteal hematomas along with periostitis,
metaphyseal changes (Fig. 68.4), and heterogeneous bone marrow
signal intensity, even in the absence of changes in plain radiographs.
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow on aspiration has been
reported in children with suspected malignancy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 68 u Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid) Deficiency and Excess

469

Fig. 68.1 Sharp angulation of beading at costochondral junction
(scorbutic rosary) in scurvy. (Courtesy Dr. J.D. MacLean, McGill Centre
for Tropical Diseases, Montreal.)

A

Fig. 68.2 Clinical photograph showing inflamed marginal gingiva in

scurvy. (From Agarwal A, Shaharyar A, Kumar A, Bhat MS, Mishra M.
Scurvy in pediatric age group: a disease often forgotten? J Clin Orthop
Trauma. 2015;6:101–107, Fig. 1, p. 103.)

Biochemical tests are not very useful in the diagnosis of scurvy,
because they do not reflect the tissue status. A plasma ascorbate
concentration of <0.2 mg/dL usually is considered deficient. Leukocyte concentration of vitamin C is a better indicator of body
stores, but this measurement is technically more difficult to perform. Leukocyte concentrations of ≤10 μg/108 white blood cells are
considered deficient and indicate latent scurvy, even in the absence
of clinical signs of deficiency. Saturation of the tissues with vitamin
C can be estimated from the urinary excretion of the vitamin after a
test dose of ascorbic acid. In healthy children, 80% of the test dose
appears in the urine within 3-­5 hours after parenteral administration. Generalized nonspecific aminoaciduria is common in scurvy,
whereas plasma amino acid levels remain normal.

B
Fig. 68.3 Scurvy. A, Perifollicular hemorrhages. B, Corkscrew hairs

with perifollicular hyperkeratotic papules. (Modified from Lipner S. A
classic case of scurvy. Lancet. 2018;392[10145]:431.)

Differential Diagnosis

Scurvy is often misdiagnosed as infectious or juvenile idiopathic
arthritis, osteomyelitis, nonaccidental trauma (child abuse), malignancy, or acrodynia. The early irritability and bone pain are sometimes
attributed to nonspecific pains or other nutritional deficiencies. Copper deficiency results in a radiographic picture similar to that of scurvy.
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, (IgA vasculitis) thrombocytopenic purpura, or leukemia is sometimes suspected in children presenting with
hemorrhagic manifestations.

Treatment

Vitamin C supplements of 100-­
200 mg/day orally or parenterally
ensure rapid and complete cure. The clinical improvement is seen
within 1 week in most cases, but the treatment should be continued for
up to 3 months for complete recovery.

A

B

Fig. 68.4 A, Radiograph of the knee in scurvy demonstrates a radi-

odense band at the chondroosseous junction (Fränkel line; long arrows)
and a translucent band in the metaphysis (Trümmerfeld zone; short arrows) of the distal femora and the proximal tibiae. B, Magnetic resonance imaging (coronal fat saturation T2-­weighted imaging) of the knee
demonstrates ill-­defined T2 hyperintensities in the metaphyses and juxtaosseous soft tissue. The diaphysis was spared. (From Seya M, Handa
A, Hasegawa D, et al. Scurvy: from a selective diet in children with
developmental delay. J Pediatr. 2016;177:331, Fig. A and B, p. 331.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

470 Part V u Nutrition

Chapter 69

Vitamin D Deficiency
(Rickets) and Excess
Larry A. Greenbaum
CAL

RICKETS

SH
LD

CE

Fig. 68.5 Large subperiosteal hematoma (SH) with areas of calcifica-

tion (CAL) is seen along the shaft of the right femur of a child with advanced scurvy. Epiphyseal separation is seen in both knees, with linear
displacement (LD) in the left knee and compression (CE) against the
shaft in the right knee.

Bone consists of a protein matrix called osteoid and a mineral phase,
principally composed of calcium and phosphate, mostly in the form
of hydroxyapatite. Osteomalacia occurs with inadequate mineralization of bone osteoid in children and adults. Rickets is a disease of
growing bone caused by unmineralized matrix at the growth plates
in children only before fusion of the epiphyses. Because growth
plate cartilage and osteoid continue to expand but mineralization is
inadequate, the growth plate thickens. Circumference of the growth
plate and metaphysis is also greater, increasing bone width at the
growth plates and causing classic clinical manifestations, such as
widening of the wrists and ankles. The general softening of the
bones causes them to bend easily when subject to forces such as
weight bearing or muscle pull. This softening leads to a variety of
bone deformities.
Rickets is principally caused by vitamin D deficiency. Although
largely corrected through public health measures that provided children with adequate vitamin D, rickets remains a persistent problem
in developed countries, especially in children with restrictive diets
(autism) or elimination diets (fear of allergies). It remains a significant
problem in developing countries and may be secondary to nutritional
vitamin D deficiency and inadequate intake of calcium (Table 69.1).

Etiology

Prevention

Breastfeeding protects against vitamin C deficiency throughout
infancy. In children consuming milk formula, fortification with
vitamin C must be ensured. Children consuming heat-­treated milk
or plant-­
based beverages (e.g., almond milk, soy milk) should
consume adequate vitamin C–rich foods in infancy. Dietary or
medicinal supplements are required in children on restrictive diets
deficient in vitamin C, severely malnourished children, and those
with chronic debilitating conditions (e.g., malignancies, neurologic
disorders). Providing antenatal supplements of vitamin C to smoking mothers may mitigate some of the harmful effects of smoking
on fetal and infant lung development and function.

VITAMIN C TOXICITY

Daily intake of <2 g of vitamin C is generally without adverse effects
in adults. Larger doses can cause gastrointestinal problems, such as
abdominal pain and osmotic diarrhea. Hemolysis has rarely been
reported after high doses of ascorbic acid. Megadoses of vitamin C
should be avoided in patients with a history of urolithiasis or conditions related to excessive iron accumulation, such as thalassemia
and hemochromatosis. Data are sparse regarding vitamin C toxicity
in children. The following values for tolerable upper intake levels
are extrapolated from data for adults based on body weight differences: ages 1-­3 years, 400 mg; 4-­8 years, 650 mg; 9-­13 years, 1,200
mg; and 14-­18 years, 1,800 mg.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

There are many causes of rickets, including vitamin D disorders, calcium deficiency, phosphorus deficiency, and distal renal tubular acidosis (Table 69.2).

Clinical Manifestations

Most manifestations of rickets are a result of skeletal changes (Table
69.3). Craniotabes is a softening of the cranial bones and can be
detected by applying pressure at the occiput or over the parietal bones.
The sensation is similar to the feel of pressing into a Ping-­Pong ball
and then releasing. Craniotabes may also be secondary to osteogenesis
imperfecta, hydrocephalus, and syphilis. It is a normal finding in many
newborns, especially near the suture lines, but typically disappears
within a few months of birth. Widening of the costochondral junctions
results in a rachitic “rosary,” which feels like the beads of a rosary as
the examiner’s fingers move along the costochondral junctions from
rib to rib (Fig. 69.1). Growth plate widening is also responsible for the
enlargement at the wrists and ankles (Fig. 69.2). The horizontal depression along the lower anterior chest known as the Harrison groove
occurs from pulling of the softened ribs by the diaphragm during inspiration. Softening of the ribs also impairs air movement and predisposes
patients to atelectasis and pneumonia. Valgus or varus deformities of
the legs are common; windswept deformity occurs when one leg is in
extreme valgus and the other is in extreme varus (Fig. 69.3).
The clinical presentation of rickets may vary based on the etiology.
Changes in the lower extremities tend to be the dominant feature in
X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets. Symptoms secondary to hypocalcemia occur only in those forms of rickets associated with decreased serum
calcium.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 69.1  Physical and Metabolic Properties and Food Sources of Vitamins D, E, and K
NAMES AND
SYNONYMS

BIOCHEMICAL
ACTION

EFFECTS OF
DEFICIENCY

EFFECTS OF
EXCESS

Necessary for GI
absorption of
calcium; also
increases absorption
of phosphate; direct
actions on bone,
including mediating
resorption

Rickets in growing
children;
osteomalacia;
hypocalcemia can
cause tetany and
seizures

Hypercalcemia,
which can cause
emesis, anorexia,
pancreatitis,
hypertension,
arrhythmias, CNS
effects, polyuria,
neph­rolithiasis, renal
failure

Fat-­soluble; readily
oxidized by oxygen,
iron, rancid fats; bile
acids necessary for
absorption

Antioxidant;
protection of cell
membranes from
lipid peroxidation
and formation of
free radicals

Red cell hemolysis in Unknown
premature infants;
posterior column
and cerebellar
dysfunction;
pigmentary
retinopathy

Vegetable oils,
seeds, nuts, green
leafy vegetables,
margarine

Natural compounds
are fat-­soluble;
stable to heat and
reducing agents;
labile to oxidizing
agent, strong acids,
alkali, light; bile
salts necessary for
intestinal absorption

Vitamin K–dependent
proteins include
coagulation factors
II, VII, IX, and X;
proteins C, S, Z;
matrix Gla protein,
osteocalcin

Hemorrhagic
Not established;
manifestations;
analogs (no longer
long-­term bone
used) caused
and vascular health hemolytic
anemia, jaundice,
kernicterus, death

Green leafy
vegetables, liver,
certain legumes
and plant oils;
widely distributed

CHARACTERISTICS

VITAMIN D
Vitamin D3
Fat-­soluble, stable
(3-­cholecalciferol), which to heat, acid, alkali,
is synthesized in the
and oxidation;
skin, and vitamin D2
bile necessary for
(from plants or yeast) are absorption;
biologically equivalent;
hydroxylation in
1 μg = 40 IU vitamin D
the liver and kidney
necessary for biologic
activity
VITAMIN E
Group of related
compounds with
similar biologic
activities; α-­tocopherol
is the most potent and
most common form
VITAMIN K
Group of
naphthoquinones
with similar biologic
activities; K1
(phylloquinone)
from diet; K2
(menaquinones) from
intestinal bacteria

SOURCES
Exposure to
sunlight (UV light);
fish oils, fatty fish,
egg yolks, and
vitamin D–fortified
formula, milk,
cereals, bread

CNS, Central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; UV, ultraviolet.

Table 69.2  Causes of Rickets

Table 69.3  Clinical Features of Rickets

VITAMIN D DISORDERS
Nutritional vitamin D deficiency
Congenital vitamin D deficiency
Secondary vitamin D deficiency
Malabsorption
Increased degradation
Decreased liver 25-­hydroxylase
Vitamin D–dependent rickets types 1A and 1B
Vitamin D–dependent rickets types 2A and 2B
Chronic kidney disease

GENERAL
Failure to thrive (malnutrition)
Listlessness
Protruding abdomen
Muscle weakness (especially proximal)
Hypocalcemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Fractures (pathologic, minimal trauma)
Increased intracranial pressure

Low intake
Diet
Premature infants (rickets of prematurity)
Malabsorption
Primary disease
Dietary inhibitors of calcium absorption

HEAD
Craniotabes
Frontal bossing
Delayed fontanel closure (usually closed by 2 yr)
Delayed dentition
No incisors by age 10 mo
No molars by age 18 mo
Caries
Craniosynostosis

PHOSPHORUS DEFICIENCY
Inadequate intake
Premature infants (rickets of prematurity)
Aluminum-­containing antacids

CHEST
Rachitic rosary
Harrison groove
Respiratory infections and atelectasis*

RENAL LOSSES

BACK
Scoliosis
Kyphosis
Lordosis

CALCIUM DEFICIENCY

X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets*
Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets*
Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets types 1, 2, and 3*
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria
Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis
types 1 and 2
Overproduction of fibroblast growth factor-­23
Tumor-­induced rickets*
McCune-­Albright syndrome*
Epidermal nevus syndrome (cutaneous skeletal hypophosphatemia
syndrome)*
Neurofibromatosis*
Fanconi syndrome
Dent disease
Distal renal tubular acidosis
*Disorders secondary to excess fibroblast growth factor-­23.

EXTREMITIES
Enlargement of wrists and ankles
Valgus or varus deformities
Windswept deformity (valgus deformity of one leg with varus
deformity of other leg)
Anterior bowing of tibia and femur
Coxa vara
Leg pain
HYPOCALCEMIC SYMPTOMS†
Tetany
Seizures
Stridor caused by laryngeal spasm
*These features are most frequently associated with the vitamin D deficiency disorders.
†These symptoms develop only in children with disorders that produce hypocalcemia (see
Table 69.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

472 Part V u Nutrition

Fig. 69.1 Rachitic “rosary” in a child with rickets. (Courtesy Dr. Thomas D. Thacher, Rochester, MN.)

Fig. 69.3 Windswept deformity of the legs in an older child with rick-

Fig. 69.2 Hands and forearms of a young child with rickets show
prominence above the wrist, resulting from flaring and poor mineralization of lower end of the radius and ulna. (From Bullough PG. Orthopaedic Pathology, 5th ed. St Louis: Mosby: 2010: Fig 8-­31.)

The chief complaint in a child with rickets is quite variable. Many
children present because of skeletal deformities, whereas others
have difficulty walking owing to a combination of deformity and
weakness. Other common presenting complaints include failure to
thrive (malnutrition) and symptomatic hypocalcemia (see Chapters
610-612).

Radiology

Rachitic changes are most easily visualized on posteroanterior radiographs of the wrist, although characteristic rachitic changes can be
seen at other growth plates (Figs. 69.4 and 69.5). Decreased calcification leads to thickening of the growth plate. The edge of the metaphysis
loses its sharp border, which is described as fraying. The edge of the
metaphysis changes from a convex or flat surface to a more concave
surface. This change to a concave surface is termed cupping and is most
easily seen at the distal ends of the radius, ulna, and fibula. There is
widening of the distal end of the metaphysis, corresponding to the clinical observation of thickened wrists and ankles, as well as the rachitic
rosary. Other radiologic features include coarse trabeculation of the
diaphysis and generalized rarefaction.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of rickets is based on the presence of classic radiographic abnormalities. It is supported by physical examination findings, history, and laboratory results consistent with a specific etiology
(Table 69.4).

Clinical Evaluation

Because the majority of children with rickets have a nutritional deficiency, the initial evaluation should focus on a dietary history,

ets. (From Rickets and osteomalacia. In Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smolen JS, et al., eds. Rheumatology, 4th ed. London: Mosby; 2008: Fig
192-­6.)

emphasizing intake of both vitamin D and calcium. Most children in
industrialized nations receive vitamin D from formula, fortified milk,
or vitamin supplements. Along with the amount, the exact composition of the formula or milk is pertinent, because rickets has occurred
in children given products that are called “milk” (e.g., soy milk) but are
deficient in vitamin D and minerals.
Cutaneous synthesis mediated by sunlight exposure is an important
source of vitamin D. It is important to ask about time spent outside,
sunscreen use, and clothing, especially if there may be a cultural reason
for increased covering of the skin. Because winter sunlight is ineffective
at stimulating cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D, the season is an additional consideration. Children with increased skin pigmentation are at
increased risk for vitamin D deficiency because of decreased cutaneous
synthesis.
The presence of maternal risk factors for nutritional vitamin D
deficiency, including diet and sun exposure, is an important consideration when a neonate or young infant has rachitic findings, especially
if the infant is breastfed (Table 69.5). Determining a child’s intake of
dairy products, the main dietary source of calcium, provides a general
sense of calcium intake. High dietary fiber can interfere with calcium
absorption.
The child’s medication use is relevant, because certain medications, such as the anticonvulsants phenobarbital and phenytoin,
increase degradation of vitamin D, and phosphate binders or
aluminum-­
containing antacids interfere with the absorption of
phosphate.
Malabsorption of vitamin D is suggested by a history of liver or
intestinal disease. Undiagnosed liver or intestinal disease should be
suspected if the child has gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, although
occasionally rickets is the presenting complaint. Fat malabsorption is
often associated with diarrhea or oily stools, and there may be signs or
symptoms suggesting deficiencies of other fat-­soluble vitamins (A, E,
and K; see Chapters 66, 70, and 71).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 69 u Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess

473

A history of renal disease (proteinuria, hematuria, urinary tract
infections) is an additional significant consideration, given the importance of chronic kidney disease as a cause of rickets. Polyuria can occur
in children with chronic kidney disease or Fanconi syndrome.
Children with rickets might have a history of dental caries, poor
growth, delayed walking, waddling gait, pneumonia, and hypocalcemic symptoms.
The family history is critical, given the large number of genetic
causes of rickets, although most of these causes are rare. Along
with bone disease, it is important to inquire about leg deformities,

A
A

B

B

Fig. 69.5 Radiographs of the knees in 7-­year-­old female with distal re-

Fig. 69.4 Radiographs of the wrist in normal child (A) and child with

rickets (B), who has metaphyseal fraying and cupping of the distal radius and ulna.

nal tubular acidosis and rickets. A, At initial presentation, there is widening of the growth plate and metaphyseal fraying. B, Dramatic improvement after 4 months of therapy with alkali.

Table 69.4  Laboratory Findings in Various Disorders Causing Rickets
DISORDER

Ca

Pi

PTH

25-­(OH)D

1,25-­(OH)2D

ALP

URINE Ca

URINE Pi

Vitamin D deficiency

N, ↓

↓

↑

↓

↓, N, ↑

↑

↓

↑

VDDR, type 1A

N, ↓

↓

↑

N

↓

↑

↓

↑

VDDR, type 1B

N, ↓

↓

↑

↓

N

↑

↓

↑

VDDR, type 2A

N, ↓

↓

↑

N

↑↑

↑

↓

↑

VDDR, type 2B

N, ↓

↓

↑

N

↑↑

↑

↓

↑

Chronic kidney disease

N, ↓

↑

↑

N

↓

↑

N, ↓

↓

Dietary Pi deficiency

N

↓

N, ↓

N

↑

↑

↑

↓

XLH*

N

↓

N, ↑

N

RD

↑

↓

↑

ADHR*

N

↓

N

N

RD

↑

↓

↑

HHRH

N

↓

N, ↓

N

↑

↑

↑

↑

ARHR, type 1 or type 2*

N

↓

N

N

RD

↑

↓

↑

Tumor-­induced rickets†

N

↓

N

N

RD

↑

↓

↑

Fanconi syndrome

N

↓

N

N

RD or ↑

↑

↓ or ↑

↑

Dent’s disease

N

↓

N

N

N

↑

↑

↑

Dietary Ca deficiency

N, ↓

↓

↑

N

↑

↑

↓

↑

*Elevated fibroblast growth factor-­23 (FGF-­23).
†FGF-­23 elevated in some patients.

ADHR, Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ARHR, autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets; Ca, calcium; HHRH, hereditary
hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria; N, normal; Pi, inorganic phosphorus; PTH, parathyroid hormone; RD, relatively decreased (because it should be increased given the
concurrent hypophosphatemia); VDDR, vitamin D–dependent rickets; XLH, X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets; 1,25-­(OH)2D, 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D; 25-­OHD, 25-­hydroxyvitamin
D; ↓, decreased; ↑, increased; ↑↑, extremely increased.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

474 Part V u Nutrition
Table 69.5  Risk Factors for Nutritional Rickets and
Osteomalacia and Their Prevention
MATERNAL FACTORS
Vitamin D deficiency
Dark skin pigmentation
Full body clothing cover
High latitude during winter/spring season
Other causes of restricted sun (UVB) exposure (e.g., predominant
indoor living, disability, pollution, cloud cover)
Low–vitamin D diet
Low-­calcium diet
Poverty, malnutrition, special diets
INFANT/CHILDHOOD FACTORS
Neonatal vitamin D deficiency secondary to maternal deficiency/
vitamin D deficiency
Lack of infant supplementation with vitamin D
Prolonged breastfeeding without appropriate complementary
feeding from 6 mo
High latitude during winter/spring season
Dark skin pigmentation and/or restricted sun (UVB) exposure (e.g.,
predominant indoor living, disability, pollution, cloud cover)
Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder
Low–vitamin D diet
Low-­calcium diet
Poverty, malnutrition, special diets
PREVENTIVE MEASURES
Sun exposure (UVB content of sunlight depends on latitude and
season)
Vitamin D supplementation
Strategic fortification of the habitual food supply
Normal calcium intake
Adapted from Munns CF, Shaw N, Kiely M, et al. Global consensus recommendations
on prevention and management of nutritional rickets. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2016;101:394–415, p. 401.

difficulties with walking, or unexplained short stature, because
some parents may be unaware of their diagnosis. Undiagnosed disease in the mother is not unusual in X-­linked hypophosphatemia. A
history of an unexplained sibling death during infancy may be present in the child with cystinosis, the most common cause of Fanconi
syndrome in children.
The physical examination focuses on detecting manifestations of
rickets (see Table 69.3). It is important to observe the child’s gait,
auscultate the lungs to detect atelectasis or pneumonia, and plot
the patient’s growth. Alopecia suggests vitamin D–dependent rickets type 2.
The initial laboratory tests in a child with rickets should include
serum calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), parathyroid hormone (PTH), 25-­hydroxyvitamin D, 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin
D (1,25-­D), creatinine, and electrolytes (see Table 69.4 for interpretation). Urinalysis is useful for detecting the glycosuria seen with
Fanconi syndrome. Evaluation of urinary excretion of calcium (24-­
hour collection for calcium or calcium:creatinine ratio) is helpful if
hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria or Dent
disease is suspected. Direct measurement of other fat-­soluble vitamins (A, E, and K) or indirect assessment of deficiency (prothrombin time for vitamin K deficiency) is appropriate if malabsorption
is a consideration.

VITAMIN D DISORDERS
Vitamin D Physiology

Vitamin D can be synthesized in skin epithelial cells and therefore
technically is not a vitamin. Cutaneous synthesis is normally the
most important source of vitamin D and depends on the conversion
of 7-­dehydrocholesterol to vitamin D3 (3-­cholecalciferol) by ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation from the sun. The efficiency of this process is
decreased by melanin; therefore more sun exposure is necessary for

vitamin D synthesis in people with increased skin pigmentation. Measures to decrease sun exposure, such as covering the skin with clothing or applying sunscreen, also decrease vitamin D synthesis. Children
who spend less time outside have reduced vitamin D synthesis. The
winter sun away from the equator is ineffective at stimulating vitamin
D synthesis.
There are few natural dietary sources of vitamin D. Fish liver oils
have a high vitamin D content. Other good dietary sources include
fatty fish and egg yolks. Most children in industrialized countries
receive vitamin D via fortified foods, especially formula and milk
(both of which contain 400 IU/L) and some breakfast cereals and
breads. Supplemental vitamin D may be vitamin D2 (which comes
from plants or yeast) or vitamin D3. Breast milk has a low vitamin D
content, approximately 12-­60 IU/L.
Vitamin D is transported bound to vitamin D–binding protein to the liver, where 25-­hydroxlase converts vitamin D into
25-­hydroxyvitamin D (25-­D), the most abundant circulating form
of vitamin D. Because there is little regulation of this liver hydroxylation step, measurement of 25-­D is the standard method for
determining a patient’s vitamin D status. The final step in activation occurs in the kidney, where the enzyme 1α-­hydroxylase adds
a second hydroxyl group, resulting in 1,25-­D. The 1α-­hydroxylase
is upregulated by PTH and hypophosphatemia and inhibited by
hyperphosphatemia and 1,25-­D. Most 1,25-­D circulates bound to
vitamin D–binding protein.
1,25-­Dihydroxyvitamin D acts by binding to an intracellular
receptor, and the complex affects gene expression by interacting with vitamin D response elements. In the intestine, this binding results in a marked increase in calcium absorption, which is
highly dependent on 1,25-­D. There is also an increase in phosphorus absorption, but this effect is less significant because most
dietary phosphorus absorption is vitamin D independent. 1,25-­D
also has direct effects on bone, including mediating resorption.
1,25-­D directly suppresses PTH secretion by the parathyroid gland,
thus completing a negative feedback loop. PTH secretion is also
suppressed by the increase in serum calcium mediated by 1,25-­D.
1,25-­D inhibits its own synthesis in the kidney and increases the
synthesis of inactive metabolites.

Nutritional Vitamin D Deficiency

Vitamin D deficiency remains the most common cause of rickets globally and even occurs in industrialized countries. Because vitamin D can
be obtained from dietary sources or from cutaneous synthesis, most
patients in industrialized countries have a combination of risk factors
that lead to vitamin D deficiency.

Etiology

Vitamin D deficiency most frequently occurs in infancy because of
a combination of poor intake and inadequate cutaneous synthesis.
Transplacental transport of vitamin D, mostly 25-­D, typically provides enough vitamin D for the first or second months of life unless
there is severe maternal vitamin D deficiency. Infants who receive
formula receive adequate vitamin D, even without cutaneous synthesis. Because of the low vitamin D content of breast milk, breastfed infants rely on cutaneous synthesis or vitamin supplements.
Cutaneous synthesis can be limited because of the ineffectiveness
of the winter sun in stimulating vitamin D synthesis; avoidance of
sunlight because of concerns about cancer, neighborhood safety, or
cultural practices; and decreased cutaneous synthesis because of
increased skin pigmentation.
The effect of skin pigmentation explains why most cases of nutritional rickets in the United States and Northern Europe occur in
breastfed children of African descent or other dark-­
pigmented
populations. The additional impact of the winter sun is supported
by such infants more often presenting in the late winter or spring.
In some groups, complete covering of infants or the practice of not
taking infants outside has a significant role, explaining the occurrence of rickets in infants living in areas of abundant sunshine,
such as the Middle East. Because the mothers of some infants can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 69 u Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess
have the same risk factors, decreased maternal vitamin D can also
contribute, both by leading to reduced vitamin D content in breast
milk and by lessening transplacental delivery of vitamin D. Rickets
caused by vitamin D deficiency can also be secondary to dietary
practices, such as vegan diets that use unfortified soy milk or
rice milk. Children with restrictive food habits (autism) or food
elimination diets (fear of allergies) may be at risk for vitamin D
deficiency.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical features are typical of rickets (see Table 69.3), with a
significant minority presenting with symptoms of hypocalcemia.
Prolonged laryngospasm is occasionally fatal. These children have
an increased risk of pneumonia and muscle weakness leading to a
delay in motor development.

Laboratory Findings

Table 69.4 summarizes the principal laboratory findings. Hypocalcemia is a variable finding because the elevated PTH acts to increase the
serum calcium concentration. The hypophosphatemia is caused by
PTH-­induced renal losses of phosphate, combined with a decrease in
intestinal absorption.
The wide variation in 1,25-­D levels (low, normal, or high) is
secondary to the upregulation of renal 1α-­hydroxylase caused by
concomitant hypophosphatemia and hyperparathyroidism. Because
serum levels of 1,25-­D are much lower than the levels of 25-­D, even
with low levels of 25-­D, there is often enough 25-­D still present to
act as a precursor for 1,25-­D synthesis in the presence of upregulated 1α-­hydroxylase. The level of 1,25-­D is only low when there is
severe vitamin D deficiency.
Some patients have a metabolic acidosis secondary to PTH-­
induced renal bicarbonate wasting. There may also be generalized
aminoaciduria.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of nutritional vitamin D deficiency is based on the
combination of a history of poor vitamin D intake and risk factors for
decreased cutaneous synthesis, radiographic changes consistent with
rickets, and typical laboratory findings (see Table 69.4). A normal PTH
level almost never occurs with vitamin D deficiency and suggests a primary phosphate disorder.

Treatment

Children with nutritional vitamin D deficiency should receive vitamin D and adequate nutritional intake of calcium and phosphorus. There are two strategies for administration of vitamin D. With
stoss therapy, vitamin D (300,000-­600,000 IU) is administered
orally (preferred) or intramuscularly as 2-­4 doses over 1 day (vitamin D3 is preferred to D2 because of the longer half-­life of D3).
Because the doses are observed, stoss therapy is ideal in patients in
whom adherence to therapy is questionable. The alternative strategy is daily vitamin D with a minimum dose of 2,000 IU/day for a
minimum of 3 months. Either strategy should be followed by daily
vitamin D intake of 400 IU/day if <1 year old or 600 IU/day if >1
year old. It is important to ensure that children receive adequate
dietary calcium (minimum of 500 mg/day) and phosphorus; this
dietary intake is usually provided by milk, formula, and other dairy
products, although calcium supplements may be needed in some
patients.
Children who have symptomatic hypocalcemia might need intravenous (IV) calcium acutely, followed by oral calcium supplements,
which typically can be tapered over 2-­6 weeks in children who
receive adequate dietary calcium. Transient use of IV or oral 1,25-­D
(calcitriol) is often helpful in reversing hypocalcemia in the acute
phase by providing active vitamin D during the delay, as supplemental vitamin D is converted to active vitamin D. Calcitriol doses
are typically 0.05 μg/kg/day. IV calcium is initially given as an acute
bolus for symptomatic hypocalcemia (20 mg/kg calcium chloride

475

or 100 mg/kg calcium gluconate). Some patients require a continuous IV calcium drip, titrated to maintain the desired serum calcium
level. These patients should transition to enteral calcium, and most
infants require approximately 1,000 mg of elemental calcium.

Prognosis

Most children with nutritional vitamin D deficiency have an excellent response to treatment, with radiologic healing occurring
within a few months. Laboratory test results should also normalize rapidly. Many of the bone malformations improve dramatically,
but children with severe disease can have permanent deformities
and short stature. Rarely, patients benefit from orthopedic intervention for leg deformities, although this is generally not done until the
metabolic bone disease has healed, there is clear evidence that the
deformity will not self-­resolve, and the deformity is causing functional problems.

Prevention

Most cases of nutritional rickets can be prevented by universal administration of 400 IU of vitamin D to infants <1 year old. Older children
with risk factors for inadequate intake should receive 600 IU/day. Vitamin D may be administered as a component of a multivitamin or as a
vitamin D supplement.

Congenital Vitamin D Deficiency

Congenital rickets is quite rare in industrialized countries and
occurs when there is severe maternal vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy. Maternal risk factors include poor dietary intake
of vitamin D, lack of adequate sun exposure, and closely spaced
pregnancies. These newborns can have symptomatic hypocalcemia,
intrauterine growth restriction, and decreased bone ossification,
along with classic rachitic changes (craniotabes, large fontanelle,
fractures). In addition, neonates with congenital rickets may have
bone pain, weakness, elevated PTH and ALP levels, and hypocalcemia with low serum 25-­hydroxyvitamin D levels. Subtler maternal
vitamin D deficiency can have an adverse effect on neonatal bone
density and birthweight, cause a defect in dental enamel, and predispose infants to neonatal hypocalcemic tetany. Treatment of congenital rickets includes vitamin D supplementation and adequate
intake of calcium and phosphorus. Use of prenatal vitamins containing vitamin D (600 IU) prevents this entity.

Secondary Vitamin D Deficiency
Etiology

Along with inadequate intake, vitamin D deficiency can result from
inadequate absorption, decreased hydroxylation in the liver, and
increased degradation. Because vitamin D is fat soluble, its absorption may be decreased in patients with a variety of liver and GI
diseases, including cholestatic liver disease, defects in bile acid
metabolism, cystic fibrosis and other causes of pancreatic dysfunction, celiac disease, and Crohn disease. Malabsorption of vitamin D
can also occur with intestinal lymphangiectasia and after intestinal
resection.
Severe liver disease, which usually is also associated with malabsorption, can cause a decrease in 25-­D formation as a result
of insufficient enzyme activity. Because of the large reserve of
25-­hydroxlase activity in the liver, vitamin D deficiency caused
by liver disease usually requires a loss of >90% of liver function.
A variety of medications increase the degradation of vitamin D by
inducing the cytochrome P450 (CYP) system. Rickets from vitamin D deficiency can develop in children receiving anticonvulsants
(e.g., phenobarbital, phenytoin) or antituberculosis medications
(e.g., isoniazid, rifampin).

Treatment

Treatment of vitamin D deficiency attributable to malabsorption
requires high doses of vitamin D. Because of its better absorption, 25-­D
(25-­50 μg/day or 5-­7 μg/kg/day) is superior to vitamin D3. The dose is
adjusted based on monitoring of serum levels of 25-­D. Alternatively,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

476 Part V u Nutrition
patients may be treated with 1,25-­D, which also is better absorbed in
the presence of fat malabsorption, or with parenteral vitamin D. Children with rickets as a result of increased degradation of vitamin D by
the CYP system require the same acute therapy as indicated for nutritional deficiency (discussed earlier), followed by long-­term administration of high doses of vitamin D (e.g., 1,000 IU/day), with dosing
titrated based on serum levels of 25-­D. Some patients require as much
as 4,000 IU/day.

Vitamin D–Dependent Rickets, Type 1

Children with vitamin D–dependent rickets type 1A, an autosomal recessive disorder, have pathologic gene variants in CYP27B,
which encodes the renal 1α-­hydroxylase, preventing conversion
of 25-­D into 1,25-­D. These patients normally present during the
first 2 years of life and can have any of the classic features of rickets (see Table 69.3), including symptomatic hypocalcemia. They
have normal levels of 25-­D but low levels of 1,25-­D (see Table
69.4). Occasionally, 1,25-­D levels are at the lower limit of normal,
inappropriately low given the high PTH and low serum phosphorus levels, both of which should increase the activity of renal 1α-­
hydroxylase and cause elevated levels of 1,25-­D. As in nutritional
vitamin D deficiency, renal tubular dysfunction can cause a metabolic acidosis and generalized aminoaciduria.
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 1B is secondary to pathologic
variants in the gene (CYP2R1) for the principal 25-hydroxylase.
Patients have low levels of 25-­D but normal levels of 1,25-­D (see
Table 69.4).

Treatment

Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 1A responds to long-­term treatment with 1,25-­D (calcitriol). Initial doses are 0.25-­2 μg/day, and
lower doses are used once the rickets has healed. Especially during
initial therapy, it is important to ensure adequate intake of calcium.
The dose of calcitriol is adjusted to maintain a low-­normal serum
calcium level, a normal serum phosphorus level, and a high-­normal
serum PTH level. Targeting a low-­normal calcium concentration and a
high-­normal PTH level avoids excessive dosing of calcitriol, which can
cause hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. Therefore patient monitoring includes periodic assessment of urinary calcium excretion, with a
target of <4 mg/kg/day.
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 1B may respond to pharmacologic doses of vitamin D2 (3,000 U/day) as a result of alternative
enzymes with 25-­hydroxylase activity or residual activity of the abnormal protein.

Vitamin D–Dependent Rickets, Type 2

Patients with vitamin D–dependent rickets type 2A have pathologic
variants in VDR, the gene encoding the vitamin D receptor, preventing a normal physiologic response to 1,25-­D. Levels of 1,25-­D
are extremely elevated in this autosomal recessive disorder (see
Table 69.4). Most patients present during infancy, although rickets in less severely affected patients might not be diagnosed until
adulthood. Less severe disease is associated with a partially functional vitamin D receptor. Approximately 50–70% of children have
alopecia, which tends to be associated with a more severe form of
the disease and can range from alopecia areata to alopecia totalis.
Epidermal cysts are a less common manifestation.
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 2B appears to result from overexpression of a hormone response element–binding protein that interferes with the actions of 1,25-­D. Alopecia may be present.

Treatment

Some patients respond to extremely high doses of vitamin D2 (25-­D or
1,25-­D), especially patients without alopecia. This response is caused
by a partially functional vitamin D receptor in patients with vitamin
D–dependent rickets type 2A, but may also occur in vitamin D–dependent rickets type 2B. All patients should be given a 3-­to 6-­month trial
of high-­dose vitamin D and oral calcium. The initial dose of 1,25-­D
should be 2 μg/day, but some patients require doses as high as 50-­60

μg/day. Calcium doses are 1,000-­3,000 mg/day. Patients who do not
respond to high-­dose vitamin D may be treated with long-­term IV
calcium, with possible transition to very high-­dose oral calcium supplements. Treatment of patients who do not respond to vitamin D is
difficult.

Chronic Kidney Disease

With chronic kidney disease, there is decreased activity of 1α-­
hydroxylase in the kidney, leading to diminished production of 1,25-­D.
In chronic kidney disease, unlike the other causes of vitamin D deficiency, patients have hyperphosphatemia as a result of decreased renal
excretion (see Table 69.4 and Chapter 572.2).

Treatment

Therapy requires the use of a form of vitamin D that can act without
1-­hydroxylation by the kidney (calcitriol), which both permits adequate absorption of calcium and directly suppresses the parathyroid
gland. Because hyperphosphatemia is a stimulus for PTH secretion,
normalization of the serum phosphorus level through a combination
of dietary phosphorus restriction and use of oral phosphate binders is
as important as the use of activated vitamin D.

CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Pathophysiology

Rickets secondary to inadequate dietary calcium is a significant
problem in some countries in Africa, although there are cases in
other regions of the world, including industrialized countries.
Because breast milk and formula are excellent sources of calcium,
this form of rickets develops after children have been weaned from
breast milk or formula and is more likely to occur in children who
are weaned early. Rickets develops because the diet has low calcium
content, typically <200 mg/day if <12 months old or <300 mg/day if
>12 months old. The child has minimal intake of dairy products or
other sources of calcium. In addition, because of reliance on grains
and green leafy vegetables, the diet may be high in phytate, oxalate,
and phosphate, which decrease absorption of dietary calcium. In
industrialized countries, rickets caused by calcium deficiency can
occur in children who consume an unconventional diet. Examples
include children with milk allergy who have low dietary calcium
and children who transition from formula or breast milk to juice,
soda, or a calcium-­poor soy drink, without an alternative source of
dietary calcium.
This type of rickets can develop in children who receive IV nutrition without adequate calcium. Malabsorption of calcium can occur in
celiac disease, intestinal abetalipoproteinemia, and after small bowel
resection. There may be concurrent malabsorption of vitamin D.

Clinical Manifestations

Children with calcium deficiency have the classic signs and symptoms of rickets (see Table 69.3). Presentation can occur during infancy
or early childhood, although some cases are diagnosed in teenagers.
Because calcium deficiency occurs after the cessation of breastfeeding, it tends to occur later than the nutritional vitamin D deficiency
that is associated with breastfeeding. In Nigeria, nutritional vitamin D
deficiency is most common at 4-­15 months of age, whereas calcium
deficiency rickets typically occurs at 15-­25 months.

Diagnosis

Laboratory findings include increased levels of ALP, PTH, and 1,25-­D
(see Table 69.4). Calcium levels may be normal or low, although symptomatic hypocalcemia is uncommon. There is decreased urinary excretion of calcium, and serum phosphorus levels may be low as a result
of renal wasting of phosphate from secondary hyperparathyroidism.
In some children, there is coexisting nutritional vitamin D deficiency,
with low 25-­D levels.

Treatment

Treatment focuses on providing adequate calcium, typically as a
dietary supplement (doses of 700 [age 1-­3 years], 1,000 [4-­8 years],

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 69 u Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess
and 1,300 [9-­18 years] mg/day of elemental calcium are effective).
Vitamin D supplementation is necessary if there is concurrent vitamin D deficiency (discussed earlier). Prevention strategies include
discouraging early cessation of breastfeeding and increasing dietary
sources of calcium. In countries such as Kenya, where many children have diets high in cereal with negligible intake of cow’s milk,
school-­based milk programs have been effective in reducing the
prevalence of rickets.

PHOSPHORUS DEFICIENCY
Inadequate Intake

With the exception of starvation or severe anorexia, it is almost
impossible to have a diet that is deficient in phosphorus, because
phosphorus is present in most foods. Decreased phosphorus
absorption can occur in diseases associated with malabsorption
(celiac disease, cystic fibrosis, cholestatic liver disease), but if rickets develops, the primary problem is usually malabsorption of vitamin D and/or calcium.
Isolated malabsorption of phosphorus occurs in patients with
long-­
term use of aluminum-­containing antacids. These compounds are very effective at chelating phosphate in the GI tract,
leading to decreased absorption. This decreased absorption results
in hypophosphatemia with secondary osteomalacia in adults and
rickets in children. This entity responds to discontinuation of the
antacid and short-­term phosphorus supplementation.

Fibroblast Growth Factor-­23

Fibroblast growth factor-­23 (FGF-­23) is a humoral mediator that
decreases renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate and therefore
decreases serum phosphorus. FGF-­23, synthesized by osteocytes, also
decreases the activity of renal 1α-­hydroxylase, resulting in a decrease
in the production of 1,25-­D. Increased levels of FGF-­23 cause many of
the renal phosphate-­wasting diseases (see Table 69.2).

X-­Linked Hypophosphatemic Rickets

Among the genetic disorders causing rickets because of hypophosphatemia, X-­
linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH) is the most
common, with a prevalence of 1/20,000. The defective gene is on the
X chromosome, but female carriers are affected, so it is an X-­linked–
dominant disorder.

Pathophysiology

The pathologic variants are in a gene called PHEX because it is a
phosphate-­regulating gene with homology to endopeptidases on the
X chromosome. The product of this gene appears to have an indirect
role in inactivating FGF-­23. Thus pathologic variants in PHEX lead to
increased levels of FGF-­23. Because the actions of FGF-­23 include inhibition of phosphate reabsorption in the proximal tubule, phosphate
excretion is increased. FGF-­23 also inhibits renal 1α-­hydroxylase, leading to decreased production of 1,25-­D.

Clinical Manifestations

These patients have rickets, but abnormalities of the lower extremities
and poor growth are the dominant features. Delayed dentition and
tooth abscesses are also common. Some patients have hypophosphatemia and short stature without clinically evident bone disease.

Laboratory Findings

Patients have high renal excretion of phosphate, hypophosphatemia, and increased ALP; PTH and serum calcium levels are normal
(see Table 69.4). Hypophosphatemia normally upregulates renal 1α-­
hydroxylase and should lead to an increase in 1,25-­D, but these patients
have low or inappropriately normal levels of 1,25-­D.

Treatment

Burosumab is a monoclonal antibody to FGF-­23 that is approved for
treating XLH in children >1 year, although cost may limit its availability in low-­resourced countries. Outcomes are better and side effects
decreased when compared with conventional therapy. The dose of

477

burosumab is titrated to normalize the serum phosphorus; it is contraindicated in patients with severe renal impairment.
Conventional treatment is a combination of oral phosphorus and
1,25-­D (calcitriol). The daily need for phosphorus supplementation
is 1-­3 g of elemental phosphorus divided into four or five doses.
Frequent dosing helps to prevent prolonged decrements in serum
phosphorus because there is a rapid decline after each dose. In addition, frequent dosing decreases diarrhea, a complication of high-­
dose oral phosphorus. Calcitriol is administered at 30-­70 ng/kg/day
in two doses.
Complications of conventional treatment occur when there is not
an adequate balance between phosphorus supplementation and calcitriol. Excess phosphorus, by decreasing enteral calcium absorption,
leads to secondary hyperparathyroidism, with worsening of the bone
lesions. In contrast, excess calcitriol causes hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis and can even cause hypercalcemia. Therefore laboratory
monitoring of treatment includes serum calcium, phosphorus, ALP,
PTH, and urinary calcium, as well as periodic renal ultrasound to
evaluate patients for nephrocalcinosis. Because of variation in the
serum phosphorus level and the importance of avoiding excessive
phosphorus dosing, normalization of ALP levels is a more useful
method of assessing the therapeutic response than measuring serum
phosphorus. For children with significant short stature, growth hormone is an effective option. Children with severe deformities might
need osteotomies, but these procedures should be done only when
treatment has led to resolution of the bone disease.

Prognosis

The response to therapy is usually good, although frequent dosing can
lead to problems with compliance with conventional therapy. Girls
generally have less severe disease than boys, probably because of the
X-­linked inheritance. Short stature can persist despite healing of the
rickets. Adults generally do well with less aggressive treatment, and
options include burosumab, conventional treatment, and no treatment.
Adults with bone pain, poorly healing fractures, or other symptoms
improve with treatment.

Autosomal Dominant Hypophosphatemic Rickets

Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR) is much
less common than XLH. There is incomplete penetrance and variable age of onset. Patients with ADHR have a pathologic variant
in the gene encoding FGF-­23 (FGF23). The pathologic variant
prevents degradation of FGF-­23 by proteases, leading its level to
increase. The actions of FGF-­23 include decreased reabsorption of
phosphate in the renal proximal tubule, which results in hypophosphatemia, and inhibition of 1α-­hydroxylase in the kidney, causing a
decrease in 1,25-­D synthesis.
In ADHR, as in XLH, abnormal laboratory findings are hypophosphatemia, elevated ALP level, and a low or inappropriately normal 1,25-­D
level (see Table 69.4). Treatment is similar to the conventional approach
with phosphate supplementation and calcitriol used in XLH. However,
iron deficiency, which upregulates FGF-­23 synthesis, should be corrected
if present.

Autosomal Recessive Hypophosphatemic Rickets

Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets (ARHR) type 1 is an
extremely rare disorder caused by pathologic variants in the DMP1
gene. ARHR type 2 occurs in patients with pathologic variants in
ENPP1. Pathologic variants in ENPP1 also cause generalized arterial
calcification of infancy. Raine syndrome, also called ARHR type 3,
is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathologic variants in
FAM20C and is an osteosclerotic bone dysplasia that is often fatal in
the neonatal period. However, patients who survive into childhood
may develop rickets.
The three types of ARHR are associated with elevated levels of FGF-­
23, leading to renal phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia, and low
or inappropriately normal levels of 1,25-­D. Treatment is similar to the
approach used in XLH, although monitoring for arterial calcification is
prudent in patients with ENPP1 pathologic variants.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

478 Part V u Nutrition
Hereditary Hypophosphatemic Rickets with
Hypercalciuria

Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH) is
a rare disorder that is mainly found in the Middle East.

Pathophysiology

This autosomal recessive disorder is caused by pathologic variants
in the gene for a sodium-­phosphate co-­transporter in the proximal
tubule (SLC34A3). The renal phosphate leak causes hypophosphatemia, which then stimulates production of 1,25-­D. The high level
of 1,25-­D increases intestinal absorption of calcium, suppressing
PTH. Hypercalciuria ensues as a result of the high absorption of
calcium and the low level of PTH, which normally decreases renal
excretion of calcium.

Clinical Manifestations

The dominant symptoms of HHRH are rachitic leg abnormalities
(see Table 69.3), muscle weakness, and bone pain. Patients can have
short stature, with a disproportionate decrease in the length of the
lower extremities. The severity of the disease varies, and some family members have no evidence of rickets but have kidney stones secondary to hypercalciuria.

Laboratory Findings

Laboratory findings include hypophosphatemia, renal phosphate wasting, elevated serum ALP levels, and elevated 1,25-­D levels. PTH levels
are low (see Table 69.4).

Treatment

Therapy for HHRH patients relies on oral phosphorus replacement
(1-­2.5 g/day of elemental phosphorus in five divided doses). Treatment of the hypophosphatemia decreases serum levels of 1,25-­D
and corrects the hypercalciuria. The response to therapy is usually
excellent, with resolution of pain, weakness, and radiographic evidence of rickets.

Hypophosphatemic Rickets with Nephrolithiasis and
Osteoporosis Types 1 and 2

Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis type
1 is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathologic variants
of SL34A1, which encodes a phosphate transporter in the proximal
tubule. Pathologic variants in the same gene can also cause Fanconi
syndrome and infantile hypercalcemia. Hypophosphatemic rickets
with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis type 2 is an autosomal dominant
disorder resulting from pathologic variants in SLC9A3R1 that cause
renal phosphate wasting. Laboratory findings and treatment for these
disorders are similar to HHRH, with the exception of the features of
Fanconi syndrome (see later and Chapter 569) in some patients with
the type 1 disorder.

Overproduction of FGF-­23

Tumor-­induced osteomalacia is more common in adults; in children
it can produce classic rachitic findings. Most tumors are mesenchymal
in origin and are usually benign, small, and located in bone. These
tumors secrete FGF-­23 and produce a biochemical phenotype similar
to XLH, including urinary phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia, elevated ALP levels, and low or inappropriately normal 1,25-­D levels (see
Table 69.4). Curative treatment is excision of the tumor. If the tumor
cannot be removed, treatment is identical to that for XLH, including
use of burosumab.
Renal phosphate wasting leading to hypophosphatemia and
rickets (or osteomalacia in adults) is a potential complication in
McCune-­Albright syndrome, an entity that includes the triad of
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, hyperpigmented macules, and polyendocrinopathy (see Chapter 600.06). Affected patients have inappropriately low levels of 1,25-­D and elevated ALP levels. The renal
phosphate wasting and inhibition of 1,25-­D synthesis are related

to the polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. Patients have elevated FGF-­
23, presumably caused by the dysplastic bone. Hypophosphatemic
rickets can also occur in children with isolated polyostotic fibrous
dysplasia. Although it is rarely possible, removal of the abnormal
bone can cure this disorder in children with McCune-­Albright syndrome. Most patients receive the same conventional treatment as
children with XLH, with case reports describing off-­label treatment
with burosumab. Bisphosphonate treatment decreases the pain and
fracture risk associated with the bone lesions.
Rickets is an unusual complication of epidermal nevus syndrome, which is caused by somatic pathologic variants (Ras family
of genes and others). It is called cutaneous skeletal hypophosphatemia syndrome when associated with hypophosphatemic rickets
or osteomalacia (see Chapter 692). Excessive production of FGF-­23
causes renal phosphate wasting and an inappropriately normal or
low level of 1,25-­D. The timing of presentation with rickets varies from infancy to early adolescence. Hypophosphatemia and
rickets have resolved after excision of the epidermal nevi in some
patients, but not in others. In most the skin lesions are too extensive
to be removed, necessitating treatment with phosphorus supplementation and 1,25-­D. Rickets caused by phosphate wasting is an
extremely rare complication in children with neurofibromatosis
(see Chapter 636.1).

Fanconi Syndrome

Fanconi syndrome is secondary to generalized dysfunction of the
renal proximal tubule (see Chapter 569.1). There are renal losses of
phosphate, amino acids, bicarbonate, glucose, urate, and other molecules that are normally reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. Some
patients have partial dysfunction, with less generalized losses. The
most clinically relevant consequences are hypophosphatemia caused
by phosphate losses and proximal renal tubular acidosis caused by
bicarbonate losses. Patients have rickets as a result of hypophosphatemia, with exacerbation from the chronic metabolic acidosis, which
causes bone dissolution. Failure to thrive is a consequence of both
rickets and renal tubular acidosis. Treatment is dictated by the etiology (see Chapter 569).

Dent Disease

Dent disease is an X-­linked disorder usually caused by pathologic
variants in the gene encoding a chloride channel expressed in the
kidney (CLCN5). Some patients have pathologic variants in the
OCRL1 gene, which can also cause Lowe syndrome (see Chapter
571.3). Affected males have variable manifestations, including
hematuria, nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, rickets, and chronic
kidney disease. Almost all patients have low-­molecular-­weight proteinuria and hypercalciuria. Other, less universal abnormalities are
aminoaciduria, glycosuria, hypophosphatemia, and hypokalemia.
Rickets occurs in approximately 25% of patients, and it responds to
oral phosphorus supplements. Some patients also need 1,25-­D, but
this treatment should be used cautiously because it can worsen the
hypercalciuria.

RICKETS OF PREMATURITY

Rickets in very low birthweight infants has become a significant problem as the survival rate for this group of infants has increased (see
Chapter 119.2).

Pathogenesis

The transfer of calcium and phosphorus from mother to fetus
occurs throughout pregnancy, but 80% occurs during the third trimester. Premature birth interrupts this process, with rickets developing when the premature infant does not have an adequate supply
of calcium and phosphorus to support mineralization of the growing skeleton.
Most cases of rickets of prematurity occur in infants with a birthweight <1,000 g. It is more likely to develop in infants with lower

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 69 u Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess
birthweight and younger gestational age. Rickets occurs because
unsupplemented breast milk and standard infant formula do not
contain enough calcium and phosphorus to supply the needs of the
premature infant. Other risk factors include cholestatic jaundice,
a complicated neonatal course, prolonged use of parenteral nutrition, the use of soy formula, and medications such as diuretics and
corticosteroids.

Clinical Manifestations

Rickets of prematurity occurs 1-­4 months after birth. Infants can
have nontraumatic fractures, especially of the legs, arms, and ribs.
Most fractures are not suspected clinically. Because fractures and
softening of the ribs lead to decreased chest compliance, some
infants have respiratory distress from atelectasis and poor ventilation. This rachitic respiratory distress usually develops >5 weeks
after birth, distinguishing it from the early-­onset respiratory disease of premature infants. These infants have poor linear growth,
with negative effects on growth persisting beyond 1 year of age. An
additional long-­term effect is enamel hypoplasia. Poor bone mineralization can contribute to dolichocephaly. There may be classic
rachitic findings, such as frontal bossing, rachitic rosary (see Fig.
69.1), craniotabes, and widened wrists and ankles (see Table 69.3).
Most infants with rickets of prematurity have no clinical manifestations, and the diagnosis is based on radiographic and laboratory
findings.

Laboratory Findings

Because of inadequate intake, the serum phosphorus level is low
or low-­normal in patients with rickets of prematurity. The renal
response is appropriate, with conservation of phosphate leading to
a low urine phosphate level; tubular reabsorption of phosphate is
>95%. Most patients have normal levels of 25-­D unless there has
been inadequate intake or poor absorption (discussed earlier). The
hypophosphatemia stimulates renal 1α-­hydroxylase, so levels of
1,25-­D are high or high-­normal. These high levels can contribute
to bone demineralization because 1,25-­D stimulates bone resorption. Serum levels of calcium are low, normal, or high, and patients
often have hypercalciuria. Elevated serum calcium levels and hypercalciuria are secondary to increased intestinal absorption and bone
dissolution caused by elevated 1,25-­D levels and inability to deposit
calcium in bone because of an inadequate phosphorus supply. The
hypercalciuria indicates that phosphorus is the limiting nutrient
for bone mineralization, although increased provision of phosphorus alone often cannot correct the mineralization defect; increased
calcium is also necessary. Thus there is an inadequate supply of calcium and phosphorus, but the deficiency in phosphorus is greater.
Alkaline phosphatase levels are often elevated, but some affected
infants have normal levels. In some cases, normal ALP levels may
be secondary to resolution of the bone demineralization because
of an adequate mineral supply despite the continued presence of
radiologic changes, which take longer to resolve. However, ALP levels may be normal despite active disease. No single blood test is
100% sensitive for the diagnosis of rickets. The diagnosis should be
suspected in infants with ALP >5-­6 times the upper limit of normal (UL) for adults (unless there is concomitant liver disease) or
phosphorus <5.6 mg/dL. The diagnosis is confirmed by radiologic
evidence of rickets, which is best seen on radiographs of the wrists
and ankles. Films of the arms and legs might reveal fractures. The
rachitic rosary may be visible on chest radiograph. Unfortunately,
radiographs cannot show early demineralization of bone because
changes are not evident until there is >20–30% reduction in the
bone mineral content.

Diagnosis

Because many premature infants have no overt clinical manifestations
of rickets, screening tests are recommended. These tests should include

479

weekly measurements of calcium, phosphorus, and ALP. Periodic measurement of the serum bicarbonate concentration is also important
because metabolic acidosis causes dissolution of bone. At least one
screening radiograph for rickets at 6-­8 weeks of age is appropriate in
infants who are at high risk for it; additional films may be indicated in
high-­risk infants.

Prevention

Provision of adequate amounts of calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D significantly decreases the risk of rickets of prematurity.
Parenteral nutrition is often necessary initially in very premature
infants. In the past, adequate parenteral calcium and phosphorus
delivery was difficult because of limits secondary to insolubility of
these ions when their concentrations were increased. Current amino
acid preparations allow higher concentrations of calcium and phosphate, decreasing the risk of rickets. Early transition to enteral feedings is also helpful. These infants should receive either human milk
fortified with calcium and phosphorus or preterm infant formula,
which has higher concentrations of calcium and phosphorus than
standard formula. Soy formula should be avoided because there
is decreased bioavailability of calcium and phosphorus. Increased
mineral feedings should continue until the infant weighs 3-­3.5 kg.
These infants should also receive approximately 400 IU/day of vitamin D through formula and vitamin supplements.

Treatment

Therapy for rickets of prematurity focuses on ensuring adequate delivery of calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D. If mineral delivery has
been good and there is no evidence of healing, it is important to screen
for vitamin D deficiency by measuring serum 25-­D. Measurement of
PTH, 1,25-­D, and urinary calcium and phosphorus may be helpful in
some cases.

DISTAL RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS

Distal renal tubular acidosis usually manifests with failure to thrive.
Patients have a metabolic acidosis with an inability to acidify the urine
appropriately. Hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis are typically present. The many etiologies include autosomal recessive and autosomal
dominant forms. Rickets is variable and responds to alkali therapy (see
Fig. 69.5 and Chapter 569.2).

HYPERVITAMINOSIS D
Etiology

Hypervitaminosis D is caused by excessive intake of vitamin D. It
can occur with long-­term high intake or with a substantial, acute
ingestion (see Table 69.1). Most cases are secondary to misuse of
prescribed or nonprescription vitamin D supplements, but other
cases have been secondary to accidental overfortification of milk,
contamination of table sugar, and inadvertent use of vitamin D supplements as cooking oil. The recommended upper limits for long-­
term vitamin D intake are 1,000 IU for children <1 year old and
2,000 IU for older children and adults.
Hypervitaminosis D can also result from excessive intake of synthetic vitamin D analogs (25-­D, 1,25-­D). Vitamin D intoxication is
never secondary to excessive exposure to sunlight, probably because
ultraviolet irradiation can transform vitamin D3 and its precursor into
inactive metabolites.

Pathogenesis

Although vitamin D increases intestinal absorption of calcium,
the dominant mechanism of the hypercalcemia is excessive bone
resorption.

Clinical Manifestations

The signs and symptoms of vitamin D intoxication are secondary to hypercalcemia. GI manifestations include nausea, vomiting, poor feeding, constipation, abdominal pain, and pancreatitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

480 Part V u Nutrition
Possible cardiac findings are hypertension, decreased QT interval,
and arrhythmias. The central nervous system effects of hypercalcemia include lethargy, hypotonia, confusion, disorientation, depression, psychosis, hallucinations, and coma. Hypercalcemia impairs
renal concentrating mechanisms, which can lead to polyuria, dehydration, and hypernatremia. Hypercalcemia can also lead to acute
kidney injury, nephrolithiasis, and nephrocalcinosis, which can
result in chronic kidney disease. Deaths are usually associated with
arrhythmias or dehydration.

Laboratory Findings

The classic findings in vitamin D intoxication are hypercalcemia, elevated levels of 25-­D (>100 ng/mL), hypercalciuria, and
suppressed PTH. Hyperphosphatemia is also common. Hypercalciuria can lead to nephrocalcinosis, which is visible on renal
ultrasound. Hypercalcemia and nephrocalcinosis can lead to renal
insufficiency.
Surprisingly, levels of 1,25-­D are usually normal. This may result from
downregulation of renal 1α-­hydroxylase by the combination of low PTH,
hyperphosphatemia, and a direct effect of 1,25-­D. The level of free 1,25-­D
may be high because of displacement from vitamin D–binding proteins by
25-­D. Anemia is sometimes present; the mechanism is unknown.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis is based on the presence of hypercalcemia and an elevated serum 25-­D level, although children with excess intake of 1,25-­D
or another synthetic vitamin D preparation have normal levels of 25-­
D. With careful sleuthing, there is usually a history of excess intake of
vitamin D, although in some situations (overfortification of milk by a
dairy), the patient and family may be unaware.
The differential diagnosis of vitamin D intoxication focuses on other
causes of hypercalcemia. Hyperparathyroidism produces hypophosphatemia, whereas vitamin D intoxication usually causes hyperphosphatemia. Williams syndrome is often suggested by phenotypic features and
accompanying cardiac disease. Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia occurs
in children taking appropriate doses of vitamin D. Subcutaneous fat necrosis is a common cause of hypercalcemia in young infants; skin findings
are usually present. The hypercalcemia of familial benign hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia is mild, asymptomatic, and associated with hypocalciuria.
Hypercalcemia of malignancy is an important consideration. Hypercalcemia may occur on a ketogenic diet. High intake of calcium can also cause
hypercalcemia, especially in the presence of renal insufficiency. Inquiring
about calcium intake should be part of the history in a patient with hypercalcemia. Occasionally, patients are intentionally taking high doses of calcium and vitamin D.

Treatment

The treatment of vitamin D intoxication focuses on control of hypercalcemia. Many patients with hypercalcemia are dehydrated as a result of
polyuria from nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, poor oral intake, and vomiting. Rehydration lowers the serum calcium level by dilution and corrects
prerenal azotemia. The resultant increased urine output increases urinary
calcium excretion. Urinary calcium excretion is also increased by high
urinary sodium excretion. The mainstay of the initial treatment is aggressive therapy with normal saline, often in conjunction with a loop diuretic
to further increase calcium excretion; this is often adequate for treating
mild or moderate hypercalcemia. More significant hypercalcemia usually
requires other therapies. Glucocorticoids decrease intestinal absorption of
calcium by blocking the action of 1,25-­D. There is also a decrease in the levels of 25-­D and 1,25-­D. The usual dosage of prednisone is 1-­2 mg/kg/24 hr.
Calcitonin, which lowers calcium by inhibiting bone resorption,
is a useful adjunct, but its effect is usually not dramatic. There is
an excellent response to IV or oral bisphosphonates in vitamin D
intoxication. Bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption through
their effects on osteoclasts. Hemodialysis using a low or zero dialysate calcium can rapidly lower serum calcium in patients with
severe hypercalcemia that is refractory to other measures.

Along with controlling hypercalcemia, it is imperative to eliminate
the source of excess vitamin D. Additional sources of vitamin D such
as multivitamins and fortified foods should be eliminated or reduced.
Avoidance of sun exposure, including the use of sunscreen, is prudent.
The patient should also restrict calcium intake.

Prognosis

Most children make a full recovery, but hypervitaminosis D may be
fatal or can lead to chronic kidney disease. Because vitamin D is stored
in fat, levels can remain elevated for months, necessitating regular
monitoring of 25-­D, serum calcium, and urine calcium.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 70

Vitamin E Deficiency
Larry A. Greenbaum
Vitamin E is a fat-­soluble vitamin and functions as an antioxidant, but
its precise biochemical functions are not known. Vitamin E deficiency
can cause hemolysis or neurologic manifestations and occurs in premature infants, in patients with malabsorption, and in an autosomal
recessive disorder affecting vitamin E transport. Because of its role as
an antioxidant, there is considerable research on vitamin E supplementation in chronic illnesses.

PATHOGENESIS

The term vitamin E denotes a group of 8 compounds with similar structures and antioxidant activity. The most potent member
of these compounds is α-­tocopherol, which is also the main form
in humans. The best dietary sources of vitamin E are vegetable
oils, seeds, nuts, green leafy vegetables, and margarine (see Table
69.1).
The majority of vitamin E is located within cell membranes, where
it prevents lipid peroxidation and the formation of free radicals. Other
antioxidants, such as ascorbic acid, enhance the antioxidant activity of
vitamin E. The importance of other functions of vitamin E is still being
delineated.
Premature infants are particularly susceptible to vitamin E deficiency because there is significant transfer of vitamin E during the
last trimester of pregnancy. Vitamin E deficiency in premature
infants causes thrombocytosis, edema, and hemolysis, potentially
causing anemia. The risk of symptomatic vitamin E deficiency was
increased by the use of formulas for premature infants that had a
high content of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). These formulas led to a high content of PUFAs in red blood cell membranes,
making them more susceptible to oxidative stress, which could
be ameliorated by vitamin E. Oxidative stress was augmented by
aggressive use of iron supplementation; iron increases the production of oxygen radicals. The incidence of hemolysis as a result of
vitamin E deficiency in premature infants decreased secondary to
the use of formulas with a lower content of PUFAs, less aggressive
use of iron, and provision of adequate vitamin E.
Because vitamin E is plentiful in common foods, primary dietary
deficiency is rare except in premature infants and in severe, generalized malnutrition. Vitamin E deficiency does occur in children with
fat malabsorption secondary to the bile acid needed for vitamin E
absorption. Although symptomatic disease is most common in
children with cholestatic liver disease, it can occur in patients with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 71 u Vitamin K Deficiency
cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, short bowel syndrome, and Crohn
disease. The autosomal recessive disorder abetalipoproteinemia
causes fat malabsorption, and vitamin E deficiency is a common
complication (see Chapter 106).
In ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency (AVED), a rare autosomal recessive disorder, there are pathologic variants in TTPA, the
gene for α-­tocopherol transfer protein. Patients with this disorder are
unable to incorporate vitamin E into lipoproteins before their release
from the liver, leading to reduced serum levels of vitamin E. There is
no associated fat malabsorption, and absorption of vitamin E from the
intestine occurs normally.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A severe, progressive neurologic disorder occurs in patients with
prolonged vitamin E deficiency. Clinical manifestations do not
appear until after 1 year of age, even in children with cholestasis
since birth. Patients may have cerebellar disease, posterior column dysfunction, and retinal disease. Loss of deep tendon reflexes
is usually the initial finding. Subsequent manifestations include
limb ataxia (intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesia), truncal ataxia
(wide-­based, unsteady gait), dysarthria, ophthalmoplegia (limited
upward gaze), nystagmus, decreased proprioception (positive Romberg test), decreased vibratory sensation, and dysarthria. Some
patients have pigmentary retinopathy. Visual field constriction can
progress to blindness. Cognition and behavior can also be affected.
Myopathy and cardiac arrhythmias are less common findings.
In premature infants, hemolysis as a result of vitamin E deficiency
typically develops during the second month of life. Edema may also
be present.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Serum vitamin E levels increase in the presence of high serum lipid
levels, even when vitamin E deficiency is present. Therefore vitamin E status is best determined by measuring the ratio of vitamin
E to serum lipids; a ratio <0.8 mg/g is abnormal in older children
and adults; <0.6 mg/g is abnormal in infants <1 year. Premature
infants with hemolysis caused by vitamin E deficiency also often
have elevated platelet counts.
Neurologic involvement can cause abnormal somatosensory evoked
potentials and nerve conduction studies. Abnormalities on electroretinography can precede physical examination findings in patients with
retinal involvement.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Premature infants with unexplained hemolytic anemia after the first
month of life, especially if thrombocytosis is present, either should
be empirically treated with vitamin E or should have serum vitamin
E and lipid levels measured. Children with neurologic findings and a
disease that causes fat malabsorption should have their vitamin E status evaluated.
Because children with AVED do not have symptoms of malabsorption, a correct diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion. Friedreich
ataxia has been misdiagnosed in some patients (see Chapter 637.1).
Children with unexplained ataxia should be screened for vitamin E
deficiency.

TREATMENT

For correction of deficiency in neonates, the dose of vitamin E is
25-­50 units/day for 1 week, followed by adequate dietary intake.
Children with deficiency as a result of malabsorption should receive
1 unit/kg/day, with the dose adjusted based on levels; ongoing treatment is necessary. Children with AVED normalize their serum
vitamin E levels with high doses of vitamin E and require ongoing
treatment.

PROGNOSIS

The hemolytic anemia in infants resolves with correction of the
vitamin E deficiency. Some neurologic manifestations of vitamin E

481

deficiency may be reversible with early treatment, but many patients
have little or no improvement. Importantly, treatment prevents
progression.

PREVENTION

Premature infants should receive sufficient vitamin E through formula or breast milk fortifier and formula without a high content of
PUFAs. Children at risk for vitamin E deficiency as a result of malabsorption should be screened for deficiency and given adequate
vitamin E supplementation. Vitamin preparations with high content of all the fat-­soluble vitamins are available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 71

Vitamin K Deficiency
Larry A. Greenbaum
Vitamin K is necessary for the synthesis of clotting factors II, VII, IX,
and X; deficiency of vitamin K can result in clinically significant bleeding. Vitamin K deficiency typically affects infants, who experience a
transient deficiency related to inadequate intake, or patients of any age
who have decreased vitamin K absorption. Mild vitamin K deficiency
can affect long-­term bone and vascular health (see Chapters 142 and
529).

PATHOGENESIS

Vitamin K is a group of compounds that have a common naphthoquinone ring structure (see Table 69.1). Phylloquinone, called
vitamin K1, is present in a variety of dietary sources, with green
leafy vegetables, liver, and certain legumes and plant oils having
the highest content. Vitamin K1 is the form used to fortify foods
and as a medication in the United States. Vitamin K2 is a group of
compounds called menaquinones, which are produced by intestinal bacteria. There is uncertainty regarding the relative importance
of intestinally produced vitamin K2. Menaquinones are also present
in meat, especially liver, and cheese. A menaquinone is used pharmacologically in some countries.
Vitamin K is a cofactor for γ-­glutamyl carboxylase, an enzyme
that performs posttranslational carboxylation, converting glutamate residues in proteins to γ-­c arboxyglutamate (Gla). The Gla
residues, by facilitating calcium binding, are necessary for protein
function.
The classic Gla-­containing proteins involved in blood coagulation that are decreased in vitamin K deficiency are factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX, and X. Vitamin K deficiency causes a decrease
in proteins C and S, which inhibit blood coagulation, and protein Z, which also has a role in coagulation. All these proteins are
made only in the liver, except for protein S, a product of various
tissues.
Gla-­containing proteins are also involved in bone biology (osteocalcin and protein S) and vascular biology (matrix Gla protein and
protein S). Based on the presence of reduced levels of Gla, these proteins appear more sensitive than the coagulation proteins to subtle
vitamin K deficiency. Evidence suggests that mild vitamin K deficiency might have a deleterious effect on long-­term bone strength
and vascular health.
Because it is fat soluble, vitamin K requires the presence of bile
salts for its absorption. Unlike other fat-­soluble vitamins, there are

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

482 Part V u Nutrition
limited body stores of vitamin K. In addition, there is high turnover
of vitamin K, and the vitamin K–dependent clotting factors have a
short half-­life. Thus symptomatic vitamin K deficiency can develop
within weeks when there is inadequate supply because of low intake
or malabsorption.
There are three forms of vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB)
of the newborn (see Chapter 142). Early VKDB was formerly called
classic hemorrhagic disease of the newborn and occurs at 1-­14 days
of age. Early VKDB is secondary to low stores of vitamin K at birth
as a result of the poor transfer of vitamin K across the placenta and
inadequate intake during the first few days of life. In addition, there
is no intestinal synthesis of vitamin K2 because the newborn gut
is sterile. Early VKDB occurs mostly in breastfed infants as a consequence of the low vitamin K content of breast milk (formula is
fortified). Delayed feeding is an additional risk factor.
Late VKDB most often occurs at 2-­12 weeks of age, although
cases can occur up to 6 months after birth. Almost all cases are
in breastfed infants because of the low vitamin K content of breast
milk. An additional risk factor is occult malabsorption of vitamin
K, as occurs in children with undiagnosed cystic fibrosis or cholestatic liver disease (e.g., biliary atresia, α1-­antitrypsin deficiency).
Without vitamin K prophylaxis, the incidence is 4-­10 per 100,000
newborns.
The third form of VKDB of the newborn occurs at birth or shortly
thereafter. It is secondary to maternal intake of medications (warfarin,
phenobarbital, phenytoin) that cross the placenta and interfere with
vitamin K function.
VKDB as a result of fat malabsorption can occur in children of any
age. Potential etiologies include cholestatic liver disease, pancreatic
disease, and intestinal disorders (celiac sprue, inflammatory bowel disease, short bowel syndrome). Prolonged diarrhea can cause vitamin K
deficiency, especially in breastfed infants. Children with cystic fibrosis
are most likely to have vitamin K deficiency if they have pancreatic
insufficiency and liver disease.
Beyond infancy, low dietary intake by itself never causes vitamin
K deficiency. However, the combination of poor intake and the use
of broad-­spectrum antibiotics that eliminate the intestine’s vitamin
K2–producing bacteria can cause vitamin K deficiency. This scenario is especially common in the intensive care unit. Vitamin K
deficiency can also occur in patients who receive total parenteral
nutrition (TPN) without vitamin K supplementation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In early VKDB, the most common sites of bleeding are the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, mucosal and cutaneous tissue, umbilical
stump, and the postcircumcision site; intracranial bleeding is less
common. GI blood loss can be severe enough to require a transfusion. In contrast, the most common site of bleeding in late VKDB
is intracranial, although cutaneous and GI bleeding may be the
initial manifestation. Intracranial bleeding can cause convulsions,
permanent neurologic sequelae, or death. In some patients with late
VKDB, the presence of an underlying disorder may be suggested
by jaundice or failure to thrive (malnutrition). Older children with
vitamin K deficiency can present with bruising, mucocutaneous
bleeding, or more serious bleeding.

Laboratory Findings

In patients with bleeding as a result of vitamin K deficiency, the
prothrombin time (PT) is prolonged. The PT must be interpreted
based on the patient’s age because it is normally prolonged in newborns (see Chapters 142 and 524). The partial thromboplastin time
(PTT) is usually prolonged, but may be normal in early deficiency.
Factor VII has the shortest half-­life of the coagulation factors and
is the first to be affected by vitamin K deficiency, but isolated factor
VII deficiency does not affect PTT. The platelet count and fibrinogen level are normal.

When there is mild vitamin K deficiency, the PT is normal, but
there are elevated levels of the undercarboxylated forms of the
proteins that are normally carboxylated in the presence of vitamin
K. These undercarboxylated proteins are called proteins induced
by vitamin K absence (PIVKA). Measurement of undercarboxylated factor II (PIVKA-­II) can be used to detect mild vitamin K
deficiency. Determination of blood vitamin K levels is less useful
because of significant variation based on recent dietary intake; levels do not always reflect tissue stores.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is established by the presence of a prolonged PT that
corrects rapidly after administration of vitamin K, which stops the
active bleeding. Other possible causes of bleeding and a prolonged
PT include disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), liver failure, and rare hereditary deficiencies of clotting factors. DIC, which
is usually secondary to sepsis, is associated with thrombocytopenia,
low fibrinogen, and elevated D-­dimers. Severe liver disease results
in decreased production of clotting factors; the PT does not fully
correct with administration of vitamin K. Children with a hereditary disorder have a deficiency in a specific clotting factor (I, II, V,
VII, X).
Coumarin derivatives inhibit the action of vitamin K by preventing its recycling to an active form after it functions as a cofactor for
γ-­glutamyl carboxylase. Bleeding can occur with overdosage of the
common anticoagulant warfarin or with ingestion of rodent poison,
which contains a coumarin derivative. High doses of salicylates also
inhibit vitamin K regeneration, potentially leading to a prolonged PT
and clinical bleeding.

TREATMENT

Infants with VKDB should receive 1 mg of parenteral vitamin K.
The PT should decrease within 6 hours and normalize within 24
hours. For rapid correction in adolescents, the parenteral dose is
2.5-­10 mg. In addition to vitamin K, a patient with severe, life-­
threatening bleeding should receive an infusion of fresh-­frozen
plasma (FFP), which corrects the coagulopathy rapidly. Children
with vitamin K deficiency caused by malabsorption require chronic
administration of high doses of oral vitamin K (2.5 mg twice/week
to 5 mg/day). Parenteral vitamin K may be necessary if oral vitamin
K is ineffective.

PREVENTION

Administration of either oral or parenteral vitamin K soon after
birth prevents early VKDB of the newborn. In contrast, a single
dose of oral vitamin K does not prevent a substantial number of
cases of late VKDB. However, a single intramuscular (IM) injection
of vitamin K (1 mg), the current practice in the United States, is
almost universally effective, except in children with severe malabsorption. This increased efficacy of the IM form is thought to be the
result of a depot effect. Concerns about an association between parenteral vitamin K at birth and the later development of malignancy
are unsubstantiated. Oral vitamin K is a less effective alternative for
parents who refuse IM vitamin K, but multiple doses are necessary
and rely on home administration.
Discontinuing the offending medications before delivery can
prevent VKDB attributable to maternal medications. If this is not
possible, administration of vitamin K to the mother may be helpful. In addition, the neonate should receive parenteral vitamin K
immediately after birth. If parenteral vitamin K does not correct the
coagulopathy rapidly, the child should receive FFP.
Children who are at high risk for malabsorption of vitamin K
should receive supplemental vitamin K and periodic measurement
of the PT.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 72 u Micronutrient Mineral Deficiencies

Chapter 72

Micronutrient Mineral
Deficiencies
Larry A. Greenbaum
Micronutrients include vitamins (see Chapters 66-­71) and trace elements. By definition, a trace element is <0.01% of the body weight.
Trace elements have a variety of essential functions (Table 72.1),
although the evidence is not always strong (chromium). With the
exception of iron deficiency, trace element deficiency is uncommon in
developed countries, but some deficiencies (iodine, zinc, selenium) are
important public health problems in a number of developing countries.
Because of low nutritional requirements and plentiful supply, deficiencies of some of the trace elements are extremely rare in humans and
Table 72.1  	
ELEMENT

483

typically occur in patients receiving unusual diets or prolonged total
parenteral nutrition without adequate delivery of a specific trace element. Trace element deficiencies can also occur in children with short
bowel syndrome or malabsorption. Excess intake of trace elements is
uncommon, but can result from environmental exposure or overuse of
supplements (see Table 72.1).
For a number of reasons, children are especially susceptible to trace
element deficiency. First, growth creates an increased demand for most
trace elements. Second, some organs are more likely to sustain permanent damage because of trace element deficiency during childhood. The
developing brain is particularly vulnerable to the consequences of certain deficiency states (iron, iodide). Similarly, adequate fluoride is most
critical for dental health during childhood. Third, children, especially
in the developing world, are more prone to gastrointestinal disorders
that can cause trace element deficiencies because of malabsorption.
A normal diet provides adequate intake of most trace elements. However, the intake of certain trace elements varies significantly in different
geographic locations. Iodide-­containing food is plentiful near the ocean,
but inland areas often have inadequate sources, leading to goiter and
hypothyroidism. Iodine deficiency is not a problem in the United States
because of the widespread use of iodized salt; however, symptomatic

Trace Elements
PHYSIOLOGY

EFFECTS OF DEFICIENCY

EFFECTS OF EXCESS

DIETARY SOURCES

Chromium

Potentiates the action of
insulin

Impaired glucose tolerance,
peripheral neuropathy, and
encephalopathy

Unknown

Meat, grains, fruits, and
vegetables

Copper

Absorbed via specific
intestinal transporter
Circulates bound to
ceruloplasmin
Enzyme cofactor (superoxide
dismutase, cytochrome
oxidase, and enzymes
involved in iron metabolism
and connective tissue
formation)

Microcytic anemia, osteoporosis,
neutropenia, neurologic
symptoms, depigmentation of
hair and skin

Acute: nausea, emesis,
abdominal pain, coma, and
hepatic necrosis
Chronic toxicity (liver and
brain injury) occurs in Wilson
disease (see Chapter 405.2)
and secondary to excess
intake (see Chapter 405.3)

Vegetables, grains, nuts,
liver, margarine,
legumes, corn oil

Fluoride

Incorporated into bone

Dental caries (see Chapter 358)

Chronic: dental fluorosis (see
Chapter 353)

Toothpaste, fluoridated
water

Iodine

Component of thyroid
hormone (see Chapter 580)

Hypothyroidism (see Chapters
601 and 603)

Hypothyroidism and goiter
(see Chapters 603 and 605);
maternal excess can cause
congenital hypothyroidism
and goiter (see Chapter 603.1)

Saltwater fish, iodized salt

Iron

Component of hemoglobin,
myoglobin, cytochromes,
and other enzymes

Anemia (see Chapter 504),
decreased alertness, impaired
learning

Acute (see Chapter 94): nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal
pain, and hypotension
Chronic excess usually
secondary to hereditary
disorders (see Chapter 511);
causes organ dysfunction

Meat, fortified foods
Deficiency can also
result from blood loss
(hookworm infestation,
menorrhagia)

Manganese

Enzyme cofactor

Hypercholesterolemia, weight loss,
decreased clotting proteins*

Neurologic manifestations,
cholestatic jaundice

Nuts, meat, grains, tea

Molybdenum

Enzyme cofactor (xanthine
oxidase and others)

Tachycardia, tachypnea, night
blindness, irritability, coma*

Hyperuricemia and increased
risk of gout

Legumes, grains, liver

Selenium

Enzyme cofactor (prevents
oxidative damage)

Cardiomyopathy (Keshan
disease), myopathy

Nausea, diarrhea, neurologic
manifestations, nail and hair
changes, garlic odor

Meat, seafood, whole
grains, garlic

Zinc

Enzyme cofactor
Constituent of zinc-­finger
proteins, which regulate
gene transcription

Decreased growth, dermatitis
of extremities and around
orifices, impaired immunity,
poor wound healing,
hypo­gonadism, diarrhea
Supplements are beneficial in
diarrhea and improve neuro­
developmental outcomes

Abdominal pain, diarrhea,
vomiting
Can worsen copper deficiency

Meat, shellfish, whole
grains, legumes, cheese

*These deficiency states have been reported only in case reports associated with parenteral nutrition or highly unusual diets.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

484 Part V u Nutrition
iodine deficiency (goiter, hypothyroidism) is common in many developing countries. Selenium content of the soil and consequently of food
is also quite variable. Dietary selenium deficiency (associated with cardiomyopathy) occurs in certain locations, such as some parts of China.
The consequences of severe isolated trace mineral deficiency are
illustrated in certain genetic disorders. The manifestations of Menkes
disease are caused by pathologic variants in the gene coding for a protein that facilitates intestinal copper absorption (see Chapters 639.5
and 703). These pathologic variants result in severe copper deficiency;
subcutaneous copper is an effective treatment. Nutritional copper
deficiency has been reported in children receiving unsupplemented
parenteral nutrition and in children on a ketogenic diet (with associated neutropenia and anemia). The recessive disorder acrodermatitis
enteropathica is secondary to malabsorption of zinc (see Chapter
712). These patients respond dramatically to zinc supplementation.

Children can have apparently asymptomatic deficiencies of certain
trace elements but still benefit from supplementation. As an example,
zinc is highly effective in treating children before or during diarrheal
illnesses in the developing world.
Zinc deficiency is quite common in the developing world and is
often associated with malnutrition or other micronutrient deficiencies
(iron). Chronic zinc deficiency is associated with dwarfism, hypogonadism, dermatitis, and T-­cell immunodeficiency. Diets rich in phytates bind zinc, impairing its absorption. Zinc supplementation in
at-­risk children reduces the incidence and severity of diarrhea, pneumonia, and possibly malaria. In developing countries, children who
have diarrhea may benefit from zinc supplementation, especially if
there is underlying malnutrition.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fluid and Electrolyte
Disorders
Chapter 73

Electrolyte and Acid-­Base
Disorders
73.1 Composition of Body Fluids
Larry A. Greenbaum

TOTAL BODY WATER

Total body water (TBW) as a percentage of body weight varies
with age (Fig. 73.1). The fetus has very high TBW, which gradually
decreases to approximately 75% of birthweight for a term infant.
Premature infants have higher TBW than term infants. During
the first year of life, TBW decreases to approximately 60% of body
weight and remains at this level until puberty. At puberty, the fat
content of females increases more than that in males, who acquire
more muscle mass than females. Because fat has very low water
content and muscle has high water content, by the end of puberty
TBW in males remains at 60%, but TBW in females decreases to
approximately 50% of body weight. The high fat content in overweight children causes a decrease in TBW as a percentage of body
weight. During dehydration, TBW decreases and thus is a smaller
percentage of body weight.

PART

VI

ECF volume. This is followed by continued expansion of the ICF
volume, which results from cellular growth. By 1 year of age, the
ratio of ICF volume to ECF volume approaches adult levels. The
ECF volume is approximately 20–25% of body weight, and the ICF
volume is approximately 30–40% of body weight, close to twice the
ECF volume (Fig. 73.2). With puberty, the increased muscle mass of
males causes them to have a higher ICF volume than females. There
is no significant difference in the ECF volume between postpubertal
females and males.
The ECF is further divided into the plasma water and the interstitial fluid (see Fig. 73.2). The plasma water is 5% of body weight.
The blood volume, given a hematocrit of 40%, is usually 8% of body
weight, although it is higher in newborns and young infants; in
premature newborns it is approximately 10% of body weight. The
volume of plasma water can be altered by pathologic conditions,
including dehydration, anemia, polycythemia, heart failure, abnormal plasma osmolality, and hypoalbuminemia. The interstitial fluid,
normally 15% of body weight, can increase dramatically in diseases
associated with edema, such as heart failure, protein-­losing enteropathy, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, and sepsis. An increase
in interstitial fluid also occurs in patients with ascites or pleural
effusions.
There is a delicate equilibrium between the intravascular fluid
and the interstitial fluid. The balance between hydrostatic and

FLUID COMPARTMENTS

TBW is divided between two main compartments: intracellular
fluid (ICF) and extracellular fluid (ECF). In the fetus and newborn, the ECF volume is larger than the ICF volume (see Fig. 73.1).
The normal postnatal diuresis causes an immediate decrease in the
Intracellular
(30-40%)
100
90

% Body Weight

80

Total body
water (TBW)

70
60
50

Intracellular fluid (ICF)

40
30

Interstitial
(15%)

Extracellular
fluid (ECF)

20
10

Extracellular
(20-25%)

0
2468
Birth

6

12

3

Months

6

9

12 15

Adult

Years
Age

Fig. 73.1 Total body water, intracellular fluid, and extracellular fluid as
a percentage of body weight as a function of age. (From Winters RW.
Water and electrolyte regulation. In: Winters RW, ed. The Body Fluids
in Pediatrics. Little, Brown; 1973.)

Plasma
(5%)

Fig. 73.2 Compartments of total body water, expressed as percentages of body weight, in an older child or adult.

485
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

486 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
oncotic forces regulates the intravascular volume, which is critical for proper tissue perfusion. The intravascular fluid has a higher
concentration of albumin than the interstitial fluid, and the consequent oncotic force draws water into the intravascular space. The
maintenance of this gradient depends on the limited permeability
of albumin across the capillaries. The hydrostatic pressure of the
intravascular space, which is caused by the pumping action of the
heart, drives fluid out of the intravascular space. These forces favor
movement into the interstitial space at the arterial ends of the capillaries. The decreased hydrostatic forces and increased oncotic
forces, which result from the dilutional increase in albumin concentration, cause movement of fluid into the venous ends of the capillaries. Overall, there is usually a net movement of fluid out of the
intravascular space to the interstitial space, but this fluid is returned
to the circulation via the lymphatics.
An imbalance in these forces may cause expansion of the interstitial volume at the expense of the intravascular volume. In children with hypoalbuminemia, the decreased oncotic pressure of the
intravascular fluid contributes to the development of edema. Loss
of fluid from the intravascular space may compromise the intravascular volume, placing the child at risk for inadequate blood flow
to vital organs. This is especially likely in diseases in which capillary leak occurs because the loss of albumin from the intravascular
space is associated with an increase in the albumin concentration
in the interstitial space, further compromising the oncotic forces
that normally maintain intravascular volume. In contrast, with
heart failure, there is an increase in venous hydrostatic pressure
from expansion of the intravascular volume, which is caused by
impaired pumping by the heart, and the increase in venous pressure causes fluid to move from the intravascular space to the interstitial space. Expansion of the intravascular volume and increased
intravascular pressure also cause the edema that occurs with acute
glomerulonephritis.

ELECTROLYTE COMPOSITION

The composition of the solutes in the ICF and ECF are very different (Fig. 73.3). Sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) are the dominant
cation and anion, respectively, in ECF. The sodium and chloride
concentrations ([Na+], [Cl−]) in the ICF are much lower. Potassium
(K+) is the most abundant cation in the ICF, and its concentration

PLASMA
Cations
Anions

INTRACELLULAR
Cations
Anions

Na (140)

K (140)

Cl (104)

Phos (107)

HCO3 (24)
Prot (40)

K (4)
Ca (2.5)
Mg (1.1)

Prot (14)
Na (13)
Other (6)
Phos (2)

Mg (7)

HCO3 (10)
Cl (3)

Fig. 73.3 Concentrations of the major cations and anions in the intra-

([K+]) within the cells is approximately 30 times higher than in the
ECF. Proteins, organic anions, and phosphate are the most plentiful anions in the ICF. The dissimilarity between the anions in the
ICF and the ECF is largely determined by the presence of intracellular molecules that do not cross the cell membrane, the barrier separating the ECF and the ICF. In contrast, the difference in
the distribution of cations (Na+ and K+) relies on activity of the
Na+,K+-­adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) pump and membrane
ion channels.
The difference in the electrolyte compositions of the ECF and the
ICF has important ramifications in the evaluation and treatment of
electrolyte disorders. Serum concentrations of electrolytes ([Na+],
[K+], and [Cl−]) do not always reflect total body content. Intracellular [K+] is much higher than the serum concentration. A shift of K+
from the intracellular space (ICS) can maintain a normal or even
an elevated serum [K+] despite massive losses of K+ from the ICS.
This effect is seen in diabetic ketoacidosis, in which significant K+
depletion is masked by transmembrane shift of K+ from the ICF to
the ECF. Therefore, for K+ and phosphorus, electrolytes with a high
intracellular concentration, serum level may not reflect total body
content. Similarly, the serum calcium concentration ([Ca2+]) does
not reflect total body content of Ca2+, which is largely contained in
bone (see Chapter 69).

OSMOLALITY

The ICF and the ECF are in osmotic equilibrium because the cell
membrane is permeable to water. If the osmolality in one compartment changes, then water movement leads to a rapid equalization
of osmolality, with a shift of water between the ICS and extracellular space (ECS). Clinically, the primary process is usually a change
in the osmolality of the ECF, with resultant shift of water into the
ICF if ECF osmolality decreases, or vice versa if ECF osmolality
increases. The ECF osmolality can be determined and usually equals
ICF osmolality. Plasma osmolality, normally 285-­295 mOsm/kg, is
measured by the degree of freezing-­point depression. The plasma
osmolality can also be estimated by a calculation based on the following formula:
Osmolality = 2 × [Na] + [glucose] /18 + [BUN] /2.8

Glucose and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) are reported in mg/dL.
Division of these values by 18 and 2.8, respectively, converts the
units into mmol/L. Multiplication of the [Na+] value by 2 accounts
for its accompanying anions, principally Cl− and bicarbonate.
The calculated osmolality is usually slightly lower than measured
osmolality.
Urea is not confined to the ECS because it readily crosses the
cell membrane, and its intracellular concentration approximately
equals its extracellular concentration. Whereas an elevated [Na+]
causes a shift of water from the ICS, with uremia there is no osmolar gradient between the two compartments and consequently no
movement of water. The only exception is during hemodialysis,
when the decrease in extracellular urea is so rapid that intracellular urea does not have time to equilibrate. Disequilibrium syndrome during hemodialysis may result in a shift of water into brain
cells and lead to severe symptoms. Ethanol, because it freely crosses
cell membranes, is another ineffective osmole. Hence, the effective
osmolality can be calculated as follows:
Effective osmolality = 2 × [Na] + [glucose] /18

The effective osmolality determines the osmotic force that is mediating the shift of water between the ECF and the ICF.

cellular space and the plasma, expressed in mEq/L.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 487
Hyperglycemia causes an increase in the plasma osmolality
because it is not in equilibrium with the ICS. During hyperglycemia, there is shift of water from the ICS to the ECS. This shift
causes dilution of the Na+ in the ECS, causing hyponatremia despite
elevated plasma osmolality. The magnitude of this effect can be calculated as follows:
[Na]corrected = [Na]measured + 1.6 × ([glucose] − 100 mg / dL) /100

where [Na]measured = Na+ concentration measured by the clinical
laboratory and [Na]corrected = corrected Na+ concentration (the Na+
concentration if the glucose concentration were normal and its accompanying water moved back into the cells). The [Na]corrected is the more
reliable indicator of the ratio of total body Na+ to TBW, the usual determinant of the [Na+].
Normally, measured osmolality and calculated osmolality are within
10 mOsm/kg. However, there are some clinical situations in which
this difference does not occur. The presence of unmeasured osmoles
causes measured osmolality to be significantly elevated in comparison
with the calculated osmolality. An osmolal gap is present when the
difference between measured osmolality exceeds calculated osmolality
by >10 mOsm/kg. Examples of unmeasured osmoles include ethanol,
ethylene glycol, methanol, sucrose, sorbitol, and mannitol. These substances increase measured osmolality but are not part of the equation
for calculating osmolality. The presence of an osmolal gap is a clinical
clue to the presence of unmeasured osmoles and may be diagnostically
useful when there is clinical suspicion of poisoning with methanol or
ethylene glycol.
Pseudohyponatremia is a second situation in which there is discordance between measured osmolality and calculated osmolality.
Lipids and proteins are the solids of the serum. In patients with
elevated serum lipids or proteins, the water content of the serum
decreases because water is displaced by the larger amounts of solids. Some instruments measure [Na+] by determining the amount
of Na+ per liter of serum, including the solid component. When
the solid component increases, there is a decrease in [Na+] per
liter of serum, despite a normal concentration when based on the
amount of Na+ per liter of serum water. It is the concentration of
Na+ in serum water that is physiologically relevant. A similar problem occurs when using instruments that require dilution of the
sample before measurement of Na+ (indirect potentiometry). In
both situations, the plasma osmolality is normal despite the presence of pseudohyponatremia, because the method for measuring
osmolality is not appreciably influenced by the percentage of serum
that is composed of lipids and proteins. Pseudohyponatremia is
diagnosed by the finding of a normal measured plasma osmolality
despite hyponatremia. This laboratory artifact does not occur if the
[Na+] in water is measured directly with an ion-­specific electrode,
as with arterial blood gas (ABG) analyzers. Pseudohypernatremia
may occur in patients with very low levels of serum proteins by a
similar mechanism.
When there are no unmeasured osmoles and pseudohyponatremia is not a concern, the calculated osmolality provides an accurate
estimate of the plasma osmolality. Measurement of plasma osmolality is useful for detecting or monitoring unmeasured osmoles
and confirming the presence of true hyponatremia. Whereas many
children with high plasma osmolality are dehydrated—as seen with
hypernatremic dehydration or diabetic ketoacidosis—high osmolality does not always equate with dehydration. A child with salt poisoning or uremia has an elevated plasma osmolality but may be volume
overloaded.

POINT-­OF-­CARE TESTING

Point-­of-­care (POC) testing offers a number of advantages, including rapid turnaround and usually smaller blood sample volume

required. POC devices may provide more accurate results in certain
situations, such as pseudohyponatremia (see earlier) and pseudohyperkalemia (see Chapter 73.4). However, the agreement between
POC and the laboratory is variable, and thus caution is needed
when interpreting results. Because of bias, POC and laboratory
results should not be used on an alternating basis when following
critical trends (e.g., during correction of hypernatremia or hyponatremia; see Chapter 73.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.2 Regulation of Osmolality and Volume
Larry A. Greenbaum
The regulation of plasma osmolality and the intravascular volume is controlled by independent systems for water balance, which
determines osmolality, and sodium balance, which determines volume status. Maintenance of normal osmolality depends on control
of water balance. Control of volume status depends on regulation of
sodium balance. When present, volume depletion takes precedence
over regulation of osmolality, and retention of water contributes to
the maintenance of intravascular volume.

REGULATION OF OSMOLALITY

The plasma osmolality is tightly regulated and maintained at 285-­295
mOsm/kg. Modification of water intake and excretion maintains normal plasma osmolality. In the steady state, the combination of water
intake and water produced by the body from oxidation balances water
losses from the skin, lungs, urine, and gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Only
water intake and urinary losses can be regulated.
Osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus sense plasma osmolality
(see Chapter 594). An elevated effective osmolality leads to secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) by neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei in the hypothalamus. The axons
of these neurons terminate in the posterior pituitary. Circulating
ADH binds to its V2 receptors in the collecting duct cells of the
kidney and causes insertion of water channels (aquaporin-­2) into
the renal collecting duct cells. This produces increased permeability to water, permitting resorption of water into the hypertonic
renal medulla. Urine concentration increases and water excretion
decreases. Urinary water losses cannot be eliminated because there
is obligatory excretion of urinary solutes, such as urea and sodium.
The regulation of ADH secretion is tightly linked to plasma osmolality, responses being detectable with a 1% change in osmolality.
ADH secretion virtually disappears when plasma osmolality is low,
allowing excretion of maximally dilute urine. The resulting loss
of free water (i.e., water without Na+) corrects plasma osmolality.
ADH secretion is not an all-­or-­nothing response; there is a graded
adjustment as the osmolality changes.
Water intake is regulated by hypothalamic osmoreceptors, which
stimulate thirst when the serum osmolality increases. Thirst occurs
with a small increase in the serum osmolality. Control of osmolality
is subordinate to maintenance of an adequate intravascular volume.
When volume depletion is present, both ADH secretion and thirst are
stimulated, regardless of the plasma osmolality. The sensation of thirst
requires moderate volume depletion but only a 1–2% change in the
plasma osmolality.
A number of conditions can limit the kidney’s ability to excrete
adequate water to correct low plasma osmolality. In the syndrome
of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), ADH continues
to be produced despite a low plasma osmolality (see Chapters 73.3
and 597).
The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) affects the kidney’s ability to
eliminate water. With a decrease in the GFR, less water is delivered to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

488 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
the collecting duct, limiting the amount of water that can be excreted.
The impairment in the GFR must be quite significant to limit the kidney’s ability to respond to an excess of water.
The minimum urine osmolality is approximately 30-­50 mOsm/
kg. This places an upper limit on the kidney’s ability to excrete water;
sufficient solute must be present to permit water loss. Massive water
intoxication may exceed this limit, whereas a lesser amount of water
is necessary in the child with a diet that has very little solute. This
can produce severe hyponatremia in children who receive little salt
and have minimal urea production as a result of inadequate protein intake. Volume depletion is an extremely important cause of
decreased water loss by the kidney despite a low plasma osmolality.
This “appropriate” secretion of ADH occurs because volume depletion takes precedence over the osmolality in the regulation of ADH.
The maximum urine osmolality is approximately 1,200 mOsm/
kg. The obligatory solute losses dictate the minimum volume of
urine that must be produced, even when maximally concentrated.
Obligatory water losses increase in patients with high salt intake or
high urea losses, as may occur after relief of a urinary obstruction
or during recovery from acute kidney injury. An increase in urinary solute and thus water losses occurs with an osmotic diuresis,
which results classically from glycosuria in diabetes mellitus as well
as iatrogenically after mannitol administration. There are developmental changes in the kidney’s ability to concentrate the urine. The
maximum urine osmolality in a newborn, especially a premature
newborn, is less than that in an older infant or child. This limits the
ability to conserve water and makes such a patient more vulnerable
to hypernatremic dehydration. Very high fluid intake, as seen with
psychogenic polydipsia, can dilute the high osmolality in the renal
medulla, which is necessary for maximal urinary concentration. If
fluid intake is restricted in patients with this condition, the kidney’s ability to concentrate the urine may be somewhat impaired,
although this defect corrects after a few days without polydipsia.
This may also occur during the initial treatment of central diabetes
insipidus with desmopressin acetate; the renal medulla takes time to
achieve its normal maximum osmolality.

REGULATION OF VOLUME

An appropriate intravascular volume is critical for survival; both volume depletion and volume overload may cause significant morbidity
and mortality. Because sodium is the principal extracellular cation and
is restricted to the ECF, adequate body sodium is necessary for maintenance of intravascular volume. The principal extracellular anion, Cl−,
is also necessary, but for simplicity, Na+ balance is considered the main
regulator of volume status because body content of sodium and that of
chloride usually change proportionally, given the need for equal numbers of cations and anions. In some situations, Cl− depletion is considered the dominant derangement causing volume depletion (metabolic
alkalosis with volume depletion).
The kidney determines sodium balance because there is little
homeostatic control of sodium intake, even though salt craving
does occasionally occur, typically in children with chronic renal
salt loss. The kidney regulates Na+ balance by altering the percentage of filtered Na+ that is resorbed along the nephron. Normally,
the kidney excretes <1% of the Na+ filtered at the glomerulus. In
the absence of disease, extrarenal losses and urinary output match
intake, with the kidney having the capacity to adapt to large variations in sodium intake. When necessary, urinary sodium excretion can be reduced to virtually undetectable levels or increased
dramatically.
The most important determinant of renal Na+ excretion is the volume status of the child; it is the effective intravascular volume that
influences urinary Na+ excretion. The effective intravascular volume is
the volume status that is sensed by the body’s regulatory mechanisms.
Heart failure is a state of volume overload, but the effective intravascular volume is low because poor cardiac function prevents adequate
perfusion of the kidneys and other organs. This explains the avid renal
Na+ retention often present in patients with heart failure.

The renin-­angiotensin system is an important regulator of renal
Na+ excretion. The juxtaglomerular apparatus produces renin in
response to decreased effective intravascular volume. Specific stimuli for renin release are decreased perfusion pressure in the afferent
arteriole of the glomerulus, decreased delivery of sodium to the distal nephron, and β1-­adrenergic agonists, which increase in response
to intravascular volume depletion. Renin, a proteolytic enzyme,
cleaves angiotensinogen, producing angiotensin I. Angiotensin-­
converting enzyme (ACE) converts angiotensin I into angiotensin
II. The actions of angiotensin II include direct stimulation of the
proximal tubule to increase sodium resorption and stimulation of
the adrenal gland to increase aldosterone secretion. Through its
actions in the distal nephron—specifically, the late distal convoluted tubule and the collecting duct—aldosterone increases sodium
resorption. Aldosterone also stimulates potassium excretion,
increasing urinary losses. Along with decreasing urinary loss of
sodium, angiotensin II acts as a vasoconstrictor, which helps maintain adequate blood pressure in the presence of volume depletion.
Volume expansion stimulates the synthesis of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), which is produced by the atria in response to atrial wall
distention. Along with increasing the GFR, ANP inhibits Na+ resorption in the medullary portion of the collecting duct, facilitating an
increase in urinary Na+ excretion.
Volume overload occurs when Na+ intake exceeds output. Children with kidney failure have impaired ability to excrete Na+. The
GFR is low at birth, limiting a newborn’s ability to excrete a Na+
load. In other situations, there is a loss of the appropriate regulation
of renal Na+ excretion. This loss of regulation occurs in patients
with excessive aldosterone, as seen in primary hyperaldosteronism or renal artery stenosis, where excess renin production leads to
high aldosterone levels. In acute glomerulonephritis, even without
significantly reduced GFR, the normal intrarenal mechanisms that
regulate Na+ excretion malfunction, causing excessive renal retention of Na+ and volume overload.
Renal retention of Na+ occurs during volume depletion, but this
appropriate response causes the severe excess in total body Na+ that
is present in heart failure, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, and other
causes of hypoalbuminemia. In these diseases, the effective intravascular volume is decreased, causing the kidney and the various regulatory systems to respond, leading to renal Na+ retention and edema
formation.
Volume depletion usually occurs when Na+ losses exceed intake.
The most common etiology in children is gastroenteritis. Excessive losses of sodium may also occur from the skin in children with
burns, in sweat from patients with cystic fibrosis, or after vigorous
exercise. Inadequate intake of Na+ is uncommon except in neglect,
in famine, or with an inappropriate choice of liquid diet in a child
who cannot take solids. Urinary Na+ wasting may occur in a range
of renal diseases, from renal dysplasia to tubular disorders, such as
Bartter syndrome. The neonate, especially if premature, has a mild
impairment in the ability to conserve Na+. Iatrogenic renal Na+
wasting takes place during diuretic therapy. Renal Na+ loss occurs
as a result of derangement in the normal regulatory systems. An
absence of aldosterone, seen most frequently in children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency,
causes sodium wasting (see Chapter 616).
Isolated disorders of water balance can affect volume status and Na+
balance. Because the cell membrane is permeable to water, changes in
TBW influence both the extracellular volume and the intracellular volume. In isolated water loss, as occurs in diabetes insipidus, the impact
is greater on the ICS because it has a greater volume than the ECS.
Thus, compared with other types of dehydration, hypernatremic dehydration has less impact on plasma volume; most of the fluid loss comes
from the ICS. Yet, significant water loss eventually affects intravascular
volume and will stimulate renal Na+ retention, even if total body Na+
content is normal. Similarly, with acute water intoxication or SIADH,
there is an excess of TBW, but most is in the ICS. However, there is
some effect on the intravascular volume, which causes renal excretion

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 489
of Na+. Children with SIADH or water intoxication have high urine
Na+ concentration despite hyponatremia. This finding reinforces the
concept of independent control systems for water and Na+, but the 2
systems interact when pathophysiologic processes dictate, and control
of effective intravascular volume always takes precedence over control
of osmolality.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.3 Sodium
Larry A. Greenbaum

SODIUM METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

Sodium is the dominant cation of the ECF (see Fig. 73.3), and it is
the principal determinant of extracellular osmolality. Na+ is therefore
necessary for the maintenance of intravascular volume. Less than 3%
of Na+ is intracellular. More than 40% of total body Na+ is in bone;
the remainder is in the interstitial and intravascular spaces. The low
intracellular [Na+], approximately 10 mEq/L, is maintained by Na+,K+-­
ATPase, which exchanges intracellular Na+ for extracellular K+.

Sodium Intake

A child’s diet determines the amount of Na+ ingested—a predomi-

nantly cultural determination in older children. An occasional child
has salt craving because of an underlying salt-­wasting renal disease or
adrenal insufficiency. Children in the United States tend to have very
high salt intakes because their diets include a large amount of “junk”
food or fast food. Infants receive sodium from breast milk (approximately 7 mEq/L) and formula (7-­13 mEq/L, for 20 calorie/oz formula).
Sodium is readily absorbed throughout the GI tract. Mineralocorticoids increase sodium transport into the body, although this effect has
limited clinical significance. The presence of glucose enhances sodium
absorption because of the presence of a co-­transport system. This is the
rationale for including sodium and glucose in oral rehydration solutions (see Chapter 387).

Sodium Excretion

Sodium excretion occurs in stool and sweat, but the kidney regulates
Na+ balance and is the principal site of Na+ excretion. There is some
Na+ loss in stool, but it is minimal unless diarrhea is present. Normally,
sweat has 5-­40 mEq/L of sodium. Sweat [Na+] is increased in children
with cystic fibrosis, aldosterone deficiency, or pseudohypoaldosteronism. The higher sweat losses in these conditions may cause or contribute to Na+ depletion.
Sodium is unique among electrolytes because water balance, not
Na+ balance, usually determines its concentration. When the [Na+]
increases, the resultant higher plasma osmolality causes increased
thirst and increased secretion of ADH, which leads to renal conservation of water. Both these mechanisms increase the water content of
the body, and the [Na+] returns to normal. During hyponatremia, the
decrease in plasma osmolality stops ADH secretion, and consequent
renal water excretion leads to an increase in the [Na+]. Even though
water balance is usually regulated by osmolality, volume depletion
does stimulate thirst, ADH secretion, and renal conservation of water.
Volume depletion takes precedence over osmolality; volume depletion
stimulates ADH secretion, even if a patient has hyponatremia.
The excretion of Na+ by the kidney is not regulated by the plasma
osmolality. The patient’s effective plasma volume determines the amount
of sodium in the urine. This is mediated by a variety of regulatory systems, including the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system and intrarenal
mechanisms. In hyponatremia or hypernatremia, the underlying pathophysiology determines the amount of urinary Na+, not the serum [Na+].

Table 73.1  Causes of Hypernatremia
EXCESSIVE SODIUM
Improperly mixed formula
Excess sodium bicarbonate
Ingestion of seawater or sodium chloride
Intentional salt poisoning (child abuse or fictitious disorder inflicted
on another)
Intravenous hypertonic saline
Sodium phosphate enemas
Hyperaldosteronism
WATER DEFICIT
Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
Acquired
X-­linked (OMIM 304800)
Autosomal recessive (OMIM 125800)
Autosomal dominant (OMIM 125800)
Central Diabetes Insipidus
Acquired*
Autosomal recessive (OMIM 125700/600955)
Autosomal dominant (OMIM 125700)
Wolfram syndrome (OMIM 222300/604928/598500)
Hypothalamic neurogenic (essential) adipsic hypernatremia
Increased Insensible Losses
Premature infants
Radiant warmers
Phototherapy
Inadequate Intake
Ineffective breastfeeding
Child neglect or abuse
Adipsia (lack of thirst)
WATER AND SODIUM DEFICITS
Gastrointestinal Losses
Diarrhea
Emesis/nasogastric suction
Osmotic cathartics (lactulose)
Cutaneous Losses
Burns
Excessive sweating
Renal Losses
Osmotic diuretics (mannitol)
Diabetes mellitus
Chronic kidney disease (dysplasia and obstructive uropathy)
Polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis
Postobstructive diuresis
*Acquired: central diabetes insipidus from CNS malformations, trauma, meningitis,
tumor, infiltration, unknown.
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

HYPERNATREMIA

Hypernatremia is a [Na+] >145 mEq/L, although it is sometimes
defined as >150 mEq/L. Mild hypernatremia is common in children,
especially among infants with gastroenteritis. Hypernatremia in hospitalized patients may be iatrogenic, which is caused by inadequate water
administration or, less often, by excessive Na+ administration. Moderate or severe hypernatremia has significant morbidity because of the
underlying disease, the effects of hypernatremia on the brain, and the
risks of overly rapid correction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

490 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Etiology and Pathophysiology

There are three basic mechanisms of hypernatremia (Table 73.1).
Sodium intoxication may be iatrogenic in a hospital setting because
of correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate. Baking soda, a putative home remedy for upset stomach, is another
source of sodium bicarbonate; the hypernatremia is accompanied
by a profound metabolic alkalosis. Hypernatremia may develop following sodium phosphate emesis. In hyperaldosteronism, there is
renal retention of sodium and resultant hypertension; hypernatremia may not be present or is usually mild.
The classic causes of hypernatremia from a water deficit are nephrogenic and central diabetes insipidus (see Chapters 570 and 596).
Hypernatremia develops in diabetes insipidus only if the patient
does not have access to water or cannot drink adequately because
of immaturity, neurologic impairment, emesis, or anorexia. Infants
are at high risk because of their inability to control their own water
intake. Central diabetes insipidus and the genetic forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus typically cause massive urinary water losses
and very dilute urine. The water losses are less dramatic, and the
urine often has the same osmolality as plasma when nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus is secondary to intrinsic renal disease (obstructive uropathy, renal dysplasia, sickle cell disease).
The other causes of a water deficit are also secondary to an imbalance between losses and intake. Newborns, especially if premature,
have high insensible water losses. Losses are further increased if
the infant is placed under a radiant warmer or with the use of phototherapy for hyperbilirubinemia. The renal concentrating mechanisms are not optimal at birth, providing an additional source of
water loss. Ineffective breastfeeding, often in a primiparous mother,
can cause severe hypernatremic dehydration. Adipsia, the absence
of thirst, is usually secondary to damage to the hypothalamus, such
as from trauma, tumor, hydrocephalus, or histiocytosis. Primary
adipsia (essential hypernatremia) is rare but is seen in children
with central nervous system (CNS) malformations (septo-­
optic
dysphasia, holoprosencephaly, optic nerve hypoplasia).
When hypernatremia occurs in conditions with deficits of sodium
and water, the water deficit exceeds the sodium deficit. This occurs
only if the patient is unable to ingest adequate water. Diarrhea results
in depletion of both Na+ and water. Because diarrhea is hypotonic—
typical Na+ concentration of 35-­65 mEq/L—water losses exceed Na+
losses, potentially leading to hypernatremia. Most children with gastroenteritis do not have hypernatremia because they drink enough
hypotonic fluid to compensate for stool water losses (see Chapter
387). Fluids such as water, juice, and formula are more hypotonic
than the stool losses, allowing correction of the water deficit and
potentially even causing hyponatremia. Hypernatremia is most likely
to occur in the child with diarrhea who has inadequate intake because
of emesis, lack of access to water, or anorexia.
Osmotic agents, including mannitol, and glucose in diabetes mellitus, cause excessive renal losses of water and Na+. Because the urine
is hypotonic ([Na+] of approximately 50 mEq/L) during an osmotic
diuresis, water loss exceeds Na+ loss, and hypernatremia may occur if
water intake is inadequate. Certain chronic kidney diseases, such as
renal dysplasia and obstructive uropathy, are associated with tubular
dysfunction, leading to excessive losses of water and Na+. Many children with such diseases have disproportionate water loss and are at risk
for hypernatremic dehydration, especially if gastroenteritis supervenes.
Similar mechanisms occur during the polyuric phase of acute kidney
injury and after relief of urinary obstruction (postobstructive diuresis).
Patients with either condition may have an osmotic diuresis from urinary losses of urea and an inability to conserve water because of tubular
dysfunction.

Clinical Manifestations

Most children with hypernatremia are dehydrated and show the typical
clinical signs and symptoms (see Chapter 75). Children with hypernatremic dehydration tend to have better preservation of intravascular
volume because of the shift of water from the ICS to the ECS. This shift

maintains blood pressure and urine output and allows hypernatremic
infants to be less symptomatic initially and potentially to become
more dehydrated before medical attention is sought. Breastfed infants
with hypernatremia are often profoundly dehydrated, with failure to
thrive (malnutrition). Probably because of intracellular water loss, the
pinched abdominal skin of a dehydrated, hypernatremic infant has a
“doughy” feel.
Hypernatremia, even without dehydration, causes central nervous
system (CNS) symptoms that tend to parallel the degree of [Na+]
elevation and the acuity of the increase. Patients are irritable, restless, weak, and lethargic. Some infants have a high-­pitched cry and
hyperpnea. Alert patients are very thirsty, even though nausea may be
present. Hypernatremia may cause fever, although many patients have
an underlying process that contributes to the fever. Hypernatremia is
associated with hyperglycemia and mild hypocalcemia; the mechanisms are unknown. Beyond the sequelae of dehydration, there is no
clear direct effect of hypernatremia on other organs or tissues, except
the brain.
Brain hemorrhage is the most devastating consequence of untreated
hypernatremia. As the extracellular osmolality increases, water moves
out of brain cells, leading to a decrease in brain volume. This decrease
can result in tearing of intracerebral veins and bridging blood vessels
as the brain moves away from the skull and the meninges. Patients may
have subarachnoid, subdural, and parenchymal hemorrhages. Seizures
and coma are possible sequelae of the hemorrhage, although seizures
are more common during correction of hypernatremia. The cerebrospinal fluid protein is often elevated in infants with significant hypernatremia, probably because of leakage from damaged blood vessels.
Neonates, especially if premature, seem especially vulnerable to hypernatremia and excessive sodium intake. There is an association between
rapid or hyperosmolar sodium bicarbonate administration and the
development of intraventricular hemorrhages in neonates. Even
though osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS), which includes
central pontine myelinolysis and extrapontine myelinolysis, is classically associated with overly rapid correction of hyponatremia, it can
occur in children with hypernatremia (see “Treatment”). Thrombotic
complications occur in severe hypernatremic dehydration, including
stroke, dural sinus thrombosis, peripheral thrombosis, and renal vein
thrombosis. This is secondary to dehydration and possibly hypercoagulability associated with hypernatremia.

Diagnosis

The etiology of hypernatremia is usually apparent from the history.
Hypernatremia resulting from water loss occurs only if the patient
does not have access to water or is unable to drink. In the absence
of dehydration, it is important to ask about sodium intake. Children with excess salt intake do not have signs of dehydration, unless
another process is present. Severe Na+ intoxication causes signs of
volume overload, such as pulmonary edema and weight gain. Salt
poisoning is associated with an elevated fractional excretion of
Na+, whereas hypernatremic dehydration causes a low fractional
excretion of Na+. Gastric sodium concentrations are often elevated
in salt poisoning. In hyperaldosteronism, hypernatremia is usually
mild or absent and is associated with edema, hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis.
When there is isolated water loss, the signs of volume depletion
are usually less severe initially because much of the loss is from the
ICS. When pure water loss causes signs of dehydration, the hypernatremia and water deficit are usually severe. In the child with
renal water loss, either central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus,
the urine is inappropriately dilute and urine volume is not low. The
urine is maximally concentrated and urine volume is low if the
losses are extrarenal or caused by inadequate intake. With extrarenal causes of loss of water, the urine osmolality should be >1,000
mOsm/kg. When diabetes insipidus is suspected, the evaluation
may include measurement of ADH and a water-­deprivation test,
including a trial of desmopressin acetate (synthetic ADH analog)
to differentiate between nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and central

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 491
diabetes insipidus (see Chapters 570 and 596). A water-­deprivation
test is unnecessary if the patient has simultaneous documentation
of hypernatremia and poorly concentrated urine (osmolality lower
than that of plasma). In children with central diabetes insipidus,
administration of desmopressin acetate increases the urine osmolality above the plasma osmolality, although maximum osmolality
does not occur immediately because of the decreased osmolality of
the renal medulla as a result of the chronic lack of ADH. In children with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, there is no response to
desmopressin acetate. Hypercalcemia or hypokalemia may produce a
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus–like syndrome.
With combined Na+ and water deficits, analysis of the urine differentiates between renal and nonrenal etiologies. When the losses are extrarenal, the kidney responds to volume depletion with low urine volume,
concentrated urine, and Na+ retention (urine [Na+] <20 mEq/L, fractional excretion of Na+ <1%). With renal causes, the urine volume is
not appropriately low, the urine is not maximally concentrated, and the
urine [Na+] may be inappropriately elevated.

Treatment

As hypernatremia develops, the brain generates idiogenic osmoles
to increase the intracellular osmolality and prevent the loss of brain
water. This mechanism is not instantaneous and is most prominent
when hypernatremia has developed gradually. If the serum [Na+] is
lowered rapidly, there is movement of water from the serum into the
brain cells to equalize the osmolality in the two compartments. The
resultant brain swelling may manifest as seizures or coma.
Because of the associated dangers, chronic hypernatremia should not
be corrected rapidly. The goal is to decrease the serum [Na+], but avoid
a decrease of more than 10 mEq/L every 24 hours. The most important component of correcting moderate or severe hypernatremia is frequent monitoring of the serum [Na+] value so that fluid therapy can
be adjusted to provide adequate correction, neither too slow nor too
fast. If a child has seizures because of brain edema secondary to rapid
correction, administration of hypotonic fluid should be stopped. An
infusion of 3% saline can acutely increase the serum [Na+], reversing
the cerebral edema.
Chapter 75 outlines a detailed approach to the child with hypernatremic dehydration. Acute, severe hypernatremia, usually secondary to
sodium administration, can be corrected more rapidly with 5% dextrose in water (D5W) because idiogenic osmoles have not had time to
accumulate. This fact balances the high morbidity and mortality rates
associated with hypernatremia with the dangers of overly rapid correction. When hypernatremia is severe and is caused by sodium intoxication, it may be impossible to administer enough water to correct
the hypernatremia rapidly without worsening the volume overload.
In this situation, dialysis allows for removal of the excess Na+, with
the precise strategy dependent on the mode of dialysis. In less severe
cases, the addition of a loop diuretic increases the removal of excess
Na+ and water, decreasing the risk of volume overload. With Na+ overload, hypernatremia is corrected with Na+-­free intravenous (IV) fluid
(D5W).
Hyperglycemia from hypernatremia is not usually a problem and
is not treated with insulin because the acute decrease in glucose may
precipitate cerebral edema by lowering plasma osmolality. Rarely, the
glucose concentration of IV fluids must be reduced (from 5% to 2.5%
dextrose in water). The secondary hypocalcemia is treated as needed.
It is important to address the underlying cause of the hypernatremia, if possible. The child with central diabetes insipidus should
receive desmopressin acetate. Because this treatment reduces renal
excretion of water, excessive intake of water must be avoided to
prevent both overly rapid correction of the hypernatremia and
the development of hyponatremia. Over the long-­term, reduced
sodium intake and the use of medications can somewhat ameliorate the water losses in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (see Chapter
570). The daily water intake of a child receiving tube feeding may
need to be increased to compensate for high losses. The patient with

significant ongoing losses, such as through diarrhea, may need supplemental water and electrolytes (see Chapter 74). Sodium intake is
reduced if it contributed to the hypernatremia.

HYPONATREMIA

Hyponatremia, a very common electrolyte abnormality in hospitalized
patients, is a serum sodium level <135 mEq/L. Both total body sodium
and TBW determine the serum sodium concentration. Hyponatremia
exists when the ratio of water to Na+ is increased. This condition can
occur with low, normal, or high levels of body Na+. Similarly, body
water can be low, normal, or high.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

Table 73.2 lists the causes of hyponatremia. Pseudohyponatremia
is a laboratory artifact present when the plasma contains very high
concentrations of protein (multiple myeloma, intravenous immune
globulin [IVIG] infusion) or lipid (hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia). It does not occur when a direct ion-­selective electrode determines the [Na+] in undiluted plasma, a technique that
is used by ABG analyzers or POC instruments (see Chapter 73.1).
In true hyponatremia, the measured osmolality is low, whereas it
is normal in pseudohyponatremia. Hyperosmolality, as may occur
with hyperglycemia, causes a low [Na+] because water moves down
its osmotic gradient from the ICS into the ECS, diluting the [Na+].
However, because the manifestations of hyponatremia are a result
of the low plasma osmolality, patients with hyponatremia resulting from hyperosmolality do not have symptoms of hyponatremia.
When the etiology of the hyperosmolality resolves, such as hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus, water moves back into the cells, and
the [Na+] rises to its “true” value. Mannitol or sucrose, a component of IVIG preparations, may cause hyponatremia because of
hyperosmolality.
Classification of hyponatremia is based on the patient’s volume
status. In hypovolemic hyponatremia, the child has lost Na+ from
the body. The water balance may be positive or negative, but Na+
loss has been higher than water loss. The pathogenesis of the hyponatremia is usually a combination of Na+ loss and water retention to
compensate for the volume depletion. The patient has a pathologic
increase in fluid loss, and this fluid contains Na+. Most fluid that is
lost has a lower [Na+] than that of plasma. Viral diarrhea fluid has
an average [Na+] of 50 mEq/L. Replacing diarrhea fluid, which has
[Na+] of 50 mEq/L, with formula, which has only approximately
7-­10 mEq/L of Na+, reduces the serum [Na+]. Intravascular volume
depletion interferes with renal water excretion, the body’s usual
mechanism for preventing hyponatremia. The volume depletion
stimulates ADH synthesis, resulting in renal water retention. Volume depletion also decreases the GFR and enhances water resorption in the proximal tubule, thereby reducing water delivery to the
collecting duct.
Diarrhea as a result of gastroenteritis is the most common cause
of hypovolemic hyponatremia in children. Emesis causes hyponatremia if the patient takes in hypotonic fluid, either IV or enterally,
despite the emesis. Most patients with emesis have either a normal
[Na+] or hypernatremia. Burns may cause massive losses of isotonic
fluid and resultant volume depletion. Hyponatremia develops if
the patient receives hypotonic fluid. Losses of sodium from sweat
are especially high in children with cystic fibrosis, aldosterone
deficiency, or pseudohypoaldosteronism, although high losses can
also occur in a hot climate. Third space losses are isotonic and can
cause significant volume depletion, leading to ADH production
and water retention, which can cause hyponatremia if the patient
receives hypotonic fluid. In diseases that cause volume depletion through extrarenal Na + loss, the urine Na + level should be
low (<10 mEq/L) as part of the renal response to maintain the
intravascular volume. The only exceptions are diseases that cause
both extrarenal and renal Na+ losses: adrenal insufficiency and
pseudohypoaldosteronism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

492 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 73.2  Causes of Hyponatremia
PSEUDOHYPONATREMIA
Hyperlipidemia
Hyperproteinemia
HYPEROSMOLALITY
Hyperglycemia
Iatrogenic (mannitol, sucrose, glycine)
HYPOVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA
Extrarenal Losses
Gastrointestinal (emesis, diarrhea)
Skin (sweating or burns)
Third space losses (bowel obstruction, peritonitis, sepsis)
Renal Losses
Thiazide or loop diuretics
Osmotic diuresis
Postobstructive diuresis
Polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis
Juvenile nephronophthisis (OMIM 256100/606966/602088/604387/6
11498)
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (OMIM 263200)
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
Obstructive uropathy
Cerebral salt wasting
Proximal (type II) renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 604278)*
Lack of aldosterone effect (high serum potassium):
Absence of aldosterone (e.g., 21-­hydroxylase deficiency [OMIM
201910])
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (OMIM 264350/177735)
Urinary tract obstruction and/or infection
Addison disease
EUVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH)
Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (OMIM 304800)
Desmopressin acetate
Glucocorticoid deficiency
Hypothyroidism
Antidepressant medications
Water intoxication
Iatrogenic (excess hypotonic intravenous fluids)
Feeding infants excessive water products
Swimming lessons
Tap water enema
Child abuse
Psychogenic polydipsia
Diluted formula
Beer potomania
Exercise-­induced hyponatremia
HYPERVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA
Heart failure
Cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Acute, chronic kidney injury
Capillary leak caused by sepsis
Hypoalbuminemia caused by gastrointestinal disease (protein-­losing
enteropathy)
*Most cases of proximal renal tubular acidosis are not caused by this primary genetic
disorder. Proximal renal tubular acidosis is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which
has multiple etiologies.
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Renal Na+ loss may occur in a variety of situations. In some
situations the urine [Na+] is >140 mEq/L; thus hyponatremia may
occur without any fluid intake. In many cases, the urine Na+ level
is less than the serum [Na+]; hence, the intake of hypotonic fluid

Table 73.3  Diagnostic Criteria for Syndrome of
Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion
• Absence of:
Renal, adrenal, or thyroid insufficiency
Heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, or cirrhosis
Diuretic ingestion
Dehydration
• Urine osmolality >100 mOsm/kg (usually > plasma)
• Serum osmolality <280 mOsm/kg and serum sodium <135 mEq/L
• Urine sodium >30 mEq/L
• Reversal of “sodium wasting” and correction of hyponatremia
with water restriction

is necessary for hyponatremia to develop. In diseases associated
with urinary Na+ loss, the urine Na+ level is >20 mEq/L despite
volume depletion. This may not be true if the urinary Na+ loss is
no longer occurring, as is frequently the case if diuretics are discontinued. Because loop diuretics prevent generation of a maximally hypertonic renal medulla, the patient can neither maximally
dilute nor concentrate the urine. The inability to maximally retain
water provides some protection against severe hyponatremia. The
patient receiving thiazide diuretics can concentrate the urine and
is at higher risk for severe hyponatremia. Osmotic agents, such as
glucose during diabetic ketoacidosis, cause loss of both water and
Na+. Urea accumulates during kidney failure and then acts as an
osmotic diuretic after relief of urinary tract obstruction and during the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis. Transient tubular damage in these conditions further impairs Na+ conservation.
The serum [Na+] in these conditions depends on [Na+] of the fluid
used to replace the losses. Hyponatremia develops when the fluid is
hypotonic relative to the urinary losses.
Renal salt wasting occurs in hereditary kidney diseases, such
as juvenile nephronophthisis and autosomal recessive polycystic
kidney disease. Obstructive uropathy, most often a result of posterior urethral valves, produces salt wasting, but patients with the
disease may also have hypernatremia as a result of impaired ability
to concentrate urine and high-­water loss. Acquired tubulointerstitial nephritis, usually secondary to either medications or infections,
may cause salt wasting, along with other evidence of tubular dysfunction. CNS injury may produce cerebral salt wasting, which is
theoretically caused by the production of a natriuretic peptide that
causes renal salt wasting. In type II renal tubular acidosis (RTA),
usually associated with Fanconi syndrome (see Chapter 569.1),
there is increased excretion of Na+ and bicarbonate in the urine.
Patients with Fanconi syndrome also have glycosuria, aminoaciduria, and hypophosphatemia because of renal phosphate wasting.
Aldosterone is necessary for renal Na+ retention and for the
excretion of K+ and acid. In congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused
by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency, the block of aldosterone production
results in hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis.
Decreased aldosterone secretion may be seen in Addison disease
(adrenal insufficiency). In pseudohypoaldosteronism, aldosterone
levels are elevated, but there is no response because of either a
defective Na+ channel or a deficiency of aldosterone receptors. A
lack of tubular response to aldosterone may occur in children with
urinary tract obstruction, especially during an acute urinary tract
infection.
In hypervolemic hyponatremia, there is an excess of TBW and
Na+, although the increase in water is greater than the increase in
Na+. In most conditions that cause hypervolemic hyponatremia,
there is a decrease in the effective blood volume, resulting from third
space fluid loss, vasodilation, or poor cardiac output. The regulatory systems sense a decrease in effective blood volume and attempt
to retain water and Na+ to correct the problem. ADH causes renal
water retention, and the kidney, under the influence of aldosterone
and other intrarenal mechanisms, retains sodium. The patient’s

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 493
sodium concentration decreases because water intake exceeds
sodium intake and ADH prevents the normal loss of excess water.
In these disorders, there is low urine [Na+] (<10 mEq/L) and an
excess of both TBW and Na+. The only exception is in patients with
kidney failure and hyponatremia. These patients have an expanded
intravascular volume, and hyponatremia can therefore appropriately
suppress ADH production. Water cannot be excreted because very
little urine is being made. Serum Na+ is diluted through ingestion of
water. Because of renal dysfunction, the urine [Na+] may be elevated,
but urine volume is so low that urine Na+ excretion has not kept up
with Na+ intake, leading to sodium overload. The urine [Na+] in kidney failure varies. In patients with acute glomerulonephritis, because it
does not affect the tubules, the urine Na+ level is usually low, whereas
in patients with acute tubular necrosis, it is elevated because of tubular
dysfunction.
Patients with hyponatremia and no evidence of volume overload
or volume depletion have euvolemic hyponatremia. These patients
typically have an excess of TBW and a slight decrease in total body
Na+. Some of these patients have an increase in weight, implying
that they are volume overloaded. Nevertheless, from a clinical
standpoint, they usually appear normal or have subtle signs of fluid
overload. In SIADH the secretion of ADH is not inhibited by either
low serum osmolality or expanded intravascular volume (see Chapter 597). The result is that the child with SIADH is unable to excrete
water. This results in dilution of the serum Na+ and hyponatremia.
The expansion of the extracellular volume because of the retained
water causes a mild increase in intravascular volume. The kidney
increases Na+ excretion to decrease intravascular volume to normal;
thus the patient has a mild decrease in body Na+. SIADH typically
occurs with disorders of the CNS (infection, hemorrhage, trauma,
tumor, thrombosis, Guillain-­
Barré syndrome), but lung disease
(infection, asthma, positive pressure ventilation) and malignant
tumors (producing ADH) are other potential causes. A variety of
medications may cause SIADH, including recreational use of 3,4
-­methylenedioxymethylamphetamine (MDMA, or “Ecstasy”), opiates, antiepileptic drugs (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, valproate),
tricyclic antidepressants, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). The diagnosis of SIADH
is one of exclusion, because other causes of hyponatremia must be
eliminated (Table 73.3). Because SIADH is a state of intravascular
volume expansion, low serum uric acid and BUN levels are supportive of the diagnosis. A rare gain-­of-­function pathogenic variant
in the renal ADH receptor causes nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis. Patients with this X-­linked disorder appear
to have SIADH but have undetectable levels of ADH.
Hyponatremia in hospitalized patients is frequently caused by
inappropriate production of ADH and administration of hypotonic
IV fluids (see Chapter 74). Causes of inappropriate ADH production include stress, medications such as narcotics or anesthetics,
nausea, and respiratory illness. The synthetic analog of ADH, desmopressin acetate, causes water retention and may cause hyponatremia if fluid intake is not appropriately limited. The main uses of
desmopressin acetate in children are for the management of central
diabetes insipidus and nocturnal enuresis.
Excess water ingestion can produce hyponatremia. In these
cases, [Na+] decreases as a result of dilution. This decrease suppresses ADH secretion, and there is a marked water diuresis by the
kidney. Hyponatremia develops only because the intake of water
exceeds the kidney’s ability to eliminate water. This condition is
more likely to occur in infants because their lower GFR limits their
ability to excrete water.
Hyponatremia may develop in infants <6 months of age when caregivers offer water to their infant as a supplement, during hot weather,
or when they run out of formula. Hyponatremia may result in transient
seizures, hypothermia, and poor tone. With cessation of water intake,
the hyponatremia rapidly corrects. Infants <6 months of age should not
be given water to drink; infants 6-­12 months of age should not receive
>1-­2 ounces. If the infant appears thirsty, the parent should offer formula
or breastfeed the child.

In some situations the water intoxication causes acute hyponatremia and is caused by a massive acute water load. Causes include
infant swimming lessons, inappropriate use of hypotonic IV fluids,
water enemas, and forced water intake as a form of child abuse.
Chronic hyponatremia occurs in children who receive water but
limited sodium and protein. The minimum urine osmolality is
approximately 50 mOsm/kg; the kidney can excrete 1 L of water
only if there is enough solute ingested to produce 50 mOsm for
urinary excretion. Because Na+ and urea (a breakdown product of
protein) are the principal urinary solutes, a lack of intake of Na+ and
protein prevents adequate water excretion. This occurs with the use
of diluted formula or other inappropriate diets. Subsistence on beer,
a poor source of Na+ and protein, causes hyponatremia because
of the inability to excrete the high water load (“beer potomania”).
Exercise-­induced hyponatremia, reported frequently during marathons, is caused by excessive water intake, salt losses from sweat,
and secretion of ADH.
The pathogenesis of the hyponatremia in glucocorticoid deficiency
(adrenal insufficiency) is multifactorial and includes increased ADH
secretion. In hypothyroidism there is an inappropriate retention
of water by the kidney, but the precise mechanisms are not clearly
elucidated.
Cerebral salt wasting, an uncommon disorder in children, may
be confused with SIADH and is often associated with CNS injury or
lesions. Cerebral salt wasting produces renal salt losses and hypovolemia (orthostatic hypotension and elevated hematocrit, BUN, or creatinine). Hypovolemia is not seen in SIADH.

Clinical Manifestations

Hyponatremia causes a decrease in the osmolality of the ECS. Because
the ICS then has a higher osmolality, water moves from the ECS to
the ICS to maintain osmotic equilibrium. The increase in intracellular water causes cells to swell. Although cell swelling is not problematic in most tissues, it is dangerous for the brain, which is confined
by the skull. As brain cells swell, there is an increase in intracranial
pressure (ICP), which impairs cerebral blood flow. Acute, severe hyponatremia can cause brainstem herniation and apnea; respiratory support is often necessary. Brain cell swelling is responsible for most of the
symptoms of hyponatremia. Neurologic symptoms of hyponatremia
include anorexia, nausea, emesis, malaise, lethargy, confusion, agitation, headache, seizures, coma, and decreased reflexes. Patients may
have hypothermia and Cheyne-­Stokes respirations. Hyponatremia can
cause muscle cramps and weakness; rhabdomyolysis can occur with
water intoxication.
The symptoms of hyponatremia are mostly a result of the decrease
in extracellular osmolality and the resulting movement of water down
its osmotic gradient into the ICS. Brain swelling can be significantly
obviated if the hyponatremia develops gradually, because brain cells
adapt to the decreased extracellular osmolality by reducing intracellular osmolality. This reduction is achieved by extrusion of the main
intracellular ions (K+, Cl−) and a variety of small organic molecules.
This process explains why the range of symptoms in hyponatremia is
related to both the serum [Na+] and its rate of decrease. A patient with
chronic hyponatremia may have only subtle neurologic abnormalities with a serum [Na+] of 110 mEq/L, but another patient may have
seizures because of an acute decline in serum [Na+] from 140 to 125
mEq/L.

Diagnosis

The history usually points to a likely etiology of the hyponatremia.
Most patients with hyponatremia have a history of volume depletion.
Diarrhea and diuretic use are common causes of hyponatremia in children. A history of polyuria, perhaps with enuresis, and/or salt craving is present in children with primary kidney diseases or absence of
aldosterone effect. Children may have signs or symptoms suggesting a
diagnosis of hypothyroidism or adrenal insufficiency (see Chapters 603
and 615). Brain injury raises the possibility of SIADH or cerebral salt
wasting, with the caveat that SIADH is much more likely. Liver disease,
nephrotic syndrome, kidney failure, or congestive heart failure may be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

494 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
acute or chronic. The history should include a review of the patient’s
intake, both IV and enteral, with careful attention to the amounts of
water, Na+, and protein.
The traditional first step in the diagnostic process is determination
of the plasma osmolality. This is done because some patients with a low
serum [Na+] do not have low osmolality. The clinical effects of hyponatremia are secondary to the associated low osmolality. Without a low
osmolality, there is no movement of water into the ICS.
A patient with hyponatremia can have a low, normal, or high osmolality. A normal osmolality in combination with hyponatremia occurs
in pseudohyponatremia. Children with elevation of serum glucose
concentration or of another effective osmole (mannitol) have a high
plasma osmolality and hyponatremia. The presence of a low osmolality
indicates “true” hyponatremia. Patients with low osmolality are at risk
for neurologic symptoms and require further evaluation to determine
the etiology of the hyponatremia.
In some situations, true hyponatremia is present despite a normal
or elevated plasma osmolality. The presence of an ineffective osmole,
usually urea, increases the plasma osmolality, but because urea has
the same concentration in the ICS, it does not cause fluid to move
into the ECS. There is no dilution of the serum Na+ by water, and the
[Na+] remains unchanged if the ineffective osmole is eliminated. Most
importantly, the ineffective osmole does not protect the brain from
edema caused by hyponatremia. Therefore a patient may have symptoms of hyponatremia despite having a normal or increased osmolality
because of uremia.
In patients with true hyponatremia, the next step in the diagnostic
process is to clinically evaluate the volume status. Patients with hyponatremia can be hypovolemic, hypervolemic, or euvolemic. The diagnosis of volume depletion relies on the usual findings with dehydration
(see Chapter 75), although subtle volume depletion may not be clinically apparent. Children with hypervolemia are edematous on physical
examination. They may have ascites, pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, or hypertension.
Hypovolemic hyponatremia can have renal or nonrenal causes.
The urine [Na+] is very useful in differentiating between renal and
nonrenal causes. When the losses are nonrenal and the kidney is
working properly, there is renal retention of Na+, a normal homeostatic response to volume depletion. Thus the urinary [Na+] is low,
typically <10 mEq/L, although Na+ conservation in neonates is less
avid. When the kidney is the cause of the Na+ loss, the urine [Na+] is
>20 mEq/L, reflecting the defect in renal Na+ retention. The interpretation of the urine Na+ level is challenging with diuretic therapy
because it is high when diuretics are being used but low after the
diuretic effect is gone. This becomes an issue only when diuretic
use is surreptitious. The urine [Na+] is not useful if a metabolic
alkalosis is present; the urine [Cl−] must be used instead (see Chapter 73.7).
Differentiating among the nonrenal causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia is usually facilitated by the history. Although the renal causes
are more challenging to distinguish, a high serum [K+] is associated
with disorders in which the Na+ wasting is caused by absence of or
ineffectiveness of aldosterone.
In the patient with hypervolemic hyponatremia, the urine [Na+] is a
helpful parameter. It is usually <10 mEq/L, except in the patient with
kidney failure.

Treatment

The management of hyponatremia is based on the pathophysiology of
the specific etiology. The management of all causes requires judicious
monitoring and avoidance of an overly quick normalization of the
serum [Na+]. A patient with severe symptoms (seizures), no matter
the etiology, should be given a bolus of hypertonic saline to produce
a small, rapid increase in serum sodium. Hypoxia worsens cerebral
edema, and hyponatremia may exacerbate hypoxic cell swelling. Therefore pulse oximetry should be monitored and hypoxia aggressively
corrected.
With all causes of hyponatremia, it is important to avoid overly
rapid correction, which may cause osmotic demyelination syndrome

(ODS), which includes central pontine myelinolysis and extrapontine
myelinolysis. This syndrome, which occurs within several days of rapid
correction of hyponatremia, produces neurologic symptoms, including confusion, agitation, flaccid or spastic quadriparesis, and death.
There are usually characteristic pathologic and radiologic changes in
the brain. Despite severe symptoms, full recovery does occur in some
patients.
ODS is more common in patients who are treated for chronic
hyponatremia than for acute hyponatremia. Presumably, this difference is based on the adaptation of brain cells to the hyponatremia.
The reduced intracellular osmolality, an adaptive mechanism for
chronic hyponatremia, makes brain cells susceptible to dehydration during rapid correction of the hyponatremia, which may be the
mechanism of ODS. Even though ODS is rare in pediatric patients,
it is advisable to avoid correcting the serum [Na+] by >10 mEq/L/24
hr or >18 mEq/L/48 hr. Desmopressin is a potential option if the
serum [Na+] is increasing too rapidly. This guideline does not
apply to acute hyponatremia, as may occur with water intoxication, because the hyponatremia is more often symptomatic, and the
adaptive decrease in brain osmolality has not had time to occur.
The consequences of brain edema in acute hyponatremia exceed the
small risk of ODS.
Patients with hyponatremia can have severe neurologic symptoms,
such as seizures and coma. The seizures associated with hyponatremia generally are poorly responsive to anticonvulsants. The child with
hyponatremia and severe symptoms needs treatment that will quickly
reduce cerebral edema. This goal is best accomplished by increasing the
extracellular osmolality so that water moves down its osmolar gradient
from the ICS to the ECS.
Intravenous hypertonic saline rapidly increases serum [Na+], and
the effect on serum osmolality leads to a decrease in brain edema.
Each mL/kg of 3% NaCl increases the serum [Na+] by approximately
1 mEq/L. A child with active symptoms often improves after receiving
4-­6 mL/kg of 3% NaCl.
The child with hypovolemic hyponatremia has a deficiency in Na+
and may have a deficiency in water. The cornerstone of therapy is to
replace the Na+ deficit and any water deficit present. The first step in
treating any dehydrated patient is to restore the intravascular volume
with isotonic saline. Ultimately, complete restoration of intravascular
volume suppresses ADH production, thereby permitting excretion of
the excess water. Chapter 75 discusses the management of hyponatremic dehydration.
The management of hypervolemic hyponatremia is difficult;
patients have an excess of both water and Na+. Administration of
Na+ leads to worsening volume overload and edema. In addition,
patients are retaining water and Na+ because of their ineffective
intravascular volume or renal insufficiency. The cornerstone of
therapy is water and Na+ restriction, because patients have volume
overload. Diuretics may help by causing excretion of both Na+ and
water. Vasopressin receptor antagonists (vaptans), by blocking the
action of ADH and causing a water diuresis, are effective in correcting the hypervolemic hyponatremia caused by heart failure. Vaptans
are contraindicated if there are moderate to severe CNS symptoms.
Hyponatremic patients with low albumin from nephrotic syndrome have a better response to diuretics after an infusion of 25%
albumin; the [Na+] often normalizes as a result of expansion of
the intravascular volume. A child with heart failure may have an
increase in renal water and Na+ excretion if there is an improvement
in cardiac output. This improvement will “turn off ” the regulatory
hormones causing renal water (ADH) and Na+ (aldosterone) retention. The patient with kidney failure cannot respond to any of these
therapies except fluid restriction. Insensible fluid losses eventually
result in an increase in the [Na+] as long as insensible and urinary
losses are greater than intake. A more definitive approach in children with kidney failure is to perform dialysis, which removes water
and Na+.
In isovolumic hyponatremia there is usually an excess of water and
a mild Na+ deficit. Therapy is directed at eliminating the excess water.
The child with acute excessive water intake loses water in the urine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 495
because ADH production is turned off as a result of the low plasma
osmolality. Children may correct their hyponatremia spontaneously
over 3-­6 hours. For acute, symptomatic hyponatremia as a result of
water intoxication, hypertonic saline may be needed to reverse cerebral edema. For chronic hyponatremia from poor solute intake, the
child needs an appropriate formula, and excess water intake should be
eliminated.
Children with iatrogenic hyponatremia caused by the administration of hypotonic IV fluids should receive 3% saline if symptomatic.
Subsequent management is dictated by the patient’s volume status. The
hypovolemic child should receive isotonic IV fluids. The child with
nonphysiologic stimuli for ADH production should undergo fluid
restriction. Prevention of this iatrogenic complication requires judicious use of IV fluids (see Chapter 74).
Specific hormone replacement is the cornerstone of therapy for the
hyponatremia of hypothyroidism or cortisol deficiency. Correction of
the underlying defect permits appropriate elimination of the excess
water.
SIADH is a condition of excess water, with limited ability of the
kidney to excrete water. The mainstay of its therapy is fluid restriction with normal sodium intake. Furosemide and NaCl supplementation are effective in the patient with SIADH and severe
hyponatremia. Even in a patient with SIADH, furosemide causes an
increase in water and Na+ excretion. The loss of Na+ is somewhat
counterproductive, but this Na+ can be replaced with hypertonic
saline. Because the patient has a net loss of water and the urinary
losses of Na+ have been replaced, there is an increase in the [Na+],
but no significant increase in blood pressure. Vaptans, which block
the action of ADH and cause a water diuresis, are effective at correcting euvolemic hyponatremia, but overly rapid correction is
a potential complication. Vaptans are not appropriate for treating
symptomatic hyponatremia because it can take a few hours before
the water diuresis occurs.
Treatment of chronic SIADH is challenging. Fluid restriction in children is difficult for nutritional and behavioral reasons. Other options
are long-­term furosemide therapy with Na+ supplementation, an oral
vaptan (tolvaptan), or oral urea.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.4 Potassium
Larry A. Greenbaum

POTASSIUM METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

The intracellular [K+], approximately 150 mEq/L, is much higher than
the plasma [K+] (see Fig. 73.3). The majority of body K+ is contained in
muscle. As muscle mass increases, there is an increase in body K+. Thus
an increase in body K+ occurs during puberty, and it is more significant
in males. The majority of extracellular K+ is in bone; <1% of total body
K+ is in plasma.
Because most K+ is intracellular, the plasma concentration does
not always reflect the total body K+ content. A variety of conditions alter the distribution of K+ between the intracellular and
extracellular compartments. Na+,K+-­ATPase maintains the high
intracellular [K+] by pumping Na+ out of the cell and K+ into
the cell. This activity balances the normal leak of K + out of cells
via potassium channels that is driven by the favorable chemical
gradient. Insulin increases K+ movement into cells by activating Na +,K+-­ATPase. Hyperkalemia stimulates insulin secretion,
which helps mitigate the hyperkalemia. Acid-­b ase status affects
K+ distribution, probably via K+ channels and the Na +,K +-­ATPase.
A decrease in pH drives potassium extracellularly; an increase in
pH has the opposite effect. β-­Adrenergic agonists stimulate the

Na +,K +-­ATPase, increasing cellular uptake of K +. This increase
is protective, in that hyperkalemia stimulates adrenal release of
catecholamines. α-­Adrenergic agonists and exercise cause a net
movement of K+ out of the ICS. An increase in plasma osmolality,
as with mannitol infusion, leads to water movement out of the
cells, and K + follows as a result of solvent drag. The serum [K +]
increases by approximately 0.6 mEq/L with each 10 mOsm rise in
plasma osmolality.
The high intracellular concentration of K+, the principal intracellular cation, is maintained through Na+,K+-­ATPase. The resulting
chemical gradient is used to produce the resting membrane potential of cells. K+ is necessary for the electrical responsiveness of nerve
and muscle cells and for the contractility of cardiac, skeletal, and
smooth muscle. The changes in membrane polarization that occur
during muscle contraction or nerve conduction make these cells
susceptible to changes in serum [K+]. The ratio of intracellular to
extracellular K+ determines the threshold for a cell to generate an
action potential and the rate of cellular repolarization. The intracellular [K+] affects cellular enzymes. K+ is necessary for maintaining
cell volume because of its important contribution to intracellular
osmolality.

Potassium Intake

Potassium is plentiful in food. Dietary consumption varies considerably, even though 1-­2 mEq/kg is the recommended intake.
The intestines normally absorb approximately 90% of ingested K+.
Most absorption occurs in the small intestine, whereas the colon
exchanges body K+ for luminal Na+. Regulation of intestinal losses
normally has a minimal role in maintaining potassium homeostasis,
although kidney failure, aldosterone, and glucocorticoids increase
colonic secretion of K+. The increase in intestinal losses in the setting of kidney failure and hyperkalemia, which stimulates aldosterone production, is clinically significant, helping to protect against
hyperkalemia.

Potassium Excretion

Some loss of K+ occurs in sweat but is normally minimal. The colon
has the ability to eliminate some K+. In addition, after an acute K+ load,
much of the K+ (>40%) moves intracellularly, through the actions of
epinephrine and insulin, which are produced in response to hyperkalemia. This process provides transient protection from hyperkalemia,
but most ingested K+ is eventually excreted in the urine. The kidneys
principally regulate long-­term K+ balance, and they alter excretion in
response to a variety of signals. K+ is freely filtered at the glomerulus, but 90% is resorbed before reaching the distal tubule and collecting duct, the principal sites of K+ regulation that have the ability to
absorb and secrete K+. The amount of tubular secretion regulates the
amount of K+ that appears in the urine. The plasma [K+] directly influences secretion in the distal nephron. As the [K+] increases, secretion
increases.
The principal hormone regulating potassium secretion is aldosterone, which is released by the adrenal cortex in response to
increased plasma K+. Its main site of action is the cortical collecting duct, where aldosterone stimulates Na+ movement from the
tubule into the cells. This movement creates a negative charge in the
tubular lumen, facilitating K+ excretion. In addition, the increased
intracellular Na+ stimulates the basolateral Na+,K+-­ATPase, causing
more K+ to move into the cells lining the cortical collecting duct.
Glucocorticoids, ADH, a high urinary flow rate, and high Na+ delivery to the distal nephron also increase urinary K+ excretion. Insulin, catecholamines, and urinary ammonia decrease K+ excretion.
Whereas ADH increases K+ secretion, it also causes water resorption, decreasing urinary flow. The net effect is that ADH has little
overall impact on K+ balance. Alkalosis causes potassium to move
into cells, including the cells lining the collecting duct. This movement increases K+ secretion, and because acidosis has the opposite
effect; acidosis decreases K+ secretion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

496 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
The kidney can dramatically vary K+ excretion in response to changes
in intake. Normally, approximately 10–15% of the filtered load is
excreted. In an adult, excretion of K+ can vary from 5-­1,000 mEq/day.

HYPERKALEMIA

Hyperkalemia—because of the potential for lethal arrhythmias—is one
of the most alarming electrolyte abnormalities.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

Three basic mechanisms cause hyperkalemia including increased
intake, cellular shifts, and decreased excretion; spurious lab values are
also commonly seen (Table 73.4). In the individual patient, the etiology
is sometimes multifactorial.
Spurious hyperkalemia or pseudohyperkalemia is very common
in children because of the difficulties in obtaining blood specimens.
This laboratory result is usually caused by hemolysis during a heelstick
or phlebotomy, but it can be the result of prolonged tourniquet application or fist clenching, either of which causes local potassium release
from muscle.
The serum [K+] is normally 0.4 mEq/L higher than the plasma value,
secondary to K+ release from cells during clot formation. This phenomenon is exaggerated with thrombocytosis because of K+ release from
platelets. For every 100,000/m3 increase in the platelet count, the serum
[K+] rises by approximately 0.15 mEq/L. This phenomenon also occurs
with the marked white blood cell (WBC) count elevations sometimes
seen with leukemia. Elevated WBC counts, typically >200,000/m3, can
cause a dramatic elevation in the measured serum [K+]. Analysis of
a plasma sample usually provides an accurate result. It is important
to analyze the sample promptly to avoid K+ release from cells, which
occurs if the sample is stored in the cold, or cellular uptake of K+ and
spurious hypokalemia, which occurs with storage at room temperature. Pneumatic tube transport can cause pseudohyperkalemia if cell
membranes are fragile (leukemia). Occasionally, heparin causes lysis of
leukemic cells and a false elevation of the plasma sample; a blood gas
syringe has less heparin and may provide a more accurate reading than
a standard tube. There are rare genetic disorders causing in vitro leakage of K+ from red blood cells (RBCs) that may causes familial pseudohyperkalemia (autosomal dominant; ABCB6 gene).
Because of the kidney’s ability to excrete K+, it is unusual for excessive intake, by itself, to cause hyperkalemia. This condition can occur in
a patient who is receiving large quantities of IV or oral K+ for excessive
losses that are no longer present. Frequent or rapid blood transfusions
can acutely increase the [K+] because of the K+ content of blood, which
is variably elevated. Increased intake may precipitate hyperkalemia if
there is an underlying defect in K+ excretion.
The ICS has a very high [K+], so a shift of K+ from the ICS to the ECS
can have a significant effect on the plasma [K+]. This shift occurs with
metabolic acidosis, but the effect is minimal with an organic acid (lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis). A respiratory acidosis has less impact than
a metabolic acidosis. Cell destruction, as seen with rhabdomyolysis,
tumor lysis syndrome, tissue necrosis, or hemolysis, releases K+ into
the extracellular milieu. The K+ released from RBCs in internal bleeding, such as hematomas, is resorbed and enters the ECS.
Normal doses of succinylcholine or β blockers and fluoride or digitalis intoxication all cause a shift of K+ out of the intracellular compartment. Succinylcholine should not be used during anesthesia in patients
at risk for hyperkalemia. β Blockers prevent the normal cellular uptake
of K+ mediated by binding of β-­agonists to the β2-­adrenergic receptors. K+ release from muscle cells occurs during exercise, and levels can
increase by 1-­2 mEq/L with high activity. With an increased plasma
osmolality, water moves from the ICS, and K+ follows. This process
occurs with hyperglycemia, although in nondiabetic patients the resultant increase in insulin causes K+ to move intracellularly. In diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA), the absence of insulin causes potassium to leave
the ICS, and the problem is compounded by the hyperosmolality. The
effect of hyperosmolality causes a transcellular shift of K+ into the ECS

Table 73.4  Causes of Hyperkalemia
SPURIOUS LABORATORY VALUE
Hemolysis
Tissue ischemia during blood drawing
Thrombocytosis
Leukocytosis
Familial pseudohyperkalemia (OMIM 609153)
INCREASED INTAKE
Intravenous or oral
Blood transfusions
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Acidosis
Rhabdomyolysis
Tumor lysis syndrome
Tissue necrosis
Hemolysis/hematomas/gastrointestinal bleeding
Succinylcholine
Digitalis intoxication
Fluoride intoxication
β-­Adrenergic blockers
Exercise
Hyperosmolality
Insulin deficiency
Malignant hyperthermia (OMIM 145600/601887/601888)
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (OMIM 170500)
DECREASED EXCRETION
Kidney failure
Primary adrenal disease
Acquired Addison disease
21-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 201910)
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 201810)
Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia (OMIM 201710)
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita (OMIM 300200)
Aldosterone synthase deficiency (OMIM 203400/610600)
Adrenoleukodystrophy (OMIM 300100)
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
Urinary tract obstruction
Sickle cell disease (OMIM 603903)
Kidney transplant
Lupus nephritis
Renal tubular disease
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (OMIM 264350/177735)
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (OMIM 614491/614492/614495)
Bartter syndrome, type 2 (OMIM 241200)
Urinary tract obstruction
Kidney transplant
Medications
Renin inhibitors
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
Angiotensin II blockers
Potassium-­sparing diuretics
Calcineurin inhibitors
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Trimethoprim
Heparin
Drospirenone (in some oral contraceptives)
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

after mannitol or hypertonic saline infusions. Malignant hyperthermia, which is triggered by some inhaled anesthetics, causes muscle
release of potassium (see Chapter 651.2). Hyperkalemic periodic
paralysis is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by pathogenic
variants in SCN4A, the gene for a Na+ channel. It results in episodic
cellular release of K+ and attacks of paralysis (see Chapter 651.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 497
The kidneys excrete most of the daily K+ intake, so a decrease in kidney function can cause hyperkalemia. Newborn infants in general, and
especially premature infants, have decreased kidney function at birth;
thus they are at increased risk for hyperkalemia despite an absence of
intrinsic renal disease. Neonates also have decreased expression of K+
channels, further limiting K+ excretion.
A wide range of primary adrenal disorders, both hereditary
and acquired, can cause decreased production of aldosterone, with
secondary hyperkalemia (see Chapters 615 and 616). Patients with
these disorders typically have metabolic acidosis and salt wasting
with hyponatremia. Children with subtle adrenal insufficiency may
have electrolyte problems only during acute illnesses. The most
common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, typically manifests in male infants as hyperkalemia,
metabolic acidosis, hyponatremia, and volume depletion. Females
with this disorder usually are diagnosed as newborns because of
their ambiguous genitals; treatment prevents the development of
electrolyte problems.
Renin, via angiotensin II, stimulates aldosterone production. A deficiency in renin, a result of kidney damage, can lead to decreased aldosterone production. Hyporeninemia occurs in many kidney diseases, with
some of the more common pediatric causes listed in Table 73.4. These
patients typically have hyperkalemia and a metabolic acidosis, without
hyponatremia. Some of these patients have impaired renal function, partially accounting for the hyperkalemia, but the impairment in K+ excretion is more extreme than expected for the degree of renal insufficiency.
A variety of renal tubular disorders impair renal excretion of
K+. Children with pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 have hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and salt wasting (kidney, colon, sweat)
leading to hyponatremia and volume depletion; aldosterone values
are elevated. In the autosomal recessive variant, there is a defect
in the renal Na+ channel that is normally activated by aldosterone.
Patients with this variant have severe symptoms (failure to thrive,
diarrhea, recurrent respiratory infections, miliaria-­r ubra like rash),
beginning in infancy. Patients with the autosomal dominant form
have a defect in the aldosterone receptor, and the disease is milder,
often remitting in adulthood. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2
(familial hyperkalemic hypertension), also called Gordon syndrome, is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertension caused by salt retention and impaired excretion of K+ and
acid, leading to hyperkalemia and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Pathogenic variants in at least four genes (WNK4, WNK1,
KLHL3, CUL3) may cause Gordon syndrome. Patients may respond
well to thiazide diuretics. In Bartter syndrome, caused by pathogenic variants in the potassium channel ROMK (type 2 Bartter
syndrome), there can be transient hyperkalemia in neonates, but
hypokalemia subsequently develops (see Chapter 571.1).
Acquired renal tubular dysfunction, with an impaired ability to excrete
K+, occurs in a number of conditions. These disorders, all characterized
by tubulointerstitial disease, are often associated with impaired acid
secretion and a secondary metabolic acidosis. In some affected children,
the metabolic acidosis is the dominant feature, although a high K+ intake
may unmask the defect in K+ handling. The tubular dysfunction can
cause renal salt wasting, potentially leading to hyponatremia. Because of
the tubulointerstitial damage, these conditions may also cause hyperkalemia as a result of hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism.
The risk of hyperkalemia resulting from medications is greatest
in patients with underlying renal insufficiency. The predominant
mechanism of medication-­induced hyperkalemia is impaired renal
excretion, although ACE inhibitors may worsen hyperkalemia in
anuric patients, probably by inhibiting GI potassium loss, which
is normally upregulated in renal insufficiency. The hyperkalemia
caused by trimethoprim is especially problematic at higher doses.
Potassium-­sparing diuretics may easily cause hyperkalemia because
they are often used in patients receiving oral K+ supplements. Oral
contraceptives containing drospirenone, which blocks the action
of aldosterone, may cause hyperkalemia and should not be used in
patients with decreased renal function.

Clinical Manifestations

The most important effects of hyperkalemia result from the role
of K+ in membrane polarization. The cardiac conduction system is
usually the dominant concern. Changes in the electrocardiogram
(ECG) begin with peaking of the T waves. This is followed, as K+
level increases, by ST-­segment depression, an increased PR interval,
flattening of the P wave, and widening of the QRS complex (Fig.
73.4). However, the correlation between K+ level and ECG changes
is poor. This process can eventually progress to ventricular fibrillation. Asystole may also occur. Some patients have paresthesias, fasciculations, weakness, and even an ascending paralysis, but cardiac
toxicity usually precedes these clinical symptoms, emphasizing the
danger of assuming that an absence of symptoms implies an absence
of danger. Chronic hyperkalemia is generally better tolerated than
acute hyperkalemia.
Lead V3

A

B

C
Fig. 73.4 The effects of progressive hyperkalemia on the electrocar-

diogram. All of the ECGs are from lead V3. A, Serum potassium concentration ([K+]) = 6.8 mEq/L; note the peaked T waves together with normal sinus rhythm. B, Serum [K+] = 8.9 mEq/L; note the peaked T waves
and absent P waves. C, Serum [K+] >8.9 mEq/L; note the classic sine
wave with absent P waves, marked prolongation of the QRS complex,
and peaked T waves. (From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil
Medicine. 26th ed. Elsevier; 2020. Fig. 109.2, p. 727.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

498 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Diagnosis

The etiology of hyperkalemia is often readily apparent. Spurious
hyperkalemia is very common in children, so obtaining a second
potassium measurement is often appropriate. If there is a significant elevation of WBC or platelet count, the second measurement
should be performed on a plasma sample that is evaluated promptly.
The history should initially focus on potassium intake, risk factors
for transcellular shifts of K+, medications that cause hyperkalemia,
and signs of renal insufficiency, such as oliguria and edema. Initial
laboratory evaluation should include creatinine, BUN, and assessment of the acid-­base status. Many etiologies of hyperkalemia cause
metabolic acidosis, which worsens hyperkalemia through the transcellular shift of K+ out of cells. Decreased kidney function is a
common cause of the combination of metabolic acidosis and hyperkalemia, also seen in diseases associated with aldosterone insufficiency or aldosterone resistance. Children with absent or ineffective
aldosterone often have hyponatremia and volume depletion because
of salt wasting. Genetic diseases, such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia and pseudohypoaldosteronism, usually manifest in infancy
and should be strongly considered in the infant with hyperkalemia
and metabolic acidosis, especially if hyponatremia is present.
It is important to consider the various etiologies of a transcellular K+ shift. In some of these disorders, the K+ level continues to
increase, despite the elimination of all K+ intake, especially with
concurrent renal insufficiency. This increase is potentially seen
in tumor lysis syndrome, hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and other
causes of cell death. All these entities can cause concomitant hyperphosphatemia and hyperuricemia. Rhabdomyolysis produces an
elevated creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) value and hypocalcemia, whereas children with hemolysis have hemoglobinuria and a
decreasing hematocrit. For the child with diabetes, elevated blood
glucose and acidosis suggest a transcellular shift of K+.

Treatment

The plasma K+ level, the ECG, and the risk of the problem worsening
determine the aggressiveness of the therapeutic approach. High serum
[K+] and the presence of ECG changes require vigorous treatment. An
additional source of concern is the patient in whom plasma K+ levels
are rising despite minimal intake. This situation can happen if there is
cellular release of K+ (tumor lysis syndrome), especially in the setting
of diminished excretion (kidney failure).
The first action in a child with a concerning elevation of plasma
[K+] is to stop all sources of additional K+ (oral, IV). Washed RBCs
can be used for patients who require blood transfusions. If the [K+]
is >6.5 mEq/L, an ECG should be obtained to help assess the urgency
of the situation. Peaked T waves are the first sign of hyperkalemia,
followed by a prolonged PR interval, and when most severe, prolonged QRS complex. Life-­threatening ventricular arrhythmias may
also develop. The treatment of hyperkalemia has two basic goals:
(1) to stabilize the heart to prevent life-­threatening arrhythmias
and (2) to remove K+ from the body. The treatments that acutely
prevent arrhythmias all have the advantage of working quickly
(within minutes) but do not remove K+ from the body. Calcium
stabilizes the cell membrane of heart cells, preventing arrhythmias;
it is given IV over a few minutes, and its action is almost immediate. Calcium should be given over 30 minutes in a patient receiving
digitalis because the calcium may cause arrhythmias. Bicarbonate
causes potassium to move intracellularly, lowering the plasma [K+];
it is most efficacious in a patient with a metabolic acidosis. Insulin
causes K+ to move intracellularly but must be given with glucose
to avoid hypoglycemia. The combination of insulin and glucose
works within 30 minutes. Nebulized albuterol, by stimulation
of β1-­adrenergic receptors, leads to rapid intracellular movement
of K+. This has the advantage of not requiring an IV route of
administration, allowing it to be given concurrently with the other
measures.

It is critical to begin measures that remove K+ from the body. In
patients who are not anuric, a loop diuretic increases renal excretion
of K+. A high dose may be required in a patient with significant renal
insufficiency. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS; Kayexalate) is an
exchange resin that is given either rectally or orally. Patiromer and
sodium zirconium cyclosilicate are oral exchange resins for treating
hyperkalemia. Some patients require dialysis for acute K+ removal.
Dialysis is often necessary if the patient has either severe kidney failure
or an especially high rate of endogenous K+ release, as is sometimes
present with tumor lysis syndrome or rhabdomyolysis. Hemodialysis
rapidly lowers plasma [K+]. Peritoneal dialysis is not nearly as quick
or reliable, but it is usually adequate as long as the acute problem can
be managed with medications and the endogenous release of K+ is not
high.
Long-­term management of hyperkalemia includes reducing intake
through dietary changes and eliminating or reducing medications that
cause hyperkalemia (see Chapter 572). Some patients require medications to increase potassium excretion, such as SPS, patiromer, sodium
zirconium cyclosilicate, and loop or thiazide diuretics. Some infants
with chronic kidney disease may need to start dialysis to allow adequate caloric intake without hyperkalemia. It is unusual for an older
child to require dialysis principally to control chronic hyperkalemia.
The disorders caused by aldosterone deficiency respond to replacement
therapy with fludrocortisone.

HYPOKALEMIA

Hypokalemia is common in children, with most cases related to
gastroenteritis.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

There are four basic mechanisms of hypokalemia (Table 73.5). Spurious hypokalemia occurs in patients with leukemia and very elevated
WBC counts if plasma for analysis is left at room temperature, permitting the WBCs to take up K+ from the plasma. With a transcellular
shift, there is no change in total body K+, although there may be concomitant potassium depletion resulting from other factors. Decreased
intake, extrarenal losses, and renal losses are all associated with total
body K+ depletion. In addition, seasonal pseudo-­hypokalemia is seen
during warm summer months as a laboratory phenomenon when
blood samples are exposed to a warm environment. On immediate
retesting, the potassium level is normal. This should not be confused
with a pseudo-­Bartter syndrome (hypokalemic, hypochloremic, alkalosis) seen in children with cystic fibrosis in a very warm environment
due to excessive sweating.
Because the intracellular [K+] is much higher than the plasma
level, a significant amount of K+ can move into cells without greatly
changing the intracellular [K+]. Alkalemia is one of the more common causes of a transcellular shift. The effect is much greater with
a metabolic alkalosis than with a respiratory alkalosis. The impact
of exogenous insulin on K+ movement into the cells is substantial
in patients with DKA. Endogenous insulin may be the cause when
a patient is given a bolus of glucose. Both endogenous (epinephrine
in stress) and exogenous (albuterol) β-­adrenergic agonists stimulate cellular uptake of K+. Theophylline overdose, barium intoxication, administration of cesium chloride (a homeopathic cancer
remedy), and toluene intoxication from paint or glue sniffing can
cause a transcellular shift hypokalemia, often with severe clinical
manifestations. Children with hypokalemic periodic paralysis, a
rare autosomal dominant disorder, have acute cellular uptake of K+
(see Chapter 651). Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, which is more
common in Asians, is an unusual initial manifestation of hyperthyroidism. Affected patients have dramatic hypokalemia as a result of
a transcellular shift of potassium. Hypokalemia can occur during
refeeding syndrome (see Chapters 63 and 385.7).
Inadequate K+ intake occurs in anorexia nervosa; accompanying
bulimia and laxative or diuretic abuse exacerbates the K+ deficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 499
Table 73.5  Causes of Hypokalemia
SPURIOUS LABORATORY VALUE
High white blood cell count
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Alkalemia
Insulin
α-­Adrenergic agonists
Drugs/toxins (theophylline, barium, toluene, cesium chloride,
hydroxychloroquine)
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (OMIM 170400)
Thyrotoxic period paralysis
Refeeding syndrome
DECREASED INTAKE
Anorexia nervosa
EXTRARENAL LOSSES
Diarrhea
Laxative abuse
Sweating
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) or clay ingestion
RENAL LOSSES
With Metabolic Acidosis
Distal renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 179800/602722/267300/611590)
Proximal renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 604278)*
Ureterosigmoidostomy
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Without Specific Acid-­Base Disturbance
Tubular toxins: amphotericin, cisplatin, aminoglycosides
Interstitial nephritis
Diuretic phase of acute tubular necrosis
Postobstructive diuresis
Hypomagnesemia
High urine anions (e.g., penicillin or penicillin derivatives)

With Metabolic Alkalosis
Low urine chloride
Emesis or nasogastric suction
Chloride-­losing diarrhea (OMIM 214700)
Cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700)
Low-­chloride formula
Posthypercapnia
Previous loop or thiazide diuretic use
High urine chloride and normal blood pressure
Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800)
Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/6
01198/613090)
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200)
EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780)
Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD
variant (OMIM not assigned)
Loop and thiazide diuretics (current)
High urine chloride and high blood pressure
Adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism (OMIM 103900)
Hyperaldosteronism type II (OMIM 605635)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type III (OMIM 613677)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV (OMIM 617027)
Renovascular disease
Renin-­secreting tumor
17β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202110)
11β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202010)
Cushing syndrome
11β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 218030)
Licorice ingestion
Liddle syndrome (OMIM 177200)
Early-­onset autosomal dominant hypertension with exacerbation in
pregnancy (OMIM 605115)

*Most cases of proximal renal tubular acidosis are not caused by this primary genetic disorder. Proximal renal tubular acidosis is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has multiple
etiologies.
EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Sweat losses of K+ can be significant during vigorous exercise in
a hot climate. Associated volume depletion and hyperaldosteronism increase renal losses of K+ (discussed later). Diarrheal fluid has
a high concentration of K+, and hypokalemia because of diarrhea
is usually associated with metabolic acidosis resulting from stool
losses of bicarbonate. In contrast, normal acid-­base balance or mild
metabolic alkalosis is seen with laxative abuse. Intake of potassium-­
binding resins (SPS) or ingestion of clay because of pica increases
stool losses of potassium.
Urinary potassium wasting may be accompanied by a metabolic
acidosis (proximal or distal RTA). In DKA, although it is often
associated with normal plasma [K+] from transcellular shifts, there
is significant total body K+ depletion from urinary losses because
of the osmotic diuresis, and the K+ level may decrease dramatically
with insulin therapy (see Chapter 629). Both the polyuric phase of
acute tubular necrosis and postobstructive diuresis cause transient,
highly variable K+ wasting and may be associated with metabolic
acidosis. Tubular damage, which occurs either directly from medications or secondary to interstitial nephritis, is often accompanied
by other tubular losses, including magnesium, Na+, and water. Such
tubular damage may cause a secondary RTA with metabolic acidosis. Isolated magnesium deficiency causes renal K+ wasting. Penicillin is an anion excreted in the urine, resulting in increased K+
excretion because the penicillin anion must be accompanied by a

cation. Hypokalemia from penicillin therapy occurs only with the
sodium salt of penicillin, not with the potassium salt.
Urinary K+ wasting is often accompanied by a metabolic alkalosis. This condition is usually associated with increased aldosterone,
which increases urinary K+ and acid losses, contributing to the
hypokalemia and the metabolic alkalosis. Other mechanisms often
contribute to both the K+ losses and the metabolic alkalosis. With
emesis or nasogastric suction, there is gastric loss of K+, but this is
minimal given the low K+ content of gastric fluid, approximately
10 mEq/L. More important is the gastric loss of hydrochloric acid
(HCl), leading to metabolic alkalosis and a state of volume depletion. The kidney compensates for metabolic alkalosis by excreting
bicarbonate in the urine, but there is obligate loss of K+ and Na+
with the bicarbonate. The volume depletion raises aldosterone levels, further increasing urinary K+ losses and preventing correction
of metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia until the volume depletion
is corrected.
Urinary chloride (Cl−) is low as a response to the volume depletion.
Because the volume depletion is secondary to Cl− loss, this is a state of
Cl− deficiency. There were cases of Cl− deficiency resulting from infant
formula deficient in Cl−, which caused a metabolic alkalosis with hypokalemia and low urine [Cl−]. Current infant formula is not deficient in
Cl−. A similar mechanism occurs in cystic fibrosis because of Cl− loss in
sweat. In congenital chloride-­losing diarrhea, an autosomal recessive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

500 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
disorder, there is high stool loss of Cl−, leading to metabolic alkalosis,
an unusual sequela of diarrhea. Because of stool K+ losses, Cl− deficiency, and metabolic alkalosis, patients with congenital chloride-­
losing diarrhea have hypokalemia.
During respiratory acidosis, there is renal compensation, with
retention of bicarbonate and excretion of Cl−. After the respiratory
acidosis is corrected, the patients have Cl− deficiency and post–
hypercapnic alkalosis with secondary hypokalemia. Patients with
Cl− deficiency, metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia have a urinary
[Cl−] of <10 mEq/L. Loop and thiazide diuretics lead to hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and Cl− deficiency. During treatment,
these patients have high urine chloride levels resulting from the
effect of the diuretic. However, after the diuretics are discontinued,
there is residual Cl− deficiency, the urinary [Cl−] is appropriately
low, and neither the hypokalemia nor the alkalosis resolves until the
Cl− deficiency is corrected.
The combination of metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia, high urine
[Cl−], and normal blood pressure is characteristic of Bartter syndrome, Gitelman syndrome, and current diuretic use. Patients with
any of these conditions have high urinary losses of Cl− despite a
state of relative volume depletion with secondary hyperaldosteronism with high plasma renin. Bartter and Gitelman syndromes are
autosomal recessive disorders caused by defects in tubular transporters (see Chapter 571). Bartter syndrome is usually associated
with hypercalciuria, and often with nephrocalcinosis, whereas children with Gitelman syndrome have low urinary calcium losses
but hypomagnesemia because of urinary magnesium losses. Some
patients with Bartter syndrome have hypomagnesemia. A transient
antenatal form of Bartter syndrome is associated with severe polyhydramnios and pathogenic variants in MAGED2.
Some patients with hypoparathyroidism and hypocalcemia
caused by activating pathogenic variants of the calcium-­sensing
receptor (autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism) have hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and metabolic alkalosis. The reason is
that activation of the calcium-­sensing receptor in the loop of Henle
impairs tubular resorption of sodium and chloride, causing volume
depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism. EAST syndrome, an
autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathologic variants in the
gene for a potassium channel in the kidney, inner ear, and brain,
consists of epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy (hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and
hypocalciuria).
In the presence of high aldosterone levels, there is urinary loss of
K+, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and elevated urinary [Cl−];
renal retention of Na+ leads to hypertension. Primary hyperaldosteronism caused by adenoma or hyperplasia is much less
common in children than in adults (see Chapters 619 and 620).
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, an autosomal dominant disorder that leads to high levels of aldosterone (but low renin
levels), is often diagnosed in childhood, although hypokalemia is
not always present. Familial hyperaldosteronism type II, an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to a gain-­of-­function variant in
CLCN2 that causes increased aldosterone synthesis. Familial hyperaldosteronism type III, an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to
a gain-­of-­function variant in KCNJ5 that causes a dramatic increase
in aldosterone synthesis and severe hypertension and hypokalemia.
Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV, an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to a gain-­of-­function variant in CACNA1H that causes
increased aldosterone synthesis.
Increased aldosterone levels may also be secondary to increased
renin production. Renal artery stenosis leads to hypertension
from increased renin and secondary hyperaldosteronism. The
increased aldosterone can cause hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis, although most patients have normal electrolyte levels. Renin-­
producing tumors, which are extremely rare, can cause hypokalemia.
A variety of disorders cause hypertension and hypokalemia without increased aldosterone levels. Some are a result of increased
levels of mineralocorticoids other than aldosterone. Such increases

occur in two forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616). In 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency, which is associated with
virilization, 11-­deoxycorticosterone is elevated, causing variable
hypertension and hypokalemia. A similar mechanism, increased
11-­deoxycorticosterone, occurs in 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency, but
patients with this disorder are more uniformly hypertensive and
hypokalemic, and they have a defect in sex hormone production.
Cushing syndrome, frequently associated with hypertension, less
frequently causes metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia, secondary
to the mineralocorticoid activity of cortisol. In 11β-­hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency, an autosomal recessive disorder, the
enzymatic defect prevents the conversion of cortisol to cortisone in
the kidney. Because cortisol binds to and activates the aldosterone
receptor, children with this deficiency have all the features of excessive mineralocorticoids, including hypertension, hypokalemia, and
metabolic alkalosis, but low levels of aldosterone and renin. Patients
with this disorder, which is also called apparent mineralocorticoid
excess, respond to spironolactone therapy, which blocks the mineralocorticoid receptor. An acquired form of 11β-­hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency occurs from the ingestion of substances
that inhibit this enzyme. A classic example is glycyrrhizic acid,
which is found in natural licorice. Liddle syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder that results from activating pathogenic
variants of the distal nephron sodium channel that is normally
upregulated by aldosterone. Patients have the characteristics of
hyperaldosteronism—hypertension, hypokalemia, and alkalosis—
but low serum renin and aldosterone levels. These patients respond
to the potassium-­sparing diuretics (triamterene and amiloride) that
inhibit this sodium channel (see Chapter 571.3). A pathogenic variant in the mineralocorticoid receptor causes early-­onset autosomal
dominant hypertension with exacerbation in pregnancy. Hypokalemia is usually mild but worsens during pregnancy; renin and
aldosterone levels are low.

Clinical Manifestations

The heart and skeletal muscle are especially vulnerable to hypokalemia.
ECG changes include a flattened T wave, a depressed ST segment, and
the appearance of a U wave, which is located between the T wave (if still
visible) and the P wave (Fig. 73.5). Ventricular fibrillation and torsades
de pointes may occur, although usually only in the context of underlying heart disease. Hypokalemia makes the heart especially susceptible
to digitalis-­induced arrhythmias, such as supraventricular tachycardia,
ventricular tachycardia, and heart block (see Chapter 484).
The clinical consequences of hypokalemia in skeletal muscle include
muscle weakness and cramps. Paralysis is a possible complication, generally only at [K+] <2.5 mEq/L. It usually starts in the legs and moves
to the arms. Respiratory paralysis may require mechanical ventilation.
Some patients have rhabdomyolysis; the risk increases with exercise.
Hypokalemia slows GI motility. This effect manifests as constipation;
with K+ levels <2.5 mEq/L, an ileus may occur. Hypokalemia impairs
bladder function, potentially leading to urinary retention.
Hypokalemia causes polyuria and polydipsia by impairing urinary
concentrating ability, which produces nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
Hypokalemia stimulates renal ammonia production, an effect that is
clinically significant if hepatic failure is present, because the liver cannot metabolize the ammonia. Consequently, hypokalemia may worsen
hepatic encephalopathy. Chronic hypokalemia may cause kidney damage, including interstitial nephritis and renal cysts.

Diagnosis

Most causes of hypokalemia are readily apparent from the history. It is
important to review the child’s diet, GI losses, and medications. Both
emesis and diuretic use can be surreptitious. The presence of hypertension suggests excess mineralocorticoid effects or levels. Concomitant
electrolyte abnormalities are useful clues. The combination of hypokalemia and metabolic acidosis is characteristic of diarrhea and distal
and proximal RTA. A concurrent metabolic alkalosis is characteristic
of emesis or nasogastric losses, aldosterone excess, use of diuretics, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 501
V2

V3

V4

Fig. 73.5 The ECG manifestations of hypokalemia. The serum po-

tassium concentration was 2.2 mEq/L. The ST segment is prolonged,
primarily because of a U wave following the T wave, and the T wave is
flattened. (From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine.
26th ed. Elsevier; 2020. Fig. 109.1, p 727.)

Bartter and Gitelman syndromes. Figure 73.6 shows an approach to
persistent hypokalemia.
If a clear etiology is not apparent, the measurement of urinary K+
distinguishes between renal and extrarenal losses. The kidneys should
conserve K+ in the presence of extrarenal losses. Urinary K+ losses can
be assessed with a 24-­hour urine collection, spot K+:creatinine ratio,
fractional excretion of K+, or calculation of the transtubular K+ gradient (TTKG), which is the most widely used approach in children:
TTKG = [K]urine /[K]plasma × (plasma osmolality / urine osmolality)

where [K]urine = urine potassium concentration and [K]plasma =
plasma potassium concentration.
The urine osmolality must be greater than the serum osmolality for
the result of this calculation to be valid. A TTKG >4 in the presence of
hypokalemia suggests excessive urinary losses of K+. The urinary K+
excretion value can be misleading if the stimulus for renal loss, such as
a diuretic, is no longer present.

Treatment

Factors that influence the treatment of hypokalemia include the K+
level, clinical symptoms, kidney function, the presence of transcellular shifts of K+, ongoing losses, and the patient’s ability to tolerate oral K+. Severe, symptomatic hypokalemia requires aggressive
treatment. Supplementation is more cautious if renal function is
decreased because of the kidney’s limited ability to excrete excessive

K+. The plasma potassium level does not always provide an accurate
estimation of the total body K+ deficit because there may be shifts
of K+ from the ICS to the plasma. Clinically, such shifts occur most
often with metabolic acidosis and the insulin deficiency of DKA; the
plasma [K+] measurement underestimates the degree of total body
K+ depletion. When these problems are corrected, K+ moves into the
ICS, so more K+ supplementation is required to correct the hypokalemia. Likewise, the presence of a transcellular shift of K+ into the cells
indicates that the total body K+ depletion is less severe. In an isolated
transcellular shift, as in hypokalemic periodic paralysis, K+ supplementation should be used cautiously, given the risk of hyperkalemia when the transcellular shift resolves. This caution is especially
required in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, which responds dramatically to propranolol, with correction of weakness and hypokalemia.
Patients who have ongoing losses of K+ need correction of the deficit
and replacement of the ongoing losses.
Because of the risk of hyperkalemia, IV K+ should be used very cautiously. Oral K+ is safer, but not as rapid in urgent situations. Liquid
preparations are bitter tasting; microencapsulated or wax matrix formulations are less irritating than tablets to the gastric mucosa. Oral
dosing is variable depending on the clinical situation. A typical starting
dose is 1-­2 mEq/kg/day, with a maximum of 60 mEq/day in divided
doses. The dose of IV potassium is 0.5-­1.0 mEq/kg, usually given over 1
hour. The adult maximum dose is 40 mEq. Conservative dosing is generally preferred. Potassium chloride is the usual choice for supplementation, although the presence of concurrent electrolyte abnormalities
may dictate other options. Patients with acidosis and hypokalemia can
receive potassium acetate or potassium citrate. If hypophosphatemia is
present, some of the potassium deficit can be replaced with potassium
phosphate. It is sometimes possible to decrease ongoing K+ losses. For
patients with excessive urinary losses, potassium-­sparing diuretics are
effective, but they need to be used cautiously in patients with decreased
kidney function. If hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and volume
depletion are present (with gastric losses), restoration of intravascular volume with adequate NaCl will decrease urinary K+ losses. Correction of concurrent hypomagnesemia is important because it may
cause hypokalemia. Disease-­specific therapy is effective in many of the
genetic tubular disorders.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.5 Magnesium
Larry A. Greenbaum

MAGNESIUM METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

Magnesium is the fourth most common cation in the body and the
third most common intracellular cation (see Fig. 73.3). From 50–60%
of body magnesium is in bone, where it serves as a reservoir because
30% is exchangeable, allowing movement to the ECS. Most intracellular magnesium is bound to proteins; only approximately 25% is
exchangeable. Because cells with higher metabolic rates have higher
magnesium concentrations, most intracellular magnesium is present
in muscle and liver.
The normal plasma magnesium concentration is 1.5-­2.3 mg/dL (1.2-­
1.9 mEq/L; 0.62-­0.94 mmol/L), with some variation among clinical
laboratories. Infants have slightly higher plasma magnesium concentrations than older children and adults. Only 1% of body magnesium
is extracellular (60% ionized, 15% complexed, 25% protein bound). In
the United States, serum magnesium is reported as mg/dL (Table 73.6).
Values in the left-­column unit are converted into the right-­column unit
by multiplying the conversion factor (e.g., calcium of 10 mg/dL × 0.25
= 2.5 mmol/L). Dividing the right-­column unit by the conversion factor converts to the units of the left-­column unit.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

502 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Hypokalemia*
Reduced total body K
Insufficient K intake

Excessive K loss

Extra-renal loss
(Urine K  15 mEq/L ; TTKG  4)

Sweat loss
Gi loss
-Pica / geophagia
-K binders, fistulas
-Diarrhea, laxatives

Cellular uptake of K

Metabolic alkalosis

Renal loss
(Urine K  15 mEq/L ; TTKG  4)

Metabolic acidosis

Variable acid-base status
Drugs (antibiotics, etc.)
Polyuric disorders
Saline diuresis (Kfree)
Magnesium depletion
Congenital K wasting
Acquired K wasting
Leukemia

Renal tubular acidosis (I and II)
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Ureterosigmoid diversion
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Urine Cl  15

Urine Cl  15
Cl Deficient diet
GI Cl loss (emesis / NG drainage)
Sweat Cl loss
Post-hypercapnea
Post-diuretic effect

PRA  0.5 ng/mL/hr; DR  15 mU/L

Hypertension

Acute alkalosis
Insulin
β-adrenergic stimulants
Periodic paralysis
Barium poisoning
Acute increase in blood cells

Low / normal BP

Recent diuretic effect
Bartter syndrome
Gitelman syndrome
Hypovolemia

PRA  0.5 ng/mL/hr; DR  15 mU/L

Renal parenchymal disease
Renovascular disease
Renal compression
Renal tumors
Pheochromocytoma
Excess ACTH / Glucocorticoids**
High aldosterone
Low / Normal DOC

Variable aldosterone
High DOC

Low aldosterone
Low / Normal DOC

Primary aldosteronism
- tumors, hyperplasia
- GRA (FH-I), FH-II

High 17-OHP
Low cortisol
High ACTH

11-β hydroxylase deficiency

Low / normal 17-OHP
Low cortisol
High ACTH

AME, licorice, Carbenoxolone
Chronic grapefruit juice intake
Liddle syndrome (PA-I)
MR activating mutation (PA-II)
Exogenous mineralocorticoid
Excess ACTH / Glucocorticoids**

High 17-OHP
High cortisol
High ACTH

17-α hydroxylase deficiency

GR resistance

Normal 17-OHP
Normal cortisol
Normal ACTH

DOC-secreting tumors

Fig. 73.6 Diagnostic algorithm to evaluate persistent hypokalemia. *Spurious hypokalemia must be excluded. **Hypokalemia is uncommon in

uncomplicated edematous disorders and in conditions associated with excessive glucocorticosteroids. Conditions associated with high circulating levels of glucocorticosteroids often have normal renin activity. 17-­OHP, 17-­Hydroxyprogesterone; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AME,
apparent mineralocorticoid excess; BP, blood pressure; Cl−, chloride; DOC, 11-­deoxycorticosterone; DR, direct renin assay; GI, gastrointestinal;
FH-­II, familial hyperaldosteronism type II; GR, glucocorticoid receptor; GRA (FH-­I), glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism (familial hyperaldosteronism type I); K+, potassium; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor; PA-­I, pseudohyperaldosteronism type I; PA-­II, pseudohyperaldosteronism type
II; PRA, plasma renin activity; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (From Shoemaker LR, Eaton BV, Buchino JJ. A three-­year-­old with persistent
hypokalemia. J Pediatr. 2007;151[6]:696–699.)

Magnesium is a necessary cofactor for hundreds of enzymes. It is
important for membrane stabilization and nerve conduction. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and guanosine triphosphate need associated
magnesium when they are used by ATPases, cyclases, and kinases.

Magnesium Intake

Between 30% and 50% of dietary magnesium is absorbed. Good
dietary sources include green vegetables, cereals, nuts, meats, and hard
water, although many foods contain magnesium. Human milk contains
approximately 35 mg/L of magnesium; formula contains 40-­70 mg/L.
The small intestine is the major site of magnesium absorption, but
the regulation of magnesium absorption is poorly understood. There
is passive absorption, which permits high absorption in the presence

of excessive intake. It probably occurs by a paracellular mechanism.
Absorption is diminished in the presence of substances that complex
with magnesium (free fatty acids, fiber, phytate, phosphate, oxalate);
increased intestinal motility and calcium also decrease magnesium
absorption. Vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) may enhance
absorption, although this effect is limited. Intestinal absorption does
increase when intake is decreased, possibly by a saturable, active transport system. If there is no oral intake of magnesium, obligatory secretory losses prevent the complete elimination of intestinal losses.

Magnesium Excretion

Renal excretion is the principal regulator of magnesium balance. There
is no defined hormonal regulatory system, although PTH may increase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 503
tubular resorption. Approximately 15% of resorption occurs in the
proximal tubule and 70% in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the loop
of Henle. Proximal resorption may be higher in neonates. High serum
magnesium levels inhibit resorption in the TAL, suggesting that active
transport is involved. Approximately 5–10% of filtered magnesium is
resorbed in the distal tubule. Hypomagnesemia increases absorption
in the TAL and the distal tubule.

HYPOMAGNESEMIA

Hypomagnesemia is relatively common in hospitalized patients,
although most cases are asymptomatic. Detection requires a high index
of suspicion because magnesium is not measured in most basic metabolic panels.

Table 73.6  Conversion Factors for Calcium, Magnesium,
and Phosphorus
UNIT

CONVERSION
FACTOR

UNIT

Calcium

mg/dL
mEq/L
mg/dL

0.25
0.5
0.5

mmol/L
mmol/L
mEq/L

Magnesium

mg/dL
mEq/L
mg/dL

0.411
0.5
0.822

mmol/L
mmol/L
mEq/L

Phosphorus

mg/dL

0.32

mmol/L

Etiology and Pathophysiology

GI and renal losses are the major causes of hypomagnesemia (Table
73.7). Diarrheal fluid contains up to 200 mg/L of magnesium; gastric
contents have only approximately 15 mg/L, but high losses can cause
depletion. Steatorrhea causes magnesium loss because of the formation
of magnesium-­lipid salts; restriction of dietary fat can decrease losses.
The potassium-­lowering agent patiromer binds magnesium and may
cause hypomagnesemia.
Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia, a rare autosomal recessive disorder, is caused by decreased intestinal absorption of
magnesium and renal magnesium wasting. Patients with this disorder
have pathogenic variants in a gene expressed in intestine and kidney;
TRPM6 codes for a transient receptor potential cation channel. The
patients have seizures, tetany, tremor, or restlessness at 2-­8 weeks of
life because of severe hypomagnesemia (0.2-­0.8 mg/dL) and secondary
hypocalcemia.
Renal losses may occur because of medications that are direct tubular toxins. Amphotericin frequently causes significant magnesium
wasting and is typically associated with other tubular defects (especially potassium wasting). Cisplatin produces dramatic renal magnesium losses. Diuretics affect tubular handling of magnesium. Loop
diuretics cause a mild increase in magnesium excretion, and thiazide
diuretics have even less effect. Chronic use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) may cause hypomagnesemia. Potassium-­sparing diuretics
reduce magnesium losses. Osmotic agents, such as mannitol, glucose
in diabetes mellitus, and urea in the recovery phase of acute tubular
necrosis, increase urinary magnesium losses. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor inhibitors cause renal magnesium wasting. IV fluid,
by expanding the intravascular volume, decreases renal resorption of

Table 73.7  Causes of Hypomagnesemia
GASTROINTESTINAL LOSSES
Diarrhea
Nasogastric suction or emesis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease
Cystic fibrosis
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Small bowel resection or bypass
Pancreatitis
Protein-­calorie malnutrition
Patiromer
Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia (OMIM 602014)*
RENAL DISORDERS
Medications
Amphotericin
Cisplatin
Cyclosporine, tacrolimus
Loop and thiazide diuretics
Mannitol
Pentamidine
Proton pump inhibitors
Aminoglycosides
Thiazide diuretics
Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors
Diabetes
Acute tubular necrosis (recovery phase)
Postobstructive nephropathy
Chronic kidney diseases
Interstitial nephritis
Glomerulonephritis
Post–renal transplantation
Hypercalcemia
Intravenous fluids

Primary aldosteronism
Genetic diseases
Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800)
Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/6
01198/613090)
Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis
(OMIM 248250)
Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis,
and severe ocular involvement (OMIM 248190)
Autosomal recessive renal magnesium wasting with normocalciuria
(OMIM 611718)
Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome due to HNF1β variants (OMIM
137920)
Autosomal dominant hypomagnesemia (OMIM
160120/613882/154020)
EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780)
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200)
Mitochondrial disorders (OMIM 500005)
Hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure in infancy and
alkalosis, HUPRA syndrome (OMIM 613845)
Transient neonatal hyperphenylalaninemia followed by hypomagnesemia
and maturity onset diabetes of the young (OMIM 264070)
Hypomagnesemia, seizures and mental retardation due to CNNM2
pathogenic variants (OMIM 616418)
Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD
pathogenic variants (OMIM not assigned)
MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES
Poor intake
Hungry bone syndrome
Insulin administration
Pancreatitis
Intrauterine growth restriction
Infants of diabetic mothers
Exchange transfusion

*This disorder is also associated with renal magnesium wasting.
EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

504 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
sodium and water, thereby impairing magnesium resorption. Hypercalcemia inhibits magnesium resorption in the loop of Henle, although
this inhibition does not occur in hypercalcemia caused by familial
hypercalcemic hypocalciuria or lithium.
A number of rare genetic diseases cause renal magnesium loss.
Gitelman and Bartter syndromes, both autosomal recessive disorders, are the most common entities (see Chapter 571). Gitelman
syndrome, caused by a defect in the thiazide-­sensitive Na+-­Cl− co-­
transporter in the distal tubule, is usually associated with hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia occurs in a minority of patients with
Bartter syndrome, which can be caused by pathogenic variants in
multiple genes necessary for Na+ and Cl− reabsorption in the loop
of Henle. In both disorders, there is hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis. Typically, hypomagnesemia is not severe and is asymptomatic,
although tetany as a result of hypomagnesemia occasionally occurs.
Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis (Michelis-­C astrillo syndrome), an autosomal recessive
disorder, is caused by pathogenic variants in the gene for claudin
16 (paracellin-­1), located in the tight junctions of the TAL of the
loop of Henle. Patients with the disease have severe renal wasting
of magnesium and calcium with secondary hypomagnesemia and
nephrocalcinosis; serum calcium levels are normal. Chronic kidney
failure frequently occurs during childhood. Other features include
kidney stones, urinary tract infections, hematuria, increased PTH
levels, tetany, seizures, incomplete distal RTA, hyperuricemia, polyuria, and polydipsia. Patients with familial hypomagnesemia with
hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and severe ocular involvement
have pathogenic variants in the gene for claudin 19.
Autosomal recessive renal magnesium wasting with normocalciuria is caused by pathogenic variants in the EGF gene. Clinical manifestations include seizures, mild to moderate psychomotor retardation,
and brisk tendon reflexes.
Autosomal dominant renal magnesium wasting is caused by
pathogenic variants in a number of different genes. A dominant-­
negative pathogenic variant in the gene encoding the Na+,K+-­
ATPase γ subunit is associated with hypomagnesemia, increased
urinary magnesium losses, hypocalciuria, and normocalcemia.
Patients may present with seizures; most are asymptomatic, despite
serum magnesium levels of 0.8-­1.5 mg/dL. Pathogenic variants
in CNNM2, which encodes a protein that mediates magnesium-­
sensitive sodium currents, cause isolated hypomagnesemia. A
pathogenic variant in KCNA1, a gene that encodes a K+ channel,
also causes an autosomal dominant form of hypomagnesemia;
symptoms may be severe.
Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome, which is caused by pathogenic variants in the gene for hepatocyte nuclear factor-­
1β, is
associated with hypomagnesemia, despite the frequent presence
of decreased kidney function. The hypomagnesemia is usually
mild but may cause symptomatic hypocalcemia. EAST syndrome
is caused by pathogenic variants in a potassium channel, and
patients with this autosomal recessive disorder have hypokalemia,
metabolic alkalosis, and hypomagnesemia. Pathogenic variants of
RRAGD cause autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia,
and affected patients may have hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia,
metabolic alkalosis, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and a severe
cardiomyopathy. Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism is
caused by an activating pathogenic variant in the calcium-­sensing
receptor, which also senses magnesium levels in the kidney (see
Chapter 611). The abnormal receptor inappropriately perceives that
magnesium and calcium levels are elevated, leading to urinary wasting of both cations. Hypomagnesemia, if present, is usually mild.
A pathogenic variant in a mitochondrially encoded transfer RNA
is associated with hypomagnesemia, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia. Hypomagnesemia is occasionally present in children
with other mitochondrial disorders.
Poor intake is an unusual cause of hypomagnesemia, although
it can be seen in children who are hospitalized and receive only IV
fluids without magnesium. In hungry bone syndrome, which most

frequently occurs after parathyroidectomy in patients with hyperparathyroidism, magnesium moves into bone as a result of accelerated bone formation. These patients usually have hypocalcemia and
hypophosphatemia through the same mechanism. A similar mechanism can occur during the refeeding phase of protein-­c alorie malnutrition in children, with high magnesium use during cell growth
depleting the patient’s limited reserves. Insulin therapy stimulates
uptake of magnesium by cells, and in DKA, in which total body
magnesium is low because of osmotic losses, hypomagnesemia frequently occurs. In pancreatitis there is saponification of magnesium and calcium in necrotic fat, causing both hypomagnesemia
and hypocalcemia.
Transient hypomagnesemia in newborns, which is sometimes idiopathic, is more common in infants of diabetic mothers, presumably as
a result of maternal depletion from osmotic losses. Other maternal diseases that cause magnesium losses predispose infants to hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia is more common in infants with intrauterine
growth restriction. Hypomagnesemia may develop in newborn infants
who require exchange transfusions because of magnesium removal by
the citrate in banked blood.

Clinical Manifestations

Hypomagnesemia causes secondary hypocalcemia by impairing the
release of PTH by the parathyroid gland and through blunting of the
tissue response to PTH. Thus hypomagnesemia is part of the differential diagnosis of hypocalcemia. It usually occurs only at magnesium
levels <0.7 mg/dL. The dominant manifestations of hypomagnesemia
are caused by hypocalcemia: tetany, presence of Chvostek and Trousseau signs, and seizures. However, with severe hypomagnesemia, these
same signs and symptoms may be present despite normocalcemia.
Persistent hypocalcemia caused by hypomagnesemia is a rare cause of
rickets.
Many causes of hypomagnesemia also result in hypokalemia. Hypomagnesemia may produce renal potassium wasting and hypokalemia
that corrects only with magnesium therapy. ECG changes with hypomagnesemia include flattening of the T wave and lengthening of the
ST segment. Arrhythmias may occur, almost always in the setting of
underlying heart disease.

Diagnosis

The etiology of hypomagnesemia is often readily apparent from the
clinical situation. The child should be assessed for GI disease, adequate
intake, and kidney disease, with close attention paid to medications that
may cause renal magnesium wasting. When the diagnosis is uncertain,
an evaluation of urinary magnesium losses distinguishes between renal
and nonrenal causes. The fractional excretion of magnesium (FEMg) is
calculated via the following formula:
FEMg = (UMg × PCr ) / ([0.7 × PMg ] × UCr ) × 100

where UMg = urinary magnesium concentration, PCr = plasma creatinine concentration, PMg = plasma magnesium concentration, and
UCr = urinary magnesium concentration. The plasma magnesium concentration is multiplied by 0.7 because approximately 30% is bound to
albumin and not filtered at the glomerulus.
The FEMg does not vary with age, but it does change according to
the serum magnesium concentration. The FEMg ranges from 1–8% in
children with normal magnesium levels. In the patient with hypomagnesemia as a result of extrarenal causes, FEMg should be low because of
renal conservation, typically <2%. The FEMg is inappropriately elevated
in the setting of renal magnesium wasting; values are usually >4%
and frequently >10%. The measurement should not be made during a
magnesium infusion, because the acute increase in serum magnesium
increases urinary magnesium. Other approaches for evaluating urinary
magnesium losses include calculation of 24-­hour urinary magnesium
losses and the urine magnesium/creatinine ratio, both of which vary
with age.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 505
The genetic causes of renal magnesium loss are distinguished based
on the measurement of other serum and urinary electrolytes. Children
with Gitelman or Bartter syndrome have hypokalemia and metabolic
alkalosis.

Treatment

Severe hypomagnesemia is treated with parenteral magnesium.
Magnesium sulfate is given at a dose of 25-­50 mg/kg (0.05-­0.1 mL/
kg of a 50% solution; 2.5-­5.0 mg/kg of elemental magnesium). It is
administered as a slow IV infusion, although it may be given intramuscularly in neonates. The rate of IV infusion should be slowed
if a patient experiences diaphoresis, flushing, or a warm sensation. The dose is often repeated every 6 hours (every 8-­12 hours
in neonates), for a total of 2-­3 doses, before the plasma magnesium
concentration is rechecked. Lower doses are used in children with
decreased kidney function.
Long-­term therapy is usually given orally. Preparations include
magnesium gluconate (5.4 mg elemental magnesium/100 mg),
magnesium oxide (60 mg elemental magnesium/100 mg), and
magnesium sulfate (10 mg elemental magnesium/100 mg).
Sustained-­release preparations include Slow-­Mag (60 mg elemental magnesium/tablet) and Mag-­Tab SR (84 mg elemental magnesium/tablet). Oral magnesium dosing should be divided to decrease
cathartic side effects. Alternatives to oral magnesium are intramuscular injections and nighttime nasogastric infusion, both designed
to minimize diarrhea. Magnesium supplementation must be used
cautiously in the context of renal insufficiency.

HYPERMAGNESEMIA

Clinically significant hypermagnesemia is almost always secondary to
excessive intake. It is unusual, except in neonates born to mothers who
are receiving IV magnesium for preeclampsia or eclampsia (see Chapter 121.5).

Etiology and Pathophysiology

There is no feedback mechanism to prevent magnesium absorption
from the GI tract. Magnesium is present in high amounts in certain
laxatives, enemas, cathartics used to treat drug overdoses, and antacids. It is also usually present in total parenteral nutrition (TPN),
and neonates may receive high amounts transplacentally if maternal levels are elevated. Usually the kidneys excrete excessive magnesium, but this ability is diminished in patients with chronic kidney
disease. In addition, neonates and young infants are vulnerable to
excessive magnesium ingestion because of their reduced GFR. Most
pediatric cases not related to maternal hypermagnesemia occur
in infants because of excessive use of antacids or laxatives. Mild
hypermagnesemia may occur in chronic kidney disease, familial
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, DKA, lithium ingestion, milk-­alkali
syndrome, and tumor lysis syndrome. The hypermagnesemia in
DKA occurs despite significant intracellular magnesium depletion
because of urinary losses; hypomagnesemia often occurs after insulin treatment.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms usually do not appear until the plasma magnesium level
is >4.5 mg/dL. Hypermagnesemia inhibits acetylcholine release at
the neuromuscular junction, producing hypotonia, hyporeflexia,
and weakness; paralysis occurs at high concentrations. The neuromuscular effects may be exacerbated by aminoglycoside antibiotics. Direct CNS depression causes lethargy and sleepiness; infants
have a poor suck. Elevated magnesium values are associated with
hypotension because of vascular dilation, which also causes flushing. Hypotension can be profound at higher concentrations from a
direct effect on cardiac function. ECG changes include prolonged
PR interval, QRS complex, and QT interval. Severe hypermagnesemia (>15 mg/dL) causes complete heart block and cardiac arrest.
Other manifestations of hypermagnesemia include nausea, vomiting, and hypocalcemia.

Diagnosis

Except for the case of the neonate with transplacental exposure, a high
index of suspicion and a good history are necessary to determine the
etiology of hypermagnesemia. Prevention is essential; magnesium-­
containing compounds should be used judiciously in children with
decreased kidney function.

Treatment

Most patients with normal kidney function rapidly clear excess magnesium. Intravenous hydration and loop diuretics can accelerate this
process. In severe cases, especially in patients with underlying renal
insufficiency, dialysis may be necessary. Hemodialysis works faster
than peritoneal dialysis. Exchange transfusion is another option in
newborn infants. Supportive care includes monitoring of cardiorespiratory status, provision of fluids, monitoring of electrolyte levels, and
the use of pressors for hypotension. In acute emergencies, especially in
the context of severe neurologic or cardiac manifestations, 100 mg/kg
of IV calcium gluconate is transiently effective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.6 Phosphorus
Larry A. Greenbaum
Approximately 65% of plasma phosphorus is in phospholipids, but
these compounds are insoluble in acid and are not measured by clinical
laboratories. It is the phosphorus content of plasma phosphate that is
determined. The result is reported as either phosphate or phosphorus,
although even when the term phosphate is used, it is actually the phosphorus concentration that is measured and reported. The result is that
the terms phosphate and phosphorus are often used interchangeably.
The term phosphorus is preferred when referring to the plasma concentration. Conversion from the units used in the United States (mg/dL)
to mmol/L is straightforward (see Table 73.6).

PHOSPHORUS METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

Most phosphorus is in bone or is intracellular, with <1% in plasma. At
a physiologic pH, there are monovalent and divalent forms of phosphate because the pKa (ionization constant of acid) of these forms is
6.8. Approximately 80% is divalent, and the remainder is monovalent
at a pH of 7.4. A small percentage of plasma phosphate, approximately
15%, is protein bound. The remainder can be filtered by the glomerulus, with most existing as free phosphate and a small percentage complexed with calcium, magnesium, or sodium. Phosphate is the most
plentiful intracellular anion, although the majority is part of a larger
compound (ATP).
More than that of any other electrolyte, the phosphorus concentration varies with age (Table 73.8). The teleologic explanation for the
high concentration during childhood is the need for phosphorus to
facilitate growth. There is diurnal variation in the plasma phosphorus
concentration, with the peak during sleep.

Table 73.8  Serum Phosphorus Levels During Childhood
AGE

PHOSPHORUS LEVEL (mg/dL)

0-­5 day

4.8-­8.2

1-­3 yr

3.8-­6.5

4-­11 yr

3.7-­5.6

12-­15 yr

2.9-­5.4

16-­19 yr

2.7-­4.7

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

506 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Phosphorus, as a component of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
other trinucleotides, is critical for cellular energy metabolism. It is necessary for cell signaling and nucleic acid synthesis, and it is a component of cell membranes and other structures. Along with calcium,
phosphorus is necessary for skeletal mineralization. A net positive
phosphorus balance is required during growth, with the growing skeleton especially vulnerable to deficiency.

Phosphorus Intake

Phosphorus is readily available in food. Milk and milk products are the
best sources of phosphorus; high concentrations are present in meat
and fish. Vegetables have more phosphorus than fruits and grains.
GI absorption of phosphorus is proportional to intake, with approximately 65% of intake being absorbed, including a small amount that is
secreted. Absorption, almost exclusively in the small intestine, occurs
via a paracellular diffusive process and a vitamin D–regulated transcellular pathway. However, the impact of the change in phosphorus
absorption caused by vitamin D is relatively small compared with the
effect of variations in phosphorus intake.

Phosphorus Excretion

Despite the wide variation in phosphorus absorption dictated
by oral intake, excretion matches intake, except for the needs for
growth. The kidney regulates phosphorus balance, which is determined by intrarenal mechanisms and hormonal actions on the
nephron.
Approximately 90% of plasma phosphate is filtered at the glomerulus, although there is some variation based on plasma phosphate and
calcium concentrations. There is no significant secretion of phosphate
along the nephron. Resorption of phosphate occurs mostly in the
proximal tubule, although a small amount can be resorbed in the distal
tubule. Normally, approximately 85% of the filtered load is resorbed.
Sodium-­phosphate co-­transporters mediate the uptake of phosphate
into the cells of the proximal tubule.
Dietary phosphorus determines the amount of phosphate resorbed
by the nephron. There are both acute and chronic changes in phosphate resorption that are based on intake. Many of these changes
appear to be mediated by intrarenal mechanisms that are independent of regulatory hormones. Fibroblast growth factor-­23 (FGF-­23)
inhibits renal resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule, and
its level increases in the setting of hyperphosphatemia. FGF-­23 also
inhibits synthesis of 1,25-­vitamin D in the kidney by decreasing 1α-­
hydroxylase activity.
Secreted in response to a low plasma calcium level, PTH decreases
resorption of phosphate, increasing the urinary phosphate level. This
process appears to have a minimal effect during normal physiologic
variation in PTH levels. However, it does affect urinary phosphate in
the setting of pathologic changes in PTH synthesis.
Low plasma phosphorus stimulates the 1α-­hydroxylase in the kidney
that converts 25-­hydroxyvitamin D (25-­D) to 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D
(1,25-­D; calcitriol). Calcitriol increases intestinal absorption of phosphorus and is necessary for maximal renal resorption of phosphate.
The effect of a change in calcitriol on urinary phosphate is significant
only when the level of calcitriol was initially low, arguing against a role
for calcitriol in nonpathologic conditions.

HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA

Because of the wide variation in normal plasma phosphorus levels, the
definition of hypophosphatemia is age dependent (see Table 73.8). The
normal range reported by a laboratory may be based on adult normal
values and therefore may be misleading in children. A serum phosphorus level of 3 mg/dL, a normal value in an adult, indicates clinically
significant hypophosphatemia in an infant.
The plasma phosphorus level does not always reflect the total body
stores because only 1% of phosphorus is extracellular. Thus a child
may have significant phosphorus deficiency despite a normal plasma
phosphorus concentration when there is a shift of phosphorus from
the ICS.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

A variety of mechanisms cause hypophosphatemia (Table 73.9). A
transcellular shift of phosphorus into cells occurs with processes that
stimulate cellular usage of phosphorus (glycolysis). Usually, this shift
causes only a minor, transient decrease in plasma phosphorus, but if
intracellular phosphorus deficiency is present, the plasma phosphorus
level can decrease significantly, producing symptoms of acute hypophosphatemia. Glucose infusion stimulates insulin release, leading to
entry of glucose and phosphorus into the cells. Phosphorus is then used
during glycolysis and other metabolic processes. A similar phenomenon
can occur during the treatment of DKA, and patients with DKA are typically phosphorus depleted because of urinary phosphorus losses.
Table 73.9  Causes of Hypophosphatemia
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Glucose infusion
Insulin
Refeeding
Total parenteral nutrition
Respiratory alkalosis
Tumor growth
Bone marrow transplantation
Hungry bone syndrome
DECREASED INTAKE
Nutritional
Premature infants
Low phosphorus formula
Antacids and other phosphate binders
RENAL LOSSES
Hyperparathyroidism
Parathyroid hormone–related peptide
X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets (OMIM 307800)
Overproduction of fibroblast growth factor-­23
Tumor-­induced rickets
McCune-­Albright syndrome (OMIM 174800)
Epidermal nevus syndrome
Neurofibromatosis
Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (OMIM 193100)
Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets, types 1, 2, and 3
(OMIM 241520/613312)
Ferric carboxymaltose
Dent disease (OMIM 300009/300555)
Fanconi syndrome (OMIM 134600/613388/615605/616026/618913/
612392)*
Hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (OMIM 241530)
Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis
types 1 and 2 (OMIM 612286/612287)
Volume expansion and intravenous fluids
Metabolic acidosis
Diuretics
Glycosuria
Glucocorticoids
Chemotherapy (cisplatin, ifosfamide)
Kidney transplantation
MULTIFACTORIAL
Vitamin D deficiency
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 1 (OMIM 264700)
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 2 (OMIM 277440)
Alcoholism
Sepsis
Dialysis
*These are primary genetic causes of Fanconi syndrome. Fanconi syndrome may also
be secondary to medications, genetic disorders (cystinosis) or systemic disease
(Sjögren syndrome).
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 507
Refeeding of patients with protein-­calorie malnutrition causes
anabolism, which leads to significant cellular demand for phosphorus (see Chapter 63). The increased phosphorus uptake for incorporation into newly synthesized compounds containing phosphorus
leads to hypophosphatemia, which can be severe and symptomatic.
Refeeding hypophosphatemia occurs frequently during treatment of severe anorexia nervosa. It can occur during treatment of
children with malnutrition from any cause, such as cystic fibrosis,
Crohn disease, burns, neglect, chronic infection, or famine. Hypophosphatemia usually occurs within the first 5 days of refeeding
and is prevented by a gradual increase in nutrition with appropriate
phosphorus supplementation. TPN without adequate phosphorus
can cause hypophosphatemia.
Phosphorus moves into the ICS during a respiratory alkalosis and
during recovery from a respiratory acidosis. An acute decrease in
the carbon dioxide concentration, by raising the intracellular pH,
stimulates glycolysis, leading to intracellular use of phosphorus and
hypophosphatemia. Because a metabolic alkalosis has less effect on
the intracellular pH (CO2 diffuses across cell membranes much faster
than bicarbonate), transcellular phosphorus movement is minimal
with a metabolic alkalosis.
Tumors that grow rapidly, such as those associated with leukemia and lymphoma, may use large amounts of phosphorus, leading
to hypophosphatemia. A similar phenomenon may occur during
the hematopoietic reconstitution that follows bone marrow transplantation. In hungry bone syndrome, there is avid bone uptake of
phosphorus, along with calcium and magnesium, which can produce plasma deficiency of all three ions. Hungry bone syndrome
is most common after parathyroidectomy for hyperparathyroidism
because the stimulus for bone dissolution is acutely removed, but
bone synthesis continues.
Nutritional phosphorus deficiency is unusual because most foods
contain phosphorus. However, infants are especially susceptible
because of their high demand for phosphorus to support growth,
especially of the skeleton. Very low birthweight infants have particularly rapid skeletal growth, and phosphorus deficiency and rickets
may develop if they are fed human milk or formula for term infants.
There is also a relative deficiency of calcium. The provision of additional calcium and phosphorus, using breast milk fortifier or special
premature infant formula, prevents this complication. Phosphorus
deficiency, sometimes with concomitant calcium and vitamin D
deficiencies, occurs in infants who are not given enough milk or
who receive a milk substitute that is nutritionally inadequate.
Antacids containing aluminum hydroxide (e.g., Maalox,
Mylanta) bind dietary phosphorus and secreted phosphorus, preventing absorption. This process can cause phosphorus deficiency
and rickets in growing children. A similar mechanism causes hypophosphatemia in patients who are overtreated for hyperphosphatemia with phosphorus binders. In children with kidney failure, the
addition of dialysis to phosphorus binders increases the risk of iatrogenic hypophosphatemia in these normally hyperphosphatemic
patients. This complication, which is more common in infants, can
worsen kidney osteodystrophy.
Excessive renal losses of phosphorus occur in a variety of inherited and acquired disorders. Because PTH inhibits the resorption of
phosphorus in the proximal tubule, hyperparathyroidism causes
hypophosphatemia (see Chapter 613). The dominant clinical manifestation, however, is hypercalcemia, and the hypophosphatemia is
usually asymptomatic. The phosphorus level in hyperparathyroidism is not extremely low, and there is no continued loss of phosphorus because a new steady state is achieved at the lower plasma
phosphorus level. Renal excretion therefore does not exceed intake
over the long term. Occasional malignancies produce PTH-­related
peptide, which has the same actions as PTH and causes hypophosphatemia and hypercalcemia.
A variety of diseases cause renal phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia, and rickets resulting from excess FGF-­23 (see Chapter

69). These disorders include X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets,
tumor-­induced osteomalacia, autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets, and autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets
types 1-­3. Ferric carboxymaltose, an IV iron preparation for correcting iron deficiency, causes hypophosphatemia via increased
levels of FGF-­23.
Fanconi syndrome is a generalized defect in the proximal tubule
leading to urinary wasting of bicarbonate, phosphorus, amino
acids, uric acid, and glucose (see Chapter 569.1). The clinical
sequelae result from the metabolic acidosis and hypophosphatemia.
In children, an underlying genetic disease, usually cystinosis, often
causes Fanconi syndrome, but it can be secondary to a variety of
toxins and acquired diseases. Some patients have incomplete
Fanconi syndrome, and phosphorus wasting may be one of the
manifestations.
Dent disease, an X-­linked disorder, can cause renal phosphorus
wasting and hypophosphatemia, although the latter is not present in most cases. Other possible manifestations of Dent disease
include tubular proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, rickets, and decreased kidney function. Dent disease may be secondary
to pathologic variants in a gene that encodes a chloride channel
or the OCRL1 gene, which may also cause Lowe syndrome (see
Chapter 569.1). Hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria
is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, principally described in kindreds from the Middle East (see Chapter 69). Pathologic variants
in a sodium-­phosphate co-­transporter cause hypophosphatemia in
this disorder, and complications may include nephrolithiasis and
osteoporosis. Similar findings are seen in hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis types 1 and 2 (see Chapter 69).
Metabolic acidosis inhibits resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule. In addition, metabolic acidosis causes a transcellular
shift of phosphorus out of cells because of intracellular catabolism.
This released phosphorus is subsequently lost in the urine, leading to significant phosphorus depletion, even though the plasma
phosphorus level may be normal. This classically occurs in DKA,
in which renal phosphorus loss is further increased by the osmotic
diuresis. With correction of the metabolic acidosis and the administration of insulin, both of which cause a transcellular movement of
phosphorus into the cells, there is a marked decrease in the plasma
phosphorus level.
Volume expansion from any cause, such as hyperaldosteronism or
SIADH, inhibits resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule. This
effect also occurs with high rates of IV fluids. Thiazide and loop diuretics can increase renal phosphorus excretion, but the increase is seldom
clinically significant. Glycosuria and glucocorticoids inhibit renal
conservation of phosphorus. Hypophosphatemia is common after
kidney transplantation because of urinary phosphorus losses. Possible explanations include preexisting secondary hyperparathyroidism
from chronic kidney disease, glucocorticoid therapy, and upregulation of FGF-­23 before transplantation. The hypophosphatemia usually
resolves in a few months.
Both acquired and genetic causes of vitamin D deficiency are
associated with hypophosphatemia (see Chapter 69). The pathogenesis is multifactorial. By impairing intestinal calcium absorption, vitamin D deficiency causes secondary hyperparathyroidism that leads
to increased urinary phosphorus wasting. An absence of vitamin D
decreases intestinal absorption of phosphorus and directly decreases
renal resorption of phosphorus. The dominant clinical manifestation
is rickets, although some patients have muscle weakness that may be
related to phosphorus deficiency.
Alcoholism is the most common cause of severe hypophosphatemia in adults. Fortunately, many of the risk factors that predispose
alcoholic adults to hypophosphatemia are not usually present in
adolescents (malnutrition, antacid abuse, recurrent DKA episodes).
Hypophosphatemia often occurs in sepsis, but the mechanism is
not clear. Aggressive, protracted hemodialysis, as might be used for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

508 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
the treatment of methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion, can cause
hypophosphatemia.

Clinical Manifestations

There are acute and chronic manifestations of hypophosphatemia.
Rickets occurs in children with long-­term phosphorus deficiency. The
clinical features of rickets are described in Chapter 69.
Severe hypophosphatemia, typically at levels <1.0-­1.5 mg/dL, may
affect every organ in the body because phosphorus has a critical role
in maintaining adequate cellular energy. Phosphorus is a component
of ATP and is necessary for glycolysis. With inadequate phosphorus,
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate levels in RBCs decrease, impairing release of
oxygen to the tissues. Severe hypophosphatemia can cause hemolysis
and dysfunction of WBCs. Chronic hypophosphatemia causes proximal muscle weakness and atrophy. In the intensive care unit, phosphorus deficiency may slow weaning from mechanical ventilation or
cause acute respiratory failure. Rhabdomyolysis is the most common
complication of acute hypophosphatemia, usually in the setting of an
acute transcellular shift of phosphorus into cells in a child with chronic
phosphorus depletion (anorexia nervosa). The rhabdomyolysis is actually somewhat protective, in that cellular release of phosphorus occurs.
Other manifestations of severe hypophosphatemia include cardiac dysfunction and neurologic symptoms, such as tremor, paresthesia, ataxia,
seizures, delirium, and coma.

Diagnosis

The history and basic laboratory evaluation often suggest the etiology of hypophosphatemia. The history should investigate nutrition,
medications, and familial disease. Hypophosphatemia and rickets
in an otherwise healthy young child suggest a genetic defect in renal
phosphorus conservation, Fanconi syndrome, inappropriate use of
antacids, poor nutrition, vitamin D deficiency, or a genetic defect in
vitamin D metabolism. The patient with Fanconi syndrome usually
has metabolic acidosis, glycosuria, aminoaciduria, and a low plasma
uric acid level. Measurement of 25-­D and 1,25-­D, calcium, and PTH
differentiates among the various vitamin D deficiency disorders and
primary renal phosphate wasting (see Chapter 69). Hyperparathyroidism is easily distinguished by the presence of elevated plasma
PTH and calcium values.

Treatment

The plasma phosphorus level, the presence of symptoms, the likelihood of chronic depletion, and the presence of ongoing losses
dictate the approach to therapy. Mild hypophosphatemia does not
require treatment unless the clinical situation suggests that chronic
phosphorus depletion is present or that losses are ongoing. Oral
phosphorus can cause diarrhea, so the doses should be divided.
IV therapy is effective in patients who have severe deficiency or
who cannot tolerate oral medications. IV phosphorus is available as
either sodium phosphate or potassium phosphate, with the choice
usually based on the patient’s plasma potassium level. Starting doses
are 0.08-­0.16 mmol/kg over 6 hours. The oral preparations of phosphorus are available with various ratios of sodium and potassium.
This is an important consideration because some patients may not
tolerate the potassium load, whereas supplemental potassium may
be helpful in some diseases, such as Fanconi syndrome and malnutrition. Oral maintenance dosages are 2-­3 mmol/kg/day in divided
doses, although the maintenance dose varies considerably between
patients.
Increasing dietary phosphorus is the only intervention needed
in infants with inadequate intake. Other patients may also benefit
from increased dietary phosphorus, usually from dairy products.
Phosphorus-­binding antacids should be discontinued in patients
with hypophosphatemia. Certain diseases require specific therapy (see Chapter 69). Specifically, X-­
linked hypophosphatemia
responds to burosumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting FGF-­23.

Table 73.10  Causes of Hyperphosphatemia
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Tumor lysis syndrome
Rhabdomyolysis
Acute hemolysis
Diabetic ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis
INCREASED INTAKE
Enemas and laxatives
Cow’s milk in infants
Treatment of hypophosphatemia
Vitamin D intoxication
DECREASED EXCRETION
Kidney failure
Hypoparathyroidism or pseudohypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200/
603233/103580/241410/203330)
Acromegaly
Hyperthyroidism
Tumoral calcinosis with hyperphosphatemia: genetic (OMIM
211900/617993/617994) or autoimmune
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Renal insufficiency is the most common cause of hyperphosphatemia,
with the severity proportional to the degree of kidney impairment (see
Chapter 572). This occurs because GI absorption of the large dietary
intake of phosphorus is unregulated, and the kidneys normally excrete
this phosphorus. As kidney function deteriorates, increased excretion
of phosphorus is able to compensate. When kidney function is <30%
of normal, hyperphosphatemia usually develops, although this varies
considerably depending on dietary intake. Many of the other causes
of hyperphosphatemia are more likely to develop in the setting of
decreased kidney function (Table 73.10).
Cellular content of phosphorus is high relative to plasma phosphorus, and cell lysis can release substantial phosphorus. This is the
etiology of hyperphosphatemia in tumor lysis syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, and acute hemolysis. These disorders cause concomitant
potassium release and the risk of hyperkalemia. Additional features of
tumor lysis and rhabdomyolysis are hyperuricemia and hypocalcemia,
whereas indirect hyperbilirubinemia and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) values are often present with hemolysis. An elevated CPK
level is suggestive of rhabdomyolysis. During lactic acidosis or DKA,
use of phosphorus by cells decreases, and phosphorus shifts into the
ECS. This problem reverses when the underlying problem is corrected,
and especially with DKA, patients subsequently become hypophosphatemic because of previous renal phosphorus loss.
Excessive intake of phosphorus is especially dangerous in children
with decreased kidney function. Neonates are at risk because kidney
function is normally reduced during the first few months of life. In
addition, they may erroneously be given doses of phosphorus that are
meant for an older child or adult. In infants fed cow’s milk, which has
higher phosphorus content than breast milk or formula, hyperphosphatemia may develop. Fleet Enema has a high amount of phosphorus
that can be absorbed, especially in the patient with an ileus; infants and
children with Hirschsprung disease are especially vulnerable. There is
often associated hypernatremia from sodium absorption and water loss
from diarrhea. Sodium phosphorus laxatives may cause hyperphosphatemia if the dose is excessive or if renal insufficiency is present. Hyperphosphatemia occurs in children who receive overaggressive treatment
for hypophosphatemia. Vitamin D intoxication causes excessive GI
absorption of both calcium and phosphorus, and the suppression of
PTH by hypercalcemia decreases renal phosphorus excretion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 509
The absence of PTH in hypoparathyroidism or PTH responsiveness in pseudohypoparathyroidism causes hyperphosphatemia
because of increased resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule
of the kidney (see Chapters 611 and 612). The associated hypocalcemia is responsible for the clinical symptoms. The hyperphosphatemia
in hyperthyroidism or acromegaly is usually mild. It is secondary to
increased resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule from the
actions of thyroxine or growth hormone. Excessive thyroxine can
also cause bone resorption, which may contribute to the hyperphosphatemia and cause hypercalcemia. Patients with familial tumoral
calcinosis (three types), a rare autosomal recessive disorder, have
hyperphosphatemia because of decreased renal phosphate excretion and heterotopic calcifications. The disease may be secondary to
pathologic variants in the genes for a glycosyltransferase (most common etiology), FGF-­23, or klotho, which encodes the co-­receptor for
FGF-­23. Autoimmune hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis occurs
with antibodies producing FGF-­23 resistance.

Clinical Manifestations

The principal clinical consequences of hyperphosphatemia are
hypocalcemia and systemic calcification. The hypocalcemia is
probably caused by tissue deposition of calcium-­phosphorus salt,
inhibition of 1,25-­D production, and decreased bone resorption.
Symptomatic hypocalcemia is most likely to occur when the phosphorus level increases rapidly or when diseases predisposing to
hypocalcemia are present (chronic kidney disease, rhabdomyolysis).
Systemic calcification occurs because the solubility of phosphorus
and calcium in the plasma is exceeded. Clinically, this condition is
often apparent in the conjunctiva, where it manifests as a foreign
body feeling, erythema, and injection. More ominous manifestations are hypoxia from pulmonary calcification and kidney failure
from nephrocalcinosis.

Diagnosis

Plasma creatinine and BUN levels should be assessed in any patient
with hyperphosphatemia. The history should focus on intake of
phosphorus and the presence of chronic diseases that may cause
hyperphosphatemia. Measurement of K+, uric acid, calcium, LDH,
bilirubin, hemoglobin, and CPK may be indicated if rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis, or hemolysis is suspected. With mild hyperphosphatemia and significant hypocalcemia, measurement of the
serum PTH level distinguishes between hypoparathyroidism and
pseudohypoparathyroidism.

Treatment

The treatment of acute hyperphosphatemia depends on its severity
and etiology. Mild hyperphosphatemia in a patient with reasonable
renal function spontaneously resolves; the resolution can be accelerated by dietary phosphorus restriction. If kidney function is not
impaired, IV fluids can enhance renal phosphorus excretion. For
more significant hyperphosphatemia or a situation such as tumor
lysis or rhabdomyolysis, in which endogenous phosphorus generation is likely to continue, addition of an oral phosphorus binder prevents absorption of dietary phosphorus and can remove phosphorus
from the body by binding what is normally secreted and absorbed
by the GI tract. Phosphorus binders are most effective when given
with food. Binders containing aluminum hydroxide are especially
efficient, but calcium carbonate is an effective alternative and may
be preferred if there is a need to treat concomitant hypocalcemia.
Preservation of renal function, as with high urine flow in rhabdomyolysis or tumor lysis, is an important adjunct because it will permit
continued excretion of phosphorus. If the hyperphosphatemia is not
responding to conservative management, especially if acute kidney
injury is supervening, dialysis may be necessary to increase phosphorus removal.
Dietary phosphorus restriction is necessary for diseases causing
chronic hyperphosphatemia. However, such diets are often difficult

to follow, given the abundance of phosphorus in a variety of foods.
Dietary restriction is often sufficient in conditions such as hypoparathyroidism and mild chronic kidney disease. For more problematic hyperphosphatemia, such as with moderate chronic kidney
disease and end-­stage kidney disease, phosphorus binders are usually necessary. They include calcium carbonate, calcium acetate,
sevelamer, ferric citrate, sucroferric oxyhydroxide, and lanthanum.
Aluminum-­containing phosphorus binders are no longer used in
patients with chronic kidney disease because of the risk of aluminum toxicity. Dialysis directly removes phosphorus from the blood
in patients with end-­stage kidney disease, but it is only an adjunct
to dietary restriction and phosphorus binders; removal by dialysis
does not keep up with normal dietary intake.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.7 Acid-­Base Balance
Larry A. Greenbaum

ACID-­BASE PHYSIOLOGY
Terminology

Chronic, mild derangements in acid-­base status may interfere with
normal growth and development, whereas acute, severe changes in pH
can be fatal. Control of acid-­base balance depends on the kidneys, the
lungs, and intracellular and extracellular buffers.
A normal pH is 7.35-­7.45. There is an inverse relationship between
the pH and the hydrogen ion concentration([H+]). At a pH of 7.40, [H+]
is 40 nmol/L. A normal serum sodium concentration, 140 mEq/L, is 1
million times higher. Maintaining a normal pH is necessary because
hydrogen ions are highly reactive and are especially likely to combine
with proteins, altering their function.
An acid is a substance that releases (“donates”) a hydrogen ion (H+).
A base is a substance that accepts a hydrogen ion. An acid (HA) can
dissociate into a hydrogen ion and a conjugate base (A−), as follows:
HA ↔ H + + A −

A strong acid is highly dissociated, so in this reaction, there is little HA. A weak acid is poorly dissociated; not all the hydrogen ions
are released from HA. A− acts as a base when the reaction moves
to the left. These reactions are in equilibrium. When HA is added
to the system, there is dissociation of some HA until the concentrations of H+ and A− increase enough that a new equilibrium is
reached. Addition of hydrogen ions causes a decrease in A− and an
increase in HA. Addition of A− causes a decrease in hydrogen ions
and an increase in HA.
Buffers are substances that attenuate the change in pH that occurs
when acids or bases are added to the body. Given the extremely low
[H+] in the body at physiologic pH, without buffers a small amount
of hydrogen ions could cause a dramatic decline in the pH. Buffers
prevent the decrease in pH by binding the added hydrogen ions, as
follows:
A − + H + → HA

The increase in [H+] drives this reaction to the right. Similarly, when
base is added to the body, buffers prevent the pH from increasing by
releasing hydrogen ions, as follows:
HA → A − + H +

The best buffers are weak acids and bases. This is because a buffer
works best when it is 50% dissociated (half HA and half A−). The pH
at which a buffer is 50% dissociated is its pKa (ionization constant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

510 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
of acid). The best physiologic buffers have a pKa close to 7.40. The
concentration of a buffer and its pKa determine the buffer’s effectiveness (buffering capacity). When the pH is lower than the pKa of
a buffer, there is more HA than A−. When the pH is higher than the
pKa, there is more A− than HA.
The bicarbonate and nonbicarbonate buffers protect the body against
major changes in pH. The bicarbonate buffer system is routinely
monitored clinically and is based on the relationship between carbon
dioxide (CO2) and bicarbonate (HCO3−):

and intracellular proteins, including hemoglobin. Proteins are effective buffers, largely because of the presence of the amino acid histidine, which has a side chain that can bind or release H+. The pKa of
histidine varies slightly, depending on its position in the protein molecule, but its average pKa is approximately 6.5. This is close enough to
a normal pH (7.4) to make histidine an effective buffer. Hemoglobin
and albumin have 34 and 16 histidine molecules, respectively.
Phosphate can bind up to three hydrogen molecules, so it can exist
as PO43−, HPO42−, H2PO41−, or H3PO4. However, at a physiologic pH,
most phosphate exists as either HPO42− or H2PO41−. H2PO41− is an
acid, and HPO42− is its conjugate base:

CO2 + H2 O ↔ H + + HCO3 −

H2 PO4 1 − ↔ H + + HPO4 2 −

Physiologic Buffers

CO2 acts as an acid in that, after combining with water, it releases
an H+; bicarbonate acts as its conjugate base in that it accepts an H+.
The pKa of this reaction is 6.1. The Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation
expresses the relationship among pH, pKa, and the concentrations of
an acid and its conjugate base. This relationship is valid for any buffer. The Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation for bicarbonate and CO2 is
as follows:
pH = 6.1 + log [HCO3 − ] / [CO2 ]

The Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation for the bicarbonate buffer system has three variables: pH, bicarbonate concentration
([HCO3−]), and carbon dioxide concentration ([CO2]). Thus, if
any two of these variables are known, it is possible to calculate the
third. When one is using the Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation, it
is important that CO2 and bicarbonate have the same units. CO2 is
reported clinically as mm Hg and must be multiplied by its solubility constant, 0.03 mmol/L/mm Hg, before the equation can be used.
Mathematical manipulation of the Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation produces the following relationship:
H  
 24  PCO2 / HCO3 

At a normal [H+] of 40 nmol (pH 7.40), the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide (Pco2), which is expressed as mm Hg in this equation, is 40 when the [HCO3−] is 24 mEq/L. This equation emphasizes
that [H+], and thus pH, can be determined by the ratio of Pco2 and
[HCO3−].
The bicarbonate buffer system is very effective because of the
high concentration of bicarbonate in the body (24 mEq/L) and
because it is an open system. The remaining body buffers are in
a closed system. The bicarbonate buffer system is an open system
because the lungs increase CO2 excretion when the blood CO2 concentration increases. When acid is added to the body, the following
reaction occurs:
H + + HCO3 − → CO2 + H2 O

In a closed system, the CO2 would increase. The higher CO2 concentration would lead to an increase in the reverse reaction:
CO2 + H2 O → H + + HCO3 −

This would increase [H+], limiting the buffering capacity of
bicarbonate. However, because the lungs excrete the excess CO2, the
reverse reaction does not increase; this fact enhances the buffering
capacity of bicarbonate. The same principle holds with the addition
of base, because the lungs decrease CO2 excretion and prevent the
CO2 level from falling. The lack of change in [CO2] dramatically
increases the buffering capacity of bicarbonate.
The nonbicarbonate buffers include proteins, phosphate, and
bone. Protein buffers consist of extracellular proteins, mostly albumin

The pKa of this reaction is 6.8, making phosphate an effective buffer.
The concentration of phosphate in the ECS is relatively low, limiting
the overall buffering capacity of phosphate; it is less important than
albumin. However, phosphate is found at a much higher concentration
in the urine, where it is an important buffer. In the ICS, most phosphate
is covalently bound to organic molecules (ATP), but it still serves as an
effective buffer.
Bone is an important buffer. Bone is basic—it is composed of compounds such as sodium bicarbonate and calcium carbonate—and thus
dissolution of bone releases base. This release can buffer an acid load,
although at the expense of bone density, if it occurs over an extended
period. In contrast, bone formation, by consuming base, helps buffer
excess base.
Clinically, we measure the extracellular pH, but it is the intracellular pH that affects cell function. Measurement of the intracellular pH
is unnecessary because changes in the intracellular pH parallel the
changes in the extracellular pH. However, the change in the intracellular pH tends to be less than the change in the extracellular pH because
of the greater buffering capacity in the ICS.

NORMAL ACID-­BASE BALANCE

The lungs and kidneys maintain a normal acid-­base balance. Carbon dioxide generated during normal metabolism is a weak acid.
The lungs prevent an increase in the Pco2 in the blood by excreting the CO2 that the body produces. CO2 production varies according to the body’s metabolic needs, increasing with physical activity.
The rapid pulmonary response to changes in the CO2 concentration
occurs via central sensing of the Pco2 and a subsequent increase or
decrease in ventilation to maintain a normal Pco2 (35-­45 mm Hg).
An increase in ventilation decreases the Pco2, and a decrease in
ventilation increases the Pco2.
The kidneys excrete endogenous acid. An adult normally produces approximately 1-­2 mEq/kg/24 hr of H+. Children normally
produce 2-­3 mEq/kg/24 hr of H+. The three principal sources of H+
are dietary protein metabolism, incomplete metabolism of carbohydrates and fat, and stool losses of bicarbonate. Because metabolism
of protein generates H+, endogenous acid production varies with
protein intake. The complete oxidation of carbohydrates or fats to
CO2 and water does not generate H+; the lungs remove the CO2.
However, incomplete metabolism of carbohydrates or fats produces
H+. Incomplete glucose metabolism can produce lactic acid, and
incomplete triglyceride metabolism can produce ketoacids, such as
β-­hydroxybutyric acid and acetoacetic acid. There is always some
baseline incomplete metabolism that contributes to endogenous
acid production. This factor increases in pathologic conditions,
such as lactic acidosis and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). Stool loss
of bicarbonate is the third major source of endogenous acid production. The stomach secretes H+, but most of the remainder of the GI
tract secretes bicarbonate, and the net effect is a loss of bicarbonate
from the body. To secrete bicarbonate, the cells of the intestine produce hydrogen ions that are released into the bloodstream. For each
bicarbonate molecule lost in the stool, the body gains one H+. This
source of endogenous acid production is normally minimal but may
increase dramatically in a patient with diarrhea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 511
The hydrogen ions formed from endogenous acid production are
neutralized by bicarbonate, potentially causing the bicarbonate concentration to decrease. The kidneys regenerate this bicarbonate by
secreting H+. The lungs cannot regenerate bicarbonate, even though
loss of CO2 lowers the [H+], as shown in the following reaction:

H + + HCO3 − → CO2 + H2 O

H + + HCO3 − → CO2 + H2 O

An increase in [HCO3−] also causes the reaction to move to the
right, which increases [CO2] while simultaneously decreasing [H+].
During a respiratory acidosis, increased renal generation of bicarbonate can decrease [H+] and increase pH but cannot repair the respiratory
acidosis. Both the lungs and the kidneys can affect [H+] and thus pH.
However, only the lungs can regulate [CO2], and only the kidneys can
regulate [HCO3−].

NH4

Proximal tubule

HCO3

Collecting
duct

HCO3

H
NH3
Loop of Henle

Fig. 73.7 Tubular sites involved in acid-­base balance. The proximal

tubule is the site where most filtered bicarbonate is reclaimed, even
though other sites along the nephron, especially the thick ascending
limb of the loop of Henle, resorb some of the filtered bicarbonate. The
collecting duct is the principal location for the hydrogen ion secretion
that acidifies the urine. The proximal tubule generates the ammonia
that serves as a urinary buffer in the collecting duct.

Tubular
lumen

Peritubular
fluid

Proximal tubule
Na
2

Filtered
 H
HCO3

Na

H
5
H2CO3

H2O

3HCO3

3

4

H2O  CO2

 OH

CO2

A decrease in [CO2] causes the reaction to move to the right, which
decreases [H+], but it also lowers [HCO3−]. During a metabolic acidosis,
hyperventilation can lower [CO2], decrease [H+], and thus increase pH. The
underlying metabolic acidosis is still present. Similarly, the kidneys cannot
correct an abnormally high [CO2], as shown in the following reaction:

HCO3
2Na
1
3K

Fig. 73.8 Resorption of filtered bicarbonate in the proximal tubule.

The Na+,K+-­ATPase (1) excretes sodium across the basolateral cell
membrane, maintaining a low intracellular sodium concentration.
The low intracellular sodium concentration provides the energy for
the Na+,H+ antiporter (2), which exchanges sodium from the tubular
lumen for intracellular hydrogen ions. The hydrogen ions that are secreted into the tubular lumen then combine with filtered bicarbonate
to generate carbonic acid. CO2 and water are produced from carbonic
acid (H2CO3). This reaction is catalyzed by luminal carbonic anhydrase
(3). CO2 diffuses into the cell and combines with OH− ions to generate bicarbonate. This reaction is catalyzed by an intracellular carbonic
anhydrase (4). The dissociation of water generates an OH− ion and an
H+ ion. The Na+,H+ antiporter (2) secretes the hydrogen ions. Bicarbonate ions cross the basolateral membrane and enter the blood via
the 3HCO3−/1Na+ co-­transporter (5). The energy for the 3HCO3−/1Na+
co-­transporter comes from the negatively charged cell interior, which
makes it electrically favorable to transport a net negative charge (i.e., 3
bicarbonates and only 1 sodium) out of the cell.

Renal Mechanisms

The kidneys regulate the serum bicarbonate concentration by modifying acid excretion in the urine. This requires a two-­step process. First,
the renal tubules resorb the bicarbonate that is filtered at the glomerulus. Second, there is tubular secretion of H+. The urinary excretion of
H+ generates bicarbonate that neutralizes endogenous acid production.
The tubular actions necessary for renal acid excretion occur throughout the nephron (Fig. 73.7).
The resorption of filtered bicarbonate is a necessary first step in
renal regulation of the acid-­base balance. A normal adult has a GFR
of approximately 180 L/24 hr. This fluid enters Bowman’s space with
[HCO3−] that is essentially identical to the plasma concentration, normally 24 mEq/L. Multiplying 180 L by 24 mEq/L indicates that >4,000
mEq of bicarbonate enters Bowman’s space each day. This bicarbonate, if not reclaimed along the nephron, would be lost in the urine and
would cause a profound metabolic acidosis.
The proximal tubule reclaims approximately 85% of the filtered bicarbonate (Fig. 73.8). The final 15% is reclaimed beyond
the proximal tubule, mostly in the ascending limb of the loop of
Henle. Bicarbonate molecules are not transported from the tubular
fluid into the cells of the proximal tubule. Rather, hydrogen ions
are secreted into the tubular fluid, leading to conversion of filtered
bicarbonate into CO2 and water. The secretion of H+ by the cells
of the proximal tubule is coupled to generation of intracellular
bicarbonate, which is transported across the basolateral membrane
of the proximal tubule cell and enters the capillaries. The bicarbonate produced in the cell replaces the bicarbonate filtered at the
glomerulus.
Increased bicarbonate resorption by the cells of the proximal
tubule—the result of increased H+ secretion—occurs in a variety of
clinical situations. Volume depletion increases bicarbonate resorption.
This is partially mediated by activation of the renin-­angiotensin system; angiotensin II increases bicarbonate resorption. Increased bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule is one of the mechanisms that
accounts for the metabolic alkalosis that may occur in some patients
with volume depletion. Other stimuli that increase bicarbonate
resorption include hypokalemia and an increased Pco2. This partially
explains the observations that hypokalemia causes a metabolic alkalosis, and that a respiratory acidosis leads to a compensatory increase in
serum [HCO3−].
Stimuli that decrease bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule
may cause a decrease in the serum [HCO3−]. A decrease in the Pco2
(respiratory alkalosis) decreases proximal tubule bicarbonate resorption, partially mediating the decrease in serum [HCO3−] that compensates for a respiratory alkalosis. PTH decreases proximal tubule
bicarbonate resorption; hyperparathyroidism may cause a mild metabolic acidosis. A variety of medications and diseases cause a metabolic
acidosis by impairing bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule.
Examples are the medication acetazolamide, which directly inhibits
carbonic anhydrase, and the many disorders that cause proximal RTA
(see Chapter 569.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

512 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
After reclaiming filtered bicarbonate, the kidneys perform the second step in renal acid-­base handling, the excretion of the acid created
by endogenous acid production. Excretion of acid occurs mostly in the
collecting duct, with a small role for the distal tubule.
Along with secretion of H+ by the tubular cells lining the collecting duct, adequate excretion of endogenous acid requires the presence of urinary buffers. The hydrogen pumps in the collecting duct
cannot lower the urine pH below 4.5. The [H+] at pH 4.5 is <0.04
mEq/L; it would require >25 L of water with a pH of 4.5 to excrete
one mEq of H+. A 10-­kg child, with an endogenous acid production
of 20 mEq H+ each day, would need to have a daily urinary output of
>500 L without the presence of urinary buffers. As in the blood, buffers in the urine attenuate the decrease in pH that occurs with the
addition of H+. The two principal urinary buffers are phosphate and
ammonia.
Urinary phosphate is proportional to dietary intake. Whereas
most of the phosphate filtered at the glomerulus is resorbed in the
proximal tubule, the urinary phosphate concentration is usually
much greater than the serum phosphate concentration. This arrangement allows phosphate to serve as an effective buffer through the following reaction:
H + + HPO4 2–→ H2 PO4 1–

The pKa of this reaction is 6.8, making phosphate an effective buffer
as the urinary pH decreases from 7.0 to 5.0 within the collecting duct.
Although phosphate is an effective buffer, its buffering capacity is limited by its concentration; there is no mechanism for increasing urinary
phosphate excretion in response to changes in acid-­base status.
In contrast, ammonia production can be modified, allowing for
regulation of acid excretion. The buffering capacity of ammonia (NH3)
is based on the reaction of ammonia with hydrogen ions to form
ammonium:
NH3 + H + → NH4 +

The cells of the proximal tubule are the source of the excreted
ammonia, mostly through metabolism of glutamine through the following reactions:
Glutamine → NH4 + + glutamate −

Tubular
lumen

Peritubular
fluid

Collecting duct
Na

Cl

1

3
HCO3

H
H
HPO42  H

H2O

H2PO4

2
OH  CO2

NH4

H  NH3

HCO3
NH3

NH4

Fig. 73.9 Secretion of hydrogen ions in the collecting duct. The disso-

ciation of water generates an OH− ion and an H+ ion. The H+-­ATPase (1)
secretes hydrogen ions into the tubular lumen. Bicarbonate is formed
when an OH− ion combines with CO2 in a reaction mediated by carbonic anhydrase (2). Bicarbonate ions cross the basolateral membrane and
enter the blood via the HCO3−/Cl− exchanger (3). The hydrogen ions
in the tubular lumen are buffered by phosphate and ammonia (NH3).
NH3 can diffuse from the peritubular fluid into the tubular lumen, but
ammonium (NH4+) cannot pass through the cells of the collecting duct.

Glutamate − → NH4 + + α − ketoglutarate3 −

The metabolism of glutamine generates two ammonium ions. In
addition, the metabolism of α-­ketoglutarate generates two bicarbonate molecules. The ammonium ions are secreted into the lumen of the
proximal tubule, whereas the bicarbonate molecules exit the proximal
tubule cells via the basolateral Na+,3HCO3− co-­transporter (see Fig.
73.8). This arrangement would seem to accomplish the goal of excreting H+ (as NH4+) and regenerating bicarbonate molecules. However,
the ammonium ions secreted in the proximal tubule do not remain
within the tubular lumen. Cells of the TAL of the loop of Henle resorb
the ammonium ions. The result is that there is a high medullary interstitial concentration of ammonia, but the tubular fluid entering the
collecting duct does not have significant amounts of ammonium ions.
Moreover, the hydrogen ions that were secreted with ammonia (as
ammonium ions) in the proximal tubule enter the bloodstream, canceling the effect of the bicarbonate generated in the proximal tubule.
The excretion of ammonium ions, and thus of hydrogen ions, depends
on the cells of the collecting duct.
The cells of the collecting duct secrete H+ and regenerate bicarbonate, which is returned to the bloodstream (Fig. 73.9). This bicarbonate
neutralizes endogenous acid production. Phosphate and ammonia
buffer the H+ secreted by the collecting duct. Ammonia is an effective buffer because of the high concentrations in the medullary interstitium and because the cells of the collecting duct are permeable
to ammonia but not to ammonium. As ammonia diffuses into the
lumen of the collecting duct, the low urine pH causes almost all the
ammonia to be converted into ammonium. This process maintains
a low luminal ammonia concentration. Because the luminal pH is
lower than the pH in the medullary interstitium, there is a higher
concentration of ammonia within the medullary interstitium than in
the tubular lumen, favoring movement of ammonia into the tubular
lumen. Even though the concentration of ammonium in the tubular
lumen is higher than in the interstitium, the cells of the collecting
duct are impermeable to ammonium, preventing back-­diffusion of
ammonium out of the tubular lumen and permitting ammonia to be
an effective buffer.
The kidneys adjust H+ excretion according to physiologic needs.
There is variation in endogenous acid production, largely a result of
diet and pathophysiologic stresses, such as diarrheal losses of bicarbonate, which increase the need for acid excretion. H+ excretion is
increased by upregulation of H+ secretion in the collecting duct, causing the pH of the urine to decrease. This response is prompt, occurring
within hours of an acid load, but it is limited by the buffering capacity
of the urine; the hydrogen pumps in the collecting duct cannot lower
the pH to <4.5. A more significant increase in acid excretion requires
upregulation of ammonia production by the proximal tubule so that
more ammonia is available to serve as a buffer in the tubular lumen of
the collecting duct. This response to a low serum pH reaches its maximum within 5-­6 days; ammonia excretion can increase approximately
10-­fold over the baseline value.
Acid excretion by the collecting duct increases in a number of different clinical situations. The extracellular pH is the most important regulator of renal acid excretion. A decrease in the extracellular pH from
either a respiratory or a metabolic acidosis causes an increase in renal
acid excretion. Aldosterone stimulates H+ excretion in the collecting
duct, causing an increase in the serum bicarbonate concentration.
This explains the metabolic alkalosis that occurs with primary hyperaldosteronism or secondary hyperaldosteronism caused by volume
depletion. Hypokalemia increases acid secretion, by both stimulating
ammonia production in the proximal tubule and increasing H+ secretion in the collecting duct. Hypokalemia therefore tends to produce a
metabolic alkalosis. Hyperkalemia has the opposite effects, which may
cause a metabolic acidosis.
In patients with an increased pH, the kidney has two principal mechanisms for correcting the problem. First, less bicarbonate is resorbed
in the proximal tubule, leading to an increase in urinary bicarbonate
losses. Second, in a limited number of specialized cells, the process for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 513
secretion of H+ by the collecting duct can be reversed (see Fig. 73.9),
leading to secretion of bicarbonate into the tubular lumen and secretion of hydrogen ions into the peritubular fluid, where they enter the
bloodstream.

CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF ACID-­BASE DISORDERS

The following rearrangement of the Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation
emphasizes the relationship among Pco2, bicarbonate concentration,
and hydrogen ion concentration:
[ +]
H = 24 × PCO2 [HCO-3 ]
An increase in the Pco2 or a decrease in [HCO3−] increases [H+];
the pH decreases. A decrease in the Pco2 or an increase in [HCO3−]
decreases [H+]; the pH increases.

Terminology

Acidemia is a pH below normal (<7.35), and alkalemia is a pH above
normal (>7.45). An acidosis is a pathologic process that causes an
increase in [H+], and an alkalosis is a pathologic process that causes a
decrease in [H+]. Whereas acidemia is always accompanied by an acidosis, a patient can have an acidosis and a low, normal, or high pH.
For example, a patient may have a mild metabolic acidosis but a simultaneous, severe respiratory alkalosis; the net result may be alkalemia.
Acidemia and alkalemia indicate the pH abnormality; acidosis and
alkalosis indicate the pathologic process that is taking place.
A simple acid-­base disorder is a single primary disturbance.
During a simple metabolic disorder, there is respiratory compensation. With a metabolic acidosis, the decrease in the pH increases
the ventilatory drive, causing a decrease in Pco2. The decrease in
the [CO2] leads to an increase in the pH. This appropriate respiratory compensation is expected with a primary metabolic acidosis.
Despite the decrease in [CO2], appropriate respiratory compensation is not a respiratory alkalosis, even though it is sometimes
erroneously called a “compensatory” respiratory alkalosis. A low
Pco2 can result either from a primary respiratory alkalosis or from
appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis.
Appropriate respiratory compensation also occurs with a primary

metabolic alkalosis, although in this case [CO2] increases to attenuate the increase in the pH. The respiratory compensation for a metabolic process happens quickly and is complete within 12-­24 hours;
it cannot overcompensate for or normalize the pH.
During a primary respiratory process, there is metabolic compensation, mediated by the kidneys. The kidneys respond to a respiratory
acidosis by increasing H+ excretion, thereby increasing bicarbonate
generation and raising the serum [HCO3−]. The kidneys increase bicarbonate excretion to compensate for a respiratory alkalosis; [HCO3−]
decreases. Unlike respiratory compensation, which occurs rapidly, it
takes 3-­4 days for the kidneys to complete appropriate metabolic compensation. There is, however, a small and rapid compensatory change
in [HCO3−] during a primary respiratory process. The expected appropriate metabolic compensation for a respiratory disorder depends on
whether the process is acute or chronic.
A mixed acid-­base disorder is present when there is more than
one primary acid-­base disturbance. An infant with bronchopulmonary dysplasia may have a respiratory acidosis from chronic lung disease and a metabolic alkalosis from the furosemide used to treat the
chronic lung disease. More dramatically, a child with pneumonia and
sepsis may have severe acidemia because of a combined metabolic
acidosis caused by lactic acid and respiratory acidosis caused by ventilatory failure.
There are formulas for calculating the appropriate metabolic or
respiratory compensation for the six primary simple acid-­base disorders (Table 73.11). The appropriate compensation is expected in
a simple disorder; it is not optional. If a patient does not have the
appropriate compensation, a mixed acid-­base disorder is present.
For example, if a patient has a primary metabolic acidosis with a
serum [HCO3−] of 10 mEq/L, the expected respiratory compensation is [CO2] of 23 mm Hg ± 2 (1.5 × 10 + 8 ± 2 = 23 ± 2; see Table
73.11). If the patient’s [CO2] is >25 mm Hg, a concurrent respiratory acidosis is present; [CO2] is higher than expected. A patient
may have a respiratory acidosis despite a CO2 level below the “normal” value of 35-­45 mm Hg. In this example, [CO2] <21 mm Hg
indicates a concurrent respiratory alkalosis; [CO2] is lower than exp
ected.

Diagnosis
Table 73.11  Appropriate Compensation During Simple
Acid-­Base Disorders
DISORDER

EXPECTED COMPENSATION

Metabolic acidosis

Pco2 = 1.5 × [HCO3−] + 8 ± 2

Metabolic alkalosis

Pco2 increases by 7 mm Hg for each
10 mEq/L increase in serum [HCO3−]

Respiratory Acidosis
Acute

[HCO3−] increases by 3.5 for each
10 mm Hg increase in Pco2

Chronic
Respiratory Alkalosis
Acute
Chronic

[HCO3−] increases by 1 for each 10 mm
Hg increase in Pco2

[HCO3−] falls by 2 for each 10 mm Hg
decrease in Pco2
[HCO3−] falls by 4 for each 10 mm Hg
decrease in Pco2

Table 73.12  Normal Values of Arterial Blood Gases
pH

7.35-­7.45

[HCO3−]

20-­28 mEq/L

Pco2

35-­45 mm Hg

A systematic evaluation of an arterial blood gas (ABG) sample, combined with the clinical history, can usually explain the patient’s acid-­
base disturbance. Assessment of an ABG sample requires knowledge
of normal values (Table 73.12). In most cases, this is accomplished
through a three-­step process (Fig. 73.10):
1.	Determine whether acidemia or alkalemia is present.
2.	Determine a cause of the acidemia or alkalemia.
3.	Determine whether a mixed disorder is present.
Most patients with an acid-­base disturbance have an abnormal
pH, although there are two exceptions. One exception is in the
patient with a mixed disorder in which the two processes have
opposite effects on pH (a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory alkalosis) and cause changes in [H+] that are comparable in magnitude,
although opposite. The other exception is in the patient with a
simple chronic respiratory alkalosis; in some cases, the appropriate
metabolic compensation is enough to normalize the pH. In both
situations, the presence of an acid-­base disturbance is deduced
because of the abnormal CO2 and bicarbonate levels. Determining
the acid-­base disturbance in these patients requires proceeding to
the third step of the process.
The second step requires inspection of the serum [HCO3−] and Pco2
to determine a cause of the abnormal pH (see Fig. 73.10). In most
cases, there is only one obvious explanation for the abnormal pH. In
some mixed disorders, however, there may be two possibilities (e.g.,
a high Pco2 and a low [HCO3−] in a patient with acidemia). In such
cases, the patient has two causes for abnormal pH—a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory acidosis, in this instance—and it is unnecessary to
proceed to the third step.
The third step requires determining whether the patient’s compensation is appropriate. It is assumed that the primary disorder was

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

514 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Acidemia or Alkalemia
Step 1
Alkalemia

Acidemia

Decreased
[HCO3]

Step 2

Respiratory
acidosis

Metabolic
acidosis

Step 3

Low
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Acid.
and
Resp.
Alk.

Expected
PCO2
Simple
Met.
Acid.

Increased
[HCO3]

Increased
PCO2

High
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Acid.
and
Resp.
Acid.

Low
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Acid.
and
Met.
Acid.

Expected
HCO3
Simple
Resp.
Acid.

Decreased
PCO2

Metabolic
alkalosis

High
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Acid.
and
Met.
Alk.

Low
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Alk.
and
Resp.
Alk.

Expected
PCO2
Simple
Met.
Alk.

Respiratory
alkalosis

High
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Alk.
and
Resp.
Acid.

Low
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Alk.
and
Met.
Acid.

Expected
HCO3
Simple
Resp.
Alk.

High
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Alk.
and
Met.
Alk.

Fig. 73.10 Three-­step process for interpreting acid-­base disturbances. In step 1, determine whether the pH is low (acidemia) or high (alkalemia).

In step 2, establish an explanation for the acidemia or alkalemia. In step 3, calculate the expected compensation (see Table 73.11) and determine
whether a mixed disturbance is present. Met. Acid., metabolic acidosis; Met. Alk., metabolic alkalosis; Resp. Acid., respiratory acidosis; Resp. Alk.,
respiratory alkalosis.

diagnosed in the second step, and the expected compensation is calculated (see Table 73.11). If the compensation is appropriate, a simple
acid-­base disorder is present. If the compensation is not appropriate, a
mixed disorder is present. The identity of the second disorder is determined by deciding whether the compensation is too little or too much
compared with what was expected (see Fig. 73.10).
The history is always useful in evaluating and diagnosing patients
with acid-­base disturbances. It is especially helpful in a respiratory process. The expected metabolic compensation for a respiratory process
changes according to whether the process is acute or chronic, which
can be deduced only from the history. The metabolic compensation for
an acute respiratory acidosis is less than that for a chronic respiratory
acidosis. In a patient with a respiratory acidosis, a small increase in
[HCO3−] would be consistent with a simple acute respiratory acidosis
or a mixed disorder (a chronic respiratory acidosis and a metabolic
acidosis). Only the history can differentiate among the possibilities.
Knowledge of the length of the respiratory process and the presence or
absence of a risk factor for a metabolic acidosis (diarrhea) allows the
correct conclusion to be reached.
An alternative to the physiologic approach just described (which
includes calculation of the anion gap; see later) is the physiochemical
approach, often called the Stewart method. Some view this approach
as superior to the physiologic approach, but it requires multiple calculations and additional laboratory values and is thus more challenging
to use in the clinical setting. The physiochemical approach requires
measurement of the blood pH and Pco2 and calculation of the apparent strong ion difference (SIDa), the effective strong ion difference
(SIDe), the strong ion gap (SIG), and the total concentration of weak
acids (ATOT).

METABOLIC ACIDOSIS

Metabolic acidosis occurs frequently in hospitalized children; diarrhea
is the most common etiology. For a patient with an unknown medical
problem, the presence of a metabolic acidosis is often helpful diagnostically, because it suggests a relatively narrow differential diagnosis.
Patients with a metabolic acidosis have a low serum [HCO3−],
although not every patient with a low serum [HCO3−] has a metabolic
acidosis. The exception is the patient with a respiratory alkalosis, which
causes a decrease in the serum [HCO3−] as part of appropriate renal
compensation. In a patient with an isolated metabolic acidosis, there is
a predictable decrease in the blood [CO2], as follows:

PCO2 = 1.5 × [HCO-3 ] + 8 ± 2

A mixed acid-­base disturbance is present if the respiratory compensation is not appropriate. If the Pco2 is greater than predicted,
the patient has a concurrent respiratory acidosis. A lower Pco2 than
predicted indicates a concurrent respiratory alkalosis or, less frequently, an isolated respiratory alkalosis. Because the appropriate
respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis never normalizes
the patient’s pH, the presence of a normal pH and a low [HCO3−]
occurs only if some degree of respiratory alkalosis is present. In this
situation, distinguishing an isolated chronic respiratory alkalosis
from a mixed metabolic acidosis and acute respiratory alkalosis
may be possible only clinically. In contrast, the combination of a
low serum pH and a low [HCO3−] occurs only if a metabolic acidosis is present.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

There are many causes of a metabolic acidosis (Table 73.13), resulting
from three basic mechanisms:
1.	Loss of bicarbonate from the body
2.	Impaired ability to excrete acid by the kidney
3.	Addition of acid to the body (exogenous or endogenous)
Diarrhea, the most common cause of metabolic acidosis in children, causes a loss of bicarbonate from the body. The amount of
bicarbonate lost in the stool depends on the volume of diarrhea
and [HCO3−] of the stool, which tends to increase with more severe
diarrhea. The kidneys attempt to balance the losses by increasing
acid secretion, but metabolic acidosis occurs when this compensation is inadequate. Diarrhea often causes volume depletion because
of losses of sodium and water, potentially exacerbating the acidosis
by causing shock and a lactic acidosis. In addition, diarrheal losses
of potassium lead to hypokalemia. Moreover, the volume depletion
causes increased production of aldosterone. This increase stimulates renal retention of sodium, helping to maintain intravascular
volume, but also leads to increased urinary losses of potassium,
exacerbating the hypokalemia.
There are four forms of renal tubular acidosis (RTA): distal (type I),
proximal (type II), mixed (type III), and hyperkalemic (type IV) (see
Chapter 569). In distal RTA, children may have accompanying hypokalemia, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, and nephrocalcinosis. Failure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 515
Table 73.13  Causes of Metabolic Acidosis
NORMAL ANION GAP
Diarrhea
RTA
Distal (type I) RTA (OMIM 179800/602722/267300/611590)*
Proximal (type II) RTA (OMIM 604278)†
Mixed (type III) RTA (OMIM 259730)
Hyperkalemic (type IV) RTA (OMIM 201910/264350/177735/145260)‡
Urinary tract diversions
Posthypocapnia
Ammonium chloride intake
INCREASED ANION GAP
Lactic Acidosis
Tissue hypoxia
Shock
Hypoxemia
Severe anemia
Liver failure
Malignancy
Intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Inborn errors of metabolism
Medications
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Metformin
Propofol
Linezolid
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Starvation ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Kidney Failure
Poisoning
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Salicylate
Toluene
Paraldehyde
*Along with these genetic disorders, distal RTA may be secondary to renal disease or
medications.
†Most cases of proximal RTA are not caused by this primary genetic disorder. Proximal

RTA is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has multiple etiologies.
‡Hyperkalemic RTA can be secondary to a genetic disorder (some of the more common

are listed) or other etiologies.
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/omim); RTA, renal tubular acidosis.

to thrive because of chronic metabolic acidosis is the most common
presenting complaint. Patients with distal RTA cannot acidify their
urine and thus have a urine pH >5.5 despite a metabolic acidosis.
Proximal RTA is rarely present in isolation. In most patients,
proximal RTA is part of Fanconi syndrome, a generalized dysfunction of the proximal tubule. The dysfunction leads to glycosuria,
aminoaciduria, and excessive urinary losses of phosphate and uric
acid. The presence of a low serum uric acid level, glycosuria, and
aminoaciduria is helpful diagnostically. Chronic hypophosphatemia
leads to rickets in children (see Chapter 69). Rickets and/or failure
to thrive may be the presenting complaint. The ability to acidify
the urine is intact in proximal RTA; thus untreated patients have a
urine pH <5.5. However, bicarbonate therapy increases bicarbonate losses in the urine, and the urine pH increases. A mixed RTA
(combined distal and proximal) occurs in patients with autosomal
recessive osteopetrosis caused by pathologic variants in the gene for
carbonic anhydrase II.

In hyperkalemic RTA, renal excretion of acid and potassium is
impaired. Hyperkalemic RTA is the result of hyperkalemia, absence
of aldosterone, or inability of the kidney to respond to aldosterone.
In severe aldosterone deficiency, as occurs with congenital adrenal
hyperplasia because of 21α-­hydroxylase deficiency, the hyperkalemia
and metabolic acidosis are accompanied by hyponatremia and volume
depletion from renal salt wasting. Incomplete aldosterone deficiency
causes less severe electrolyte disturbances; children may have isolated
hyperkalemic RTA, hyperkalemia without acidosis, or isolated hyponatremia. Patients may have aldosterone deficiency caused by decreased
renin production by the kidney; renin normally stimulates aldosterone
synthesis. Children with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism usually
have either isolated hyperkalemia or hyperkalemic RTA. The manifestations of aldosterone resistance depend on the severity of the resistance. In the autosomal recessive form of pseudohypoaldosteronism
type I, which is the result of an absence of the sodium channel that
normally responds to aldosterone, there is often severe salt wasting
and hyponatremia. In contrast, the aldosterone resistance in kidney
transplant recipients usually produces either isolated hyperkalemia or
hyperkalemic RTA; hyponatremia is unusual. Similarly, the medications that cause hyperkalemic RTA do not cause hyponatremia. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II, an autosomal dominant disorder also
known as Gordon syndrome, is a unique cause of hyperkalemic RTA
because the genetic defect causes volume expansion and hypertension.
Children with abnormal urinary tracts, usually secondary to congenital malformations, may require diversion of urine through intestinal segments. Ureterosigmoidostomy, anastomosis of a ureter to the
sigmoid colon, almost always produces a metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia. Consequently, ileal conduits are the more commonly used
procedure, although there is still a risk of a metabolic acidosis.
The appropriate metabolic compensation for a chronic respiratory alkalosis is a decrease in renal acid excretion. The resultant
decrease in the serum [HCO3−] lessens the alkalemia caused by the
respiratory alkalosis. If the respiratory alkalosis resolves quickly,
the patient continues to have a decreased serum [HCO3−], causing
acidemia as the result of a metabolic acidosis. This resolves over 1-­2
days through increased acid excretion by the kidneys.
Lactic acidosis (l-­lactic) typically occurs when inadequate oxygen delivery to the tissues leads to anaerobic metabolism and excess
production of lactic acid. Lactic acidosis may be secondary to shock,
severe anemia, or hypoxemia. When the underlying cause of the
lactic acidosis is alleviated, the liver is able to metabolize the accumulated lactate into bicarbonate, correcting the metabolic acidosis.
There is normally some tissue production of lactate metabolized
by the liver. In children with severe liver dysfunction, impairment of lactate metabolism may produce a lactic acidosis. Rarely,
a metabolically active malignancy grows so fast that its blood supply becomes inadequate, with resultant anaerobic metabolism and
lactic acidosis. Patients who have short bowel syndrome resulting
from small bowel resection can have bacterial overgrowth. In these
patients, excessive intestinal bacterial metabolism of glucose into
d-­lactic acid can cause a lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis occurs in
a variety of inborn errors of metabolism, especially those affecting mitochondrial oxidation (see Chapters 107.4 and 108). Medications also can cause lactic acidosis. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors that are used to treat HIV infection inhibit mitochondrial
replication; lactic acidosis is a rare complication, although elevated
serum lactate concentrations without acidosis are quite common.
Metformin, used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, is most likely to
cause a lactic acidosis in patients with chronic kidney disease. High
dosages and prolonged use of propofol can cause lactic acidosis.
Propylene glycol is a diluent in a variety of oral and IV medications;
excessive intake causes a lactic acidosis, principally from accumulation of d-­lactic acid. Linezolid is another medication that may cause
a lactic acidosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

516 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
In insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus, inadequate insulin leads to
hyperglycemia and DKA (see Chapter 629). Production of acetoacetic
acid and β-­hydroxybutyric acid causes the metabolic acidosis. Administration of insulin corrects the underlying metabolic problem and
permits conversion of acetoacetate and β-­hydroxybutyrate into bicarbonate, which helps correct the metabolic acidosis. However, in some
patients, urinary losses of acetoacetate and β-­hydroxybutyrate may
be substantial, preventing rapid regeneration of bicarbonate. In these
patients, full correction of the metabolic acidosis requires renal regeneration of bicarbonate, a slower process. The hyperglycemia causes an
osmotic diuresis, usually producing volume depletion, along with substantial losses of potassium, sodium, and phosphate.
In starvation ketoacidosis the lack of glucose leads to ketoacid production, which in turn can produce a metabolic acidosis, although it
is usually mild as a result of increased acid secretion by the kidney. In
alcoholic ketoacidosis, which is much less common in children than
in adults, the acidosis usually follows a combination of an alcoholic
binge with vomiting and poor intake of food. The acidosis is potentially
more severe than with isolated starvation, and the blood glucose level
may be low, normal, or high. Hypoglycemia and acidosis also suggest
an inborn error of metabolism.
Kidney failure causes a metabolic acidosis because of the need for
the kidneys to excrete the acid produced by normal metabolism. With
mild or moderate chronic kidney disease, the remaining nephrons are
usually able to compensate by increasing acid excretion. When the
GFR is <20–30% of normal, the compensation is inadequate, and a
metabolic acidosis develops. In some children, especially those with
chronic kidney disease because of tubular damage, the acidosis develops at a higher GFR because of a concurrent defect in acid secretion by
the distal tubule (distal RTA).
A variety of toxic ingestions can cause a metabolic acidosis (see
Chapter 94). Salicylate intoxication is now much less common because
aspirin is no longer recommended for fever control in children. Acute
salicylate intoxication occurs after a large overdose. Chronic salicylate
intoxication is possible with gradual buildup of the drug. Especially
in adults, respiratory alkalosis may be the dominant acid-­base disturbance. In children, the metabolic acidosis is usually the more significant
finding. Other symptoms of salicylate intoxication are fever, seizures,
lethargy, and coma. Hyperventilation may be particularly marked. Tinnitus, vertigo, and hearing impairment are more likely with chronic
salicylate intoxication.
Ethylene glycol, a component of antifreeze, is converted in the
liver to glyoxylic and oxalic acids, causing a severe metabolic acidosis.
Excessive oxalate excretion causes calcium oxalate crystals to appear in
the urine, and calcium oxalate precipitation in the kidney tubules can
cause kidney failure. The toxicity of methanol ingestion also depends
on liver metabolism; formic acid is the toxic end product that causes
the metabolic acidosis and other sequelae, which include damage to
the optic nerve and CNS. Symptoms may include nausea, emesis, visual
impairment, and altered mental status. Toluene inhalation and paraldehyde ingestion are other potential causes of a metabolic acidosis.
Many inborn errors of metabolism cause a metabolic acidosis (see
Chapters 104-­107). The metabolic acidosis may be the result of excessive production of ketoacids, lactic acid, and other organic anions.
Some patients have accompanying hypoglycemia or hyperammonemia. In most patients, the acidosis occurs episodically during acute
decompensations, which may be precipitated by ingestion of specific
dietary substrates, the stress of a mild illness, or poor compliance
with dietary or medical therapy. In a few inborn errors of metabolism,
patients have a chronic metabolic acidosis.

Clinical Manifestations

The underlying disorder usually produces most of the signs and symptoms in children with a mild or moderate metabolic acidosis. The clinical manifestations of the acidosis are related to the degree of acidemia;
patients with appropriate respiratory compensation and less severe

acidemia have fewer manifestations than those with a concomitant
respiratory acidosis. At a serum pH <7.2, there may be impaired cardiac contractility and an increased risk of arrhythmias, especially if
underlying heart disease or other predisposing electrolyte disorders are
present. With acidemia, there may be a decrease in the cardiovascular
response to catecholamines, potentially exacerbating hypotension in
children with volume depletion or shock. Acidemia causes vasoconstriction of the pulmonary vasculature, which is especially problematic in newborn infants with persistent pulmonary hypertension (see
Chapter 130).
The normal respiratory response to metabolic acidosis—compensatory hyperventilation— may be subtle with mild metabolic acidosis,
but it causes discernible increased respiratory effort with worsening acidemia. The acute metabolic effects of acidemia include insulin
resistance, increased protein degradation, and reduced ATP synthesis.
Chronic metabolic acidosis causes failure to thrive in children. Acidemia causes potassium to move from the ICS to the ECS, thereby
increasing the serum [K+]. Severe acidemia impairs brain metabolism,
eventually resulting in lethargy and coma.

Diagnosis

The etiology of a metabolic acidosis is often apparent from the history
and physical examination. Acutely, diarrhea and shock are common
causes of a metabolic acidosis. Shock, which causes a lactic acidosis,
is usually apparent on physical examination and can be secondary
to dehydration, acute blood loss, sepsis, or heart disease. Failure to
thrive suggests a chronic metabolic acidosis, as with renal insufficiency
or RTA. New onset of polyuria occurs in children with undiagnosed
diabetes mellitus and DKA. Metabolic acidosis with seizures and/
or a depressed sensorium, especially in an infant, warrants consideration of an inborn error of metabolism. Meningitis and sepsis with
lactic acidosis are more common explanations for metabolic acidosis
with neurologic signs and symptoms. Identification of a toxic ingestion (e.g., ethylene glycol, methanol) is especially important because
of the potentially excellent response to specific therapy. A variety of
medications can cause a metabolic acidosis, whether prescribed or
accidentally ingested. Hepatomegaly and metabolic acidosis may occur
in children with sepsis, congenital or acquired heart disease, hepatic
failure, or inborn errors of metabolism.
Basic laboratory tests in a child with a metabolic acidosis should
include measurements of BUN, serum creatinine, serum glucose, urinalysis, and serum electrolytes. Metabolic acidosis, hyperglycemia, glycosuria, and ketonuria support a diagnosis of DKA. Starvation causes
ketosis, but the metabolic acidosis, if present, is usually mild (HCO3−
>18 mEq/L). Most children with ketosis from poor intake and metabolic acidosis have a concomitant disorder, such as gastroenteritis with
diarrhea, that explains the metabolic acidosis. Alternatively, metabolic
acidosis with or without ketosis occurs in inborn errors of metabolism;
patients with these disorders may have hyperglycemia, normoglycemia,
or hypoglycemia. Adrenal insufficiency may cause metabolic acidosis
and hypoglycemia. Metabolic acidosis with hypoglycemia also occurs
with liver failure. Metabolic acidosis, normoglycemia, and glycosuria
occur in children when type II RTA is part of Fanconi syndrome; the
defect in resorption of glucose by the proximal tubule of the kidney
causes the glycosuria.
The serum [K+] is often abnormal in children with a metabolic acidosis. Even though a metabolic acidosis causes potassium to move
from the ICS to the ECS, many patients with a metabolic acidosis have
a low serum [K+] because of excessive body losses of K+. With diarrhea, there are high stool losses of K+ and, often, secondary renal losses
of K+, whereas in type I or type II RTA, there are increased urinary
losses of K+. In DKA, urinary losses of K+ are high, but the shift of
K+ out of cells because of a lack of insulin and metabolic acidosis is
especially significant. Consequently, the initial serum [K+] can be low,
normal, or high, even though total body K+ is almost always decreased.
The serum [K+] is usually increased in patients with acidosis caused

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 517
Normal plasma
UC

Acidosis (no gap)
UC

UA

UC
UA

HCO3
Na

Cl

UA

HCO3

HCO3

Na

Acidosis (gap)

Na
Cl

Cl

Fig. 73.11 Anion gap. The anion gap is the difference between the

sodium concentration and the combined concentrations of chloride
and bicarbonate (vertical black bars). In both a gap and a nongap metabolic acidosis, there is a decrease in the bicarbonate concentration.
There is an increase in unmeasured anions (UA) in patients with a gap
metabolic acidosis. In a nongap metabolic acidosis, there is an increase
in the serum chloride concentration. UC, Unmeasured cations.

by renal insufficiency; urinary K+ excretion is impaired. The combination of metabolic acidosis, hyperkalemia, and hyponatremia occurs in
patients with severe aldosterone deficiency (adrenogenital syndrome)
or aldosterone resistance. Patients with less severe, type IV RTA often
have only hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis. Very ill children with
metabolic acidosis may have an elevated serum K+ because of a combination of renal insufficiency, tissue breakdown, and a shift of K+ from
the ICS to the ECS secondary to the metabolic acidosis.
The plasma anion gap is useful for evaluating patients with a metabolic acidosis. It divides patients into two diagnostic groups, those with
normal anion gap and those with increased anion gap. The following
formula determines the anion gap:
]
[
Anion gap = Na + − ([Cl − ] + [HCO3 − ])

A normal anion gap is 4-­11, although there is variation among laboratories. Approximately 11 mEq of the anion gap is normally secondary
to albumin. A 1 g/dL decrease in the albumin concentration decreases
the anion gap by approximately 2.5 mEq/L. Thus, if the albumin is not
close to 4 g/dL, the anion gap should be corrected for the albumin
concentration:
Anion gap ( corrected for albumin) = Na + − ([ Cl − ] +
[HCO3 − ]) + [2.5 x ( 4 − observed albumin)]

The number of serum anions must equal the number of serum cations to maintain electrical neutrality (Fig. 73.11). The anion gap is the
difference between the measured cation (Na+) and the measured anions
(Cl− + bicarbonate). The anion gap is also the difference between the
unmeasured cations (K+, magnesium, calcium) and the unmeasured
anions (albumin, phosphate, urate, sulfate). An increased anion gap
occurs when there is an increase in unmeasured anions. With a lactic acidosis, there is endogenous production of lactic acid, which is
composed of positively charged hydrogen ions and negatively charged
lactate anions. The hydrogen ions are largely buffered by serum bicarbonate, resulting in a decrease in [HCO3−]. The hydrogen ions that are
not buffered by bicarbonate cause the serum pH to decrease. The lactate anions remain, causing the increase in the anion gap.

An increase in unmeasured anions, along with H+ generation, is
present in all causes of an increased gap metabolic acidosis (see Table
73.13). In DKA, the ketoacids β-­hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate are
the unmeasured anions. In kidney failure there is retention of unmeasured anions, including phosphate, urate, and sulfate. The increase in
unmeasured anions in kidney failure is usually less than the decrease
in [HCO3−]. Kidney failure is thus a mix of an increased-­gap and a
normal-­gap metabolic acidosis. The normal-­gap metabolic acidosis is
especially prominent in children with kidney failure because of tubular
damage, as occurs with renal dysplasia or obstructive uropathy, because
these patients have a concurrent RTA. The unmeasured anions in toxic
ingestions vary: formate in methanol intoxication, glycolate in ethylene
glycol intoxication, and lactate and ketoacids in salicylate intoxication.
In inborn errors of metabolism, the unmeasured anions depend on the
specific etiology and may include ketoacids, lactate, and other organic
anions. In a few inborn errors of metabolism, the acidosis occurs without generation of unmeasured anions; thus the anion gap is normal.
A normal–anion gap metabolic acidosis occurs when there is a
decrease in [HCO3−] without an increase in the unmeasured anions.
With diarrhea, there is a loss of bicarbonate in the stool, causing a
decrease in the serum pH and [HCO3−]; the serum [Cl−] increases to
maintain electrical neutrality (see Fig. 73.11). Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis is an alternative term for a normal–anion gap metabolic
acidosis. Calculation of the anion gap is more precise than using [Cl −]
to differentiate between a normal-­gap and an increased-­gap metabolic acidosis, in that the anion gap directly determines the presence
of unmeasured anions. Electrical neutrality dictates that the [Cl−]
increases or decreases according to the serum [Na+], making [Cl−] a
less reliable predictor of unmeasured anions than the more direct measure, calculation of the anion gap.
An increase in unmeasured cations, such as calcium, potassium,
and magnesium, decreases the anion gap. Conversely, a decrease in
unmeasured cations is a very unusual cause of an increased anion gap.
Because of these variables, the broad range of a normal anion gap, and
other variables, the presence of a normal or an increased anion gap
is not always reliable in differentiating among the causes of a metabolic acidosis, especially when the metabolic acidosis is mild. In some
patients, there is more than one explanation for the metabolic acidosis,
such as the child with diarrhea and lactic acidosis as a result of poor
perfusion. The anion gap should not be interpreted in dogmatic isolation; consideration of other laboratory abnormalities and the clinical
history improves its diagnostic utility.

Treatment

The most effective therapeutic approach for patients with a metabolic
acidosis is repair of the underlying disorder, if possible. The administration of insulin in DKA and the restoration of adequate perfusion with
IV fluids in lactic acidosis because of hypovolemia or shock eventually
result in normalization of the acid-­base balance. In other diseases, the
use of bicarbonate therapy is indicated because the underlying disorder is irreparable. Children with metabolic acidosis caused by RTA or
chronic kidney disease require long-­term base therapy. Patients with
acute kidney injury and metabolic acidosis may need base therapy
until their kidneys’ ability to excrete hydrogen normalizes. In other
disorders the cause of the metabolic acidosis eventually resolves, but
base therapy may be necessary during the acute illness. In salicylate
poisoning, alkali administration increases renal clearance of salicylate
and decreases the amount of salicylate in brain cells. Short-­term base
therapy is often necessary in other poisonings (ethylene glycol, methanol) and inborn errors of metabolism (pyruvate carboxylase deficiency,
propionic acidemia). Some inborn errors of metabolism require long-­
term base therapy.
The use of base therapy in DKA with lactic acidosis is controversial; there is little evidence that it improves patient outcome, and it has a
variety of potential side effects. The risks of giving sodium bicarbonate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

518 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
include the possibility of causing hypernatremia or volume overload.
Furthermore, the patient may have overcorrection of the metabolic
acidosis once the underlying disorder resolves, because metabolism
of lactate or ketoacids generates bicarbonate. The rapid change from
acidemia to alkalemia can cause a variety of problems, including hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. Bicarbonate therapy increases the
generation of CO2, which can accumulate in patients with respiratory
failure. Because CO2 readily diffuses into cells, the administration of
bicarbonate can lower the intracellular pH, potentially worsening cell
function. Base therapy is usually reserved for children with severe
acute lactic acidosis and severe DKA.
Oral base therapy is given to children with chronic metabolic acidosis. Sodium bicarbonate tablets are available for older children. Younger
children generally take citrate solutions; the liver generates bicarbonate
from citrate. Citrate solutions are available as sodium citrate, potassium citrate, and a 1:1 mix of sodium citrate and potassium citrate.
The patient’s potassium needs dictate the choice. Children with type
I or type II RTA may have hypokalemia and benefit from potassium
supplements, but most children with chronic kidney failure cannot tolerate additional potassium.
Oral or IV base can be used in acute metabolic acidosis; IV therapy
is generally used when a rapid response is necessary. Sodium bicarbonate may be given as a bolus, usually at a dose of 1 mEq/kg, in an
emergency situation. Another approach is to add sodium bicarbonate
or sodium acetate to the patient’s IV fluids, remembering to remove
an equal amount of sodium chloride from the solution to avoid giving an excessive sodium load. Careful monitoring is mandatory so that
the dose of base can be titrated appropriately. Tris(hydroxymethyl)
aminomethane (tromethamine, THAM) is an option in patients with
a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory acidosis, because it neutralizes
acids without releasing CO2. THAM also diffuses into cells and therefore provides intracellular buffering.
Hemodialysis is another option for correcting a metabolic acidosis, and it is an appropriate choice in patients with renal insufficiency,
especially if significant uremia or hyperkalemia is also present. Hemodialysis is advantageous for correcting the metabolic acidosis caused
by methanol or ethylene glycol intoxication, because hemodialysis efficiently removes the offending toxin. In addition, these patients often
have a severe metabolic acidosis that does not respond easily to IV
bicarbonate therapy. Peritoneal dialysis is another option for correcting the metabolic acidosis due to chronic kidney disease.
Many causes of metabolic acidosis require specific therapy. Administration of a glucocorticoid and a mineralocorticoid is necessary in
patients with adrenal insufficiency. Patients with DKA require insulin therapy, whereas patients with lactic acidosis respond to measures that alleviate tissue hypoxia. Along with correction of acidosis,
patients with methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion should receive an
agent that prevents the breakdown of the toxic substance to its toxic
metabolites. Fomepizole has supplanted ethanol as the treatment of
choice. These agents work by inhibiting alcohol dehydrogenase, the
enzyme that performs the first step in the metabolism of ethylene
glycol or methanol. There are a variety of disease-­specific therapies
for patients with a metabolic acidosis resulting from an inborn error
of metabolism.

METABOLIC ALKALOSIS

Metabolic alkalosis in children is most often secondary to emesis or
diuretic use. The serum bicarbonate concentration is increased with a
metabolic alkalosis, although a respiratory acidosis also leads to a compensatory elevation of the serum [HCO3−]. With a simple metabolic
alkalosis, however, the pH is elevated; alkalemia is present. Patients
with a respiratory acidosis are acidemic. Decreasing ventilation causes
appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic alkalosis. Pco2
increases by 7 mm Hg for each 10 mEq/L increase in the serum
[HCO3−]. Appropriate respiratory compensation never exceeds a Pco2
of 55-­60 mm Hg. The patient has a concurrent respiratory alkalosis

Table 73.14  Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis
CHLORIDE-­RESPONSIVE (URINARY CHLORIDE <15 MEQ/L)
Gastric losses
Emesis
Nasogastric suction
Diuretics (loop or thiazide)
Chloride-­losing diarrhea (OMIM 214700)
Low chloride formula
Cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700)
Posthypercapnia
CHLORIDE-­RESISTANT (URINARY CHLORIDE >20 MEQ/L)
High Blood Pressure
Adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism/Familial
hyperaldosteronism type I (OMIM 103900)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type II (OMIM 605635)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type III (OMIM 613677)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV (OMIM 617027)
Renovascular disease
Renin-­secreting tumor
17α-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202110)
11β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202010)
Cushing syndrome
11β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 218030)
Licorice ingestion
Liddle syndrome (OMIM 177200)
Normal Blood Pressure
Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800)
Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/60
1198/613090)
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200)
EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780)
Hyperuricemia, Pulmonary Hypertension, Renal Failure in Infancy and
Alkalosis, HUPRA Syndrome (OMIM 613845)
Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD
variant (OMIM not assigned)
Base administration
EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database
number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/omim).

if the Pco2 is lower than the expected compensation. A greater than
expected Pco2 occurs with a concurrent respiratory acidosis.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

The kidneys normally respond promptly to a metabolic alkalosis by
increasing base excretion. Two processes are therefore usually present
to produce a metabolic alkalosis: (1) the generation of the metabolic
alkalosis, which requires the addition of base to the body, and (2) the
maintenance of the metabolic alkalosis, which requires impairment in
the kidney’s ability to excrete base.
The etiologies of a metabolic alkalosis are divided into two categories based on the urinary chloride level (Table 73.14). The alkalosis
in patients with a low urinary [Cl−] is maintained by volume depletion; thus volume repletion is necessary for correction of the alkalosis.
The volume depletion in these patients is caused by losses of Na+ and
K+, but the loss of Cl− is usually greater than the losses of Na+ and K+
combined. Because Cl− losses are the dominant cause of the volume
depletion, these patients require Cl− to correct the volume depletion
and metabolic alkalosis; they are said to have Cl−-­responsive metabolic alkalosis. In contrast, the alkalosis in a patient with an elevated
urinary [Cl−] does not respond to volume repletion and so is termed
Cl−-­resistant metabolic alkalosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 519
Emesis or nasogastric suction results in loss of gastric fluid, which
has a high content of HCl. Generation of H+ by the gastric mucosa
causes simultaneous release of bicarbonate into the bloodstream. Normally, the hydrogen ions in gastric fluid are reclaimed in the small
intestine (by neutralizing secreted bicarbonate); thus there is no net
loss of acid. With loss of gastric fluid, this does not occur, and a metabolic alkalosis develops. This period is the generation phase of the metabolic alkalosis.
The maintenance phase of the metabolic alkalosis from gastric
losses is caused by the volume depletion (“chloride depletion” from
gastric loss of HCl). Volume depletion interferes with urinary loss
of bicarbonate, the normal renal response to a metabolic alkalosis.
During volume depletion, several mechanisms prevent renal bicarbonate loss. First, there is a reduction in the GFR, so less bicarbonate is filtered. Second, volume depletion increases resorption
of sodium and bicarbonate in the proximal tubule, limiting the
amount of bicarbonate that can be excreted in the urine. This effect
is mediated by angiotensin II and adrenergic stimulation of the
kidney, both of which are increased in response to volume depletion. Third, the increase in aldosterone during volume depletion
increases bicarbonate resorption and H+ secretion in the collecting
duct.
In addition to volume depletion, gastric losses are usually associated with hypokalemia as a result of both gastric loss of K+ and, most
importantly, increased urinary K+ losses. The increased urinary losses
of K+ are mediated by aldosterone, through volume depletion, and by
the increase in intracellular K+ secondary to the metabolic alkalosis,
which causes K+ to move into the cells of the kidney, causing increased
K+ excretion. Hypokalemia contributes to the maintenance of the metabolic alkalosis by decreasing bicarbonate loss. Hypokalemia increases
H+ secretion in the distal nephron and stimulates ammonia production
in the proximal tubule. Ammonia production enhances renal excretion
of H+.
A metabolic alkalosis can develop in patients receiving loop or
thiazide diuretics. Diuretic use leads to volume depletion, which
increases angiotensin II, aldosterone, and adrenergic stimulation of
the kidney. Diuretics increase the delivery of sodium to the distal
nephron, further enhancing acid excretion. Moreover, these diuretics cause hypokalemia, which increases acid excretion by the kidney. The increase in renal acid excretion generates the metabolic
alkalosis, and the decrease in bicarbonate loss maintains it. In addition, patients who are receiving diuretics have a “contraction alkalosis.” Diuretic use causes fluid loss without bicarbonate; thus the
remaining body bicarbonate is contained in a smaller total body
fluid compartment. The [HCO3−] increases, helping to generate the
metabolic alkalosis.
Diuretics are often used in patients with edema, such as those
with nephrotic syndrome, heart failure, or liver failure. In many of
these patients, metabolic alkalosis resulting from diuretic use develops despite the continued presence of edema. This is because the
effective intravascular volume is low, and it is the effective intravascular volume that stimulates the compensatory mechanisms that
cause and maintain a metabolic alkalosis. Many of these patients
have a decreased effective intravascular volume before they begin
diuretic therapy, increasing the likelihood of diuretic-­induced metabolic alkalosis.
Diuretic use increases chloride excretion in the urine. Consequently, while a patient is receiving diuretics, the urine [Cl−] is
typically high (>20 mEq/L). After the diuretic effect has worn off,
the urinary [Cl−] is low (<15 mEq/L) because of appropriate renal
Cl− retention in response to volume depletion. Thus categorization
of diuretics because of urinary [Cl−] depends on the timing of the
measurement. However, the metabolic alkalosis from diuretics is Cl−
responsive; it is corrected after adequate volume repletion. This is the
rationale for including this process among the chloride-­responsive
causes of a metabolic alkalosis.

Most patients with diarrhea have a metabolic acidosis because of
stool losses of bicarbonate. In chloride-­losing diarrhea, an autosomal recessive disorder, there is a defect in the normal intestinal
exchange of bicarbonate for chloride, causing excessive stool losses
of chloride (see Chapter 385). In addition, stool losses of H+ and K+
cause metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia, both of which are exacerbated by increased renal H+ and K+ losses from volume depletion.
Treatment is with oral supplements of K+ and NaCl. Use of a gastric
proton pump inhibitor (PPI), by decreasing gastric HCl production,
reduces both the volume of diarrhea and the need for electrolyte
supplementation.
Formulas with extremely low Cl− content have led to Cl− deficiency and volume depletion. There is secondary metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia. Cystic fibrosis can rarely cause metabolic
alkalosis, hypokalemia, and hyponatremia because of excessive
NaCl losses in sweat (see Chapter 454). The volume depletion
causes the metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia through increased
urinary losses, whereas the hyponatremia, a less common finding,
is secondary to Na+ loss combined with renal water conservation in
an effort to protect the intravascular volume (“appropriate” ADH
production).
A posthypercapnic metabolic alkalosis occurs after the correction of a chronic respiratory acidosis. This is typically seen in
patients with chronic lung disease who are started on mechanical
ventilation. During chronic respiratory acidosis, appropriate renal
compensation leads to an increase in the serum [HCO3−]. Because it
is still present after acute correction of the respiratory acidosis, the
elevated [HCO3−] causes a metabolic alkalosis. The metabolic alkalosis persists because the patient with a chronic respiratory acidosis is intravascularly depleted because of the Cl− loss that occurred
during the initial metabolic compensation for the primary respiratory acidosis. In addition, many children with a chronic respiratory
acidosis receive diuretics, which further decrease the intravascular
volume. The metabolic alkalosis responds to correction of the intravascular volume deficit.
The chloride-­resistant causes of metabolic alkalosis can be subdivided according to blood pressure status. Patients with hypertension
either have increased aldosterone levels or act as if they do. Aldosterone
levels are elevated in children with adrenal adenomas or hyperplasia.
Aldosterone causes renal retention of sodium, with resultant hypertension. Metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia result from aldosterone-­
mediated renal excretion of H+ and K+. The urinary Cl− level is not low
because these patients are volume overloaded, not volume depleted.
The volume expansion and hypertension allow normal excretion of
Na+ and Cl− despite the presence of aldosterone. This is known as the
mineralocorticoid escape phenomenon.
In glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, an autosomal
dominant disorder, excess production of aldosterone results from
the presence of an aldosterone synthase gene regulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (see Chapter 616.8). Glucocorticoids
effectively treat this disorder by inhibiting ACTH production by the
pituitary, downregulating the inappropriate aldosterone production.
Familial hyperaldosteronism type II, which causes elevated aldosterone levels, responds to spironolactone. Familial hyperaldosteronism
type III typically requires bilateral adrenalectomy due to the severity
of the hyperaldosteronism. Renovascular disease and renin-­secreting
tumors both cause excessive renin, leading to an increase in aldosterone, although hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis are less common findings than hypertension. In two forms of congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, 11β-­
hydroxylase deficiency and 17α-­hydroxylase
deficiency, there is excessive production of the mineralocorticoid
11-­deoxycorticosterone (see Chapters 616.2 and 616.4). Hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis are more likely in 17α-­
hydroxylase deficiency than in 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency. These
disorders respond to glucocorticoids because the excess production
of 11-­deoxycorticosterone is under the control of ACTH.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

520 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Cushing syndrome frequently causes hypertension. Cortisol has
some mineralocorticoid activity, and high levels can produce hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis in patients with Cushing syndrome.
Cortisol can bind to the mineralocorticoid receptors in the kidney and function as a mineralocorticoid. This binding normally
does not occur because 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the
kidney converts cortisol to cortisone, which does not bind to the
mineralocorticoid receptor. In the autosomal recessive disorder
11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, also called apparent
mineralocorticoid excess, cortisol is not converted in the kidney
to cortisone. Cortisol is therefore available to bind to the mineralocorticoid receptor in the kidney and act as a mineralocorticoid.
Patients with this deficiency, despite low levels of aldosterone, are
hypertensive and hypokalemic, and they have a metabolic alkalosis.
The same phenomenon can occur with excessive intake of natural
licorice, a component of which, glycyrrhizic acid, inhibits 11β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The autosomal dominant disorder
Liddle syndrome is secondary to an activating variant in the gene
for the sodium channel in the distal nephron (see Chapter 571.3).
Upregulation of this sodium channel is one of the principal actions
of aldosterone. Because this Na+ channel is continuously open, children with Liddle syndrome have the features of hyperaldosteronism, including hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis,
but low serum levels of aldosterone.
Bartter and Gitelman syndromes are autosomal recessive disorders associated with normal blood pressure, elevated urinary Cl−,
metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia (see Chapter 571). In Bartter syndrome, patients have a defect in Na+ and Cl− resorption
in the loop of Henle. This leads to excessive urinary losses of Na+
and Cl−, and as in patients receiving loop diuretics, volume depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism occur, causing hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Gitelman syndrome is usually milder
than Bartter syndrome. Patients have renal Na+ and Cl− wasting
with volume depletion caused by variants in the gene encoding the
thiazide-­sensitive Na+-­Cl− transporter in the distal tubule. As in
patients receiving a thiazide diuretic, affected patients have volume
depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism with hypokalemia
and metabolic alkalosis. Children with Gitelman syndrome have
hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia. Some patients with autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism have hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis from impaired Na+ and Cl− resorption in the loop of
Henle. EAST syndrome causes hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis,
and hypomagnesemia.
Excessive base intake can cause a metabolic alkalosis. Affected
patients do not have low urine [Cl−], unless there is associated volume depletion. In the absence of volume depletion, excess base is
rapidly corrected via renal excretion of bicarbonate. Rarely, massive
base intake can cause a metabolic alkalosis by overwhelming the
kidney’s ability to excrete bicarbonate. This may occur in infants
who are given baking soda as a “home remedy” for colic or stomach upset. Each teaspoon of baking soda has 42 mEq of sodium
bicarbonate. Infants have increased vulnerability because of a lower
GFR, limiting the rate of compensatory renal bicarbonate excretion.
A metabolic alkalosis may also occur in patients who receive a large
amount of sodium bicarbonate during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Blood products are anticoagulated with citrate, which is
converted into bicarbonate by the liver. Patients who receive large
amounts of blood products may have a metabolic alkalosis. Iatrogenic metabolic alkalosis can occur because of acetate in TPN.
Aggressive use of bicarbonate therapy in a child with a lactic acidosis or DKA may cause a metabolic alkalosis. This is especially
likely in a patient in whom the underlying cause of the lactic acidosis is successfully corrected (restoration of intravascular volume
in a patient with severe dehydration). Once the cause of the lactic
acidosis resolves, lactate can be converted by the liver into bicarbonate, which when combined with infused bicarbonate can create

a metabolic alkalosis. A similar phenomenon can occur in a child
with DKA because the administration of insulin allows ketoacids
to be metabolized, producing bicarbonate. However, this phenomenon rarely occurs because of judicious use of bicarbonate therapy in
DKA and because there are usually significant pretreatment losses
of ketoacids in the urine, preventing massive regeneration of bicarbonate. Base administration is most likely to cause a metabolic alkalosis in patients who have an impaired ability to excrete bicarbonate
in the urine. This impairment occurs in patients with concurrent
volume depletion or renal insufficiency.

Clinical Manifestations

The symptoms in patients with a metabolic alkalosis are often related
to the underlying disease and associated electrolyte disturbances.
Children with Cl−-­responsive causes of metabolic alkalosis often have
symptoms related to volume depletion, such as thirst and lethargy. In
contrast, children with Cl−-­unresponsive causes may have symptoms
related to hypertension.
Alkalemia causes potassium to shift into the ICS, producing a
decrease in the extracellular [K+]. Alkalemia leads to increased urinary
losses of K+. Increased K+ losses are present in many of the conditions
that cause a metabolic alkalosis. Therefore most patients with a metabolic alkalosis have hypokalemia, and their symptoms may be related
to the hypokalemia (see Chapter 73.4).
The symptoms of a metabolic alkalosis are caused by the associated
alkalemia. The magnitude of the alkalemia is related to the severity
of the metabolic alkalosis and the presence of concurrent respiratory
acid-­base disturbances. During alkalemia, the ionized calcium concentration decreases because of increased binding of calcium to albumin.
The decrease in the ionized calcium concentration may cause symptoms of tetany (carpopedal spasm).
Arrhythmias are a potential complication of a metabolic alkalosis,
and the risk for arrhythmia increases if there is concomitant hypokalemia. Alkalemia increases the risk of digoxin toxicity, and antiarrhythmic medications are less effective in the presence of alkalemia. In
addition, alkalemia may decrease cardiac output. A metabolic alkalosis
causes a compensatory increase in the Pco2 by decreasing ventilation.
The decrease in ventilatory drive can cause hypoxia.

Diagnosis

Measurement of the urine [Cl−] is the most helpful test in differentiating among the causes of a metabolic alkalosis. The urine [Cl−]
is low in patients with a metabolic alkalosis resulting from volume
depletion, unless there is a defect in renal handling of Cl−. The
urine [Cl−] is superior to the urine [Na+] in assessment of volume
status in patients with a metabolic alkalosis because the normal
renal response to a metabolic alkalosis is to excrete bicarbonate.
Because bicarbonate is negatively charged, it can only be excreted
with cations, usually Na+ and K+. Therefore a patient with a metabolic alkalosis may excrete Na+ in the urine despite the presence of
volume depletion, which normally causes avid Na+ retention. The
urine [Cl−] is usually a good indicator of volume status, and it differentiates Cl−-­resistant and Cl−-­responsive causes of a metabolic
alkalosis.
Diuretics and gastric losses are the most common causes of metabolic alkalosis and are usually apparent from the patient history.
Occasionally, metabolic alkalosis, usually with hypokalemia, may
be a clue to the presence of bulimia or surreptitious diuretic use
(see Chapter 41). Patients with bulimia have a low urine Cl− level,
indicating that they have volume depletion because of an extrarenal
etiology, but there is no alternative explanation for their volume
depletion. Surreptitious diuretic use may be diagnosed by obtaining
a urine toxicology screen for diuretics. The urine [Cl−] is increased
while a patient is using diuretics but is low when the patient stops
taking them. Rarely, children with mild Bartter or Gitelman syndrome are misdiagnosed as having bulimia or abusing diuretics. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 521
urine [Cl−] is always elevated in Bartter and Gitelman syndromes,
and the urine toxicology screen for diuretics has a negative result.
Metabolic alkalosis with hypokalemia is occasionally the initial
manifestation of cystic fibrosis. An elevated sweat Cl− finding is
diagnostic.
Patients with a metabolic alkalosis and a high urinary [Cl−] are
subdivided according to blood pressure status. Children with normal blood pressure may have Bartter or Gitelman syndrome. Excess
base administration is another diagnostic possibility, but it is usually apparent from the history. In patients with sodium bicarbonate
ingestion (baking soda), which may be unreported by the parent, the
metabolic alkalosis usually occurs with significant hypernatremia. In
addition, unless volume depletion is superimposed, the metabolic
alkalosis from base ingestion resolves itself once the source of base
is eliminated.
Measuring serum concentrations of renin and aldosterone differentiates children with a metabolic alkalosis, a high urinary [Cl−], and
elevated blood pressure. Both renin and aldosterone are elevated in
children with either renovascular disease or a renin-­secreting tumor.
Aldosterone is high and renin is low in patients with adrenal adenomas
or hyperplasia and glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism. Renin
and aldosterone are low in children with Cushing syndrome, Liddle
syndrome, licorice ingestion, and 17α-­hydroxylase, 11β-­hydroxylase,
and 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiencies. An elevated 24-­
hour urine cortisol value is diagnostic of Cushing syndrome, which
is suspected from the presence of the other classic features of this disease (see Chapter 619). Elevations of 11-­deoxycorticosterone values are
seen in 17α-­hydroxylase and 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency.

Treatment

The approach to treatment of metabolic alkalosis depends on the severity of the alkalosis and the underlying etiology. In children with a mild
metabolic alkalosis ([HCO3−] <32 mEq/L), intervention is often unnecessary, although this depends on the specific circumstances. In a child
with congenital heart disease who is receiving a stable dose of a loop
diuretic, a mild alkalosis does not require treatment. In contrast, intervention may be appropriate in a child with a worsening mild metabolic
alkalosis because of nasogastric suction. The presence of a concurrent
respiratory acid-­base disturbance also influences therapeutic decision-­
making. A patient with a concurrent respiratory acidosis should have
some increase in bicarbonate from metabolic compensation; thus the
severity of the pH elevation is more important than [HCO3−]. In contrast, a patient with respiratory alkalosis and a metabolic alkalosis is
at risk for severe alkalemia; treatment may be indicated, even if the
increase in bicarbonate value is only mild.
Intervention is usually necessary in children with moderate or severe
metabolic alkalosis. The most effective approach is to address the underlying etiology. In some children, nasogastric suction may be decreased or
discontinued. Alternatively, the addition of a gastric PPI reduces gastric
secretion and losses of HCl. Diuretics are an important cause of metabolic alkalosis, and if a change is tolerated, they should be eliminated or
the dose reduced. Adequate potassium supplementation or the addition
of a potassium-­sparing diuretic is also helpful in a child with a metabolic
alkalosis from diuretics. Potassium-­sparing diuretics not only decrease
renal K+ losses but, by blocking the action of aldosterone, also decrease
H+ secretion in the distal nephron, increasing urinary bicarbonate excretion. Many children cannot tolerate discontinuation of diuretic therapy;
hence, potassium supplementation and potassium-­sparing diuretics are
the principal therapeutic approach. Arginine HCl may also be used to
treat chloride-­responsive metabolic acidosis if sodium or potassium salts
are not appropriate. Arginine HCl may raise the serum K+ levels during administration. Rarely, in cases of severe metabolic alkalosis, acetazolamide is an option. A carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, acetazolamide
decreases resorption of bicarbonate in the proximal tubule, causing
significant bicarbonate loss in the urine. The patient receiving this drug

must be monitored closely, because acetazolamide produces major losses
of potassium in the urine and increases fluid losses, potentially necessitating a reduction in dosage of other diuretics.
Most children with a metabolic alkalosis have one of the chloride-­
responsive etiologies. In these situations, administration of sufficient
sodium chloride and potassium chloride to correct the volume deficit and
the potassium deficit is necessary to correct the metabolic alkalosis. This
approach may not be an option in the child who has volume depletion due
to diuretics, because volume repletion may be contraindicated. Adequate
replacement of gastric losses of sodium and potassium in a child with a
nasogastric tube can minimize or prevent the development of the metabolic alkalosis. With adequate intravascular volume and a normal serum
[K+], the kidney excretes the excess bicarbonate within 2 days.
In children with the chloride-­resistant causes of a metabolic
alkalosis that are associated with hypertension, volume repletion is
contraindicated because it would exacerbate the hypertension and
would not repair the metabolic alkalosis. Ideally, treatment focuses
on eliminating the excess aldosterone effect. Adrenal adenomas can
be resected, licorice intake can be eliminated, and renovascular disease can be repaired. Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, 17α-­
hydroxylase deficiency, and 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency respond to
the administration of glucocorticoids. The mineralocorticoid effect
of cortisol in 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency can be
decreased with the use of spironolactone, which blocks the mineralocorticoid receptor. In contrast, the metabolic alkalosis in children
with Liddle syndrome does not respond to spironolactone; however,
either triamterene or amiloride is effective therapy because both
agents block the sodium channel that is constitutively active in Liddle
syndrome.
In children with Bartter or Gitelman syndrome, therapy includes oral
potassium and sodium supplementation; potassium-­sparing diuretics
may be helpful in select cases. Children with Gitelman syndrome often
require magnesium supplementation, whereas children with severe
Bartter syndrome often benefit from indomethacin.

RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS

A respiratory acidosis is an inappropriate increase in blood carbon dioxide tension (Pco2). CO2 is a by-­product of metabolism and is removed
from the body by the lungs. During a respiratory acidosis, the effectiveness of CO2 removal by the lungs is decreased. A respiratory acidosis
is secondary to either pulmonary disease, such as severe bronchiolitis,
or nonpulmonary disease, such as a narcotic overdose (see Chapter 86).
Even though body production of CO2 can vary, normal lungs are able to
accommodate this variation; excess production of CO2 is not an isolated
cause of a respiratory acidosis. With impairment of alveolar ventilation,
the rate of body production of CO2 may affect the severity of the respiratory acidosis, but this is usually not a significant factor.
A respiratory acidosis causes a decrease in the blood pH, but there is
normally a metabolic response that partially compensates, minimizing
the severity of the acidemia. The acute metabolic response to a respiratory alkalosis occurs within minutes. The metabolic compensation for
an acute respiratory acidosis is secondary to titration of acid by nonbicarbonate buffers. This buffering of H+ causes a predictable increase in
the serum [HCO3−]: Plasma bicarbonate increases by 1 for each 10 mm
Hg increase in the Pco2 (acute compensation).
With a chronic respiratory acidosis, there is more significant metabolic compensation and thus less severe acidemia than in an acute
respiratory acidosis with the same increase in Pco2. During a chronic
respiratory acidosis, the kidneys increase acid excretion. This response
occurs over 3-­4 days and causes a predictable increase in the serum
[HCO3−]: Plasma bicarbonate increases by 3.5 for each 10 mm Hg
increase in the Pco2 (chronic compensation).
The increase of serum [HCO3−] during a chronic respiratory acidosis is associated with a decrease in body chloride. After acute correction
of a chronic respiratory acidosis, the plasma bicarbonate continues to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

522 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 73.15  Causes of Respiratory Acidosis
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DEPRESSION
Encephalitis
Head trauma
Brain tumor
Central sleep apnea
Primary pulmonary hypoventilation (Ondine curse)
Stroke
Hypoxic brain damage
Obesity-­hypoventilation (Pickwickian) syndrome
Increased intracranial pressure
Medications
Narcotics
Barbiturates
Anesthesia
Benzodiazepines
Propofol
Alcohols
DISORDERS OF SPINAL CORD, PERIPHERAL NERVES, OR
NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
Diaphragmatic paralysis
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Poliomyelitis
Acute flaccid myelitis
Spinal muscular atrophies
Tick paralysis
Botulism
Myasthenia
Multiple sclerosis
Spinal cord injury
Medications
Vecuronium
Aminoglycosides
Organophosphates (pesticides)

PULMONARY DISEASE
Pneumonia
Pneumothorax
Asthma
Bronchiolitis
Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary hemorrhage
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome
Cystic fibrosis
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Hypoplastic lungs
Meconium aspiration
Pulmonary thromboembolus
Interstitial fibrosis
UPPER AIRWAY DISEASE
Aspiration
Laryngospasm
Angioedema
Obstructive sleep apnea
Tonsillar hypertrophy
Vocal cord paralysis
Extrinsic tumor
Extrinsic or intrinsic hemangioma
MISCELLANEOUS
Flail chest
Cardiac arrest
Kyphoscoliosis
Decreased diaphragmatic movement due to ascites or peritoneal
dialysis

RESPIRATORY MUSCLE WEAKNESS
Muscular dystrophy
Hypothyroidism
Malnutrition
Hypokalemia
Hypophosphatemia
Medications
Succinylcholine
Corticosteroids

be increased, and the patient has a metabolic alkalosis. Because of the
Cl− deficit, this is a chloride-­responsive metabolic alkalosis; it corrects
once the patient’s Cl− deficit is replaced.
A mixed disorder is present if the metabolic compensation is inappropriate. A higher than expected bicarbonate value occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic alkalosis, and a lower than expected
bicarbonate value occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic acidosis. Evaluating whether compensation is appropriate during a respiratory acidosis requires clinical knowledge of the acuity of the process,
because the expected compensation is different, depending on whether
the process is acute or chronic.
The Pco2 cannot be interpreted in isolation to determine whether
a patient has a respiratory acidosis. A respiratory acidosis is always
present if a patient has acidemia and an elevated Pco2. However, an
elevated Pco2 also occurs as appropriate respiratory compensation
for a simple metabolic alkalosis. The patient is alkalemic; this is not a
respiratory acidosis. During a mixed disturbance, a patient can have
a respiratory acidosis and a normal or even low Pco2. This condition may occur in a patient with a metabolic acidosis. A respiratory
acidosis is present if the patient does not have appropriate respiratory

compensation (the Pco2 is higher than expected from the severity of
the metabolic acidosis).

Etiology and Pathophysiology

The causes of a respiratory acidosis are either pulmonary or nonpulmonary (Table 73.15). CNS disorders can decrease the activity of the
central respiratory center, reducing ventilatory drive. A variety of medications and illicit drugs suppress the respiratory center. The signals
from the respiratory center need to be transmitted to the respiratory
muscles via the nervous system. Respiratory muscle failure can be secondary to disruption of the signal from the CNS in the spinal cord,
the phrenic nerve, or the neuromuscular junction. Disorders directly
affecting the muscles of respiration can prevent adequate ventilation,
causing a respiratory acidosis.
Mild or moderate lung disease often causes a respiratory alkalosis as
a result of hyperventilation secondary to hypoxia or stimulation of lung
mechanoreceptors or chemoreceptors. Only more severe lung disease
causes a respiratory acidosis. Upper airway diseases, by impairing air
entry into the lungs, may decrease ventilation, producing a respiratory
acidosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 523
Increased production of CO2 is never the sole cause of a respiratory
acidosis, but it can increase the severity of the disease in a patient with
decreased ventilation of CO2. Increased production of CO2 occurs in
patients with fever, hyperthyroidism, excess caloric intake, and high
levels of physical activity. Increased respiratory muscle work also
increases CO2 production.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with a respiratory acidosis are often tachypneic in an effort to
correct the inadequate ventilation. Exceptions include patients with a
respiratory acidosis resulting from CNS depression and patients who
are on the verge of complete respiratory failure secondary to fatigue of
the respiratory muscles.
The symptoms of respiratory acidosis are related to the severity of
the hypercarbia. Acute respiratory acidosis is usually more symptomatic than chronic respiratory acidosis. Symptoms are also increased by
concurrent hypoxia or metabolic acidosis. In a patient breathing room
air, hypoxia is always present if a respiratory acidosis is present. The
potential CNS manifestations of respiratory acidosis include anxiety,
dizziness, headache, confusion, asterixis, myoclonic jerks, hallucinations, psychosis, coma, and seizures.
Acidemia, no matter the etiology, affects the cardiovascular system. An arterial pH <7.2 impairs cardiac contractility and the normal response to catecholamines in both the heart and the peripheral
vasculature. Hypercapnia causes vasodilation, most dramatically in
the cerebral vasculature, but hypercapnia produces vasoconstriction
of the pulmonary circulation. Respiratory acidosis increases the risk
of cardiac arrhythmias, especially in a child with underlying cardiac
disease.

Diagnosis

The history and physical findings often point to a clear etiology.
For the obtunded patient with poor respiratory effort, evaluation of
the CNS is often indicated. This may include imaging studies (CT
or MRI) and, potentially, a lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid
analysis. A toxicology screen for illicit drugs may also be appropriate. A response to naloxone is both diagnostic and therapeutic.
In many of the diseases affecting the respiratory muscles, there is
evidence of weakness in other muscles. Stridor is a clue that the
child may have upper airway disease. Along with a physical examination, a chest radiograph is often helpful in diagnosing pulmonary
disease.
In many patients, respiratory acidosis may be multifactorial. A child
with bronchopulmonary dysplasia, an intrinsic lung disease, may
worsen because of respiratory muscle dysfunction caused by severe
hypokalemia resulting from long-­term diuretic therapy. Conversely, a
child with muscular dystrophy, a muscle disease, may worsen because
of aspiration pneumonia.
For a patient with respiratory acidosis, calculation of the gradient
between the alveolar oxygen concentration and the arterial oxygen
concentration, the A-­a O2 gradient, is useful for distinguishing between
poor respiratory effort and intrinsic lung disease. The A-­a O2 gradient
is increased if the hypoxemia is caused by intrinsic lung disease (see
Chapter 421).

Treatment

Respiratory acidosis is best managed by treatment of the underlying etiology. In some patients, the response is very rapid, such as
after the administration of naloxone to a patient with a narcotic
overdose. In contrast, in the child with pneumonia, a number of
days of antibiotic therapy may be required before the respiratory
status improves. In many children with a chronic respiratory acidosis, there is no curative therapy, although an acute respiratory
illness superimposed on a chronic respiratory condition is usually
reversible.
All patients with an acute respiratory acidosis are hypoxic and
therefore need to receive supplemental oxygen. Mechanical ventilation is necessary in some children with respiratory acidosis. Children
with significant respiratory acidosis caused by CNS disease usually

require mechanical ventilation because such a disorder is unlikely to
respond quickly to therapy. In addition, hypercarbia causes cerebral
vasodilation, and the increase in ICP can be dangerous in a child
with an underlying CNS disease. Readily reversible CNS depression,
as from a narcotic overdose, may not require mechanical ventilation.
Decisions on mechanical ventilation for other patients depend on a
number of factors. Patients with severe hypercarbia (Pco2 >75 mm
Hg) usually require mechanical ventilation (see Chapter 86.1). The
threshold for intubation is lower if there is concomitant metabolic
acidosis, a slowly responsive underlying disease, or hypoxia that
responds poorly to oxygen, or if the patient appears to be tiring and
respiratory arrest seems likely.
In patients with a chronic respiratory acidosis, the respiratory drive
is often less responsive to hypercarbia and more responsive to hypoxia.
Thus, with chronic respiratory acidosis, excessive use of oxygen can
blunt the respiratory drive and therefore increase the Pco2. In these
patients, oxygen must be used cautiously.
When possible, it is best to avoid mechanical ventilation in a patient
with chronic respiratory acidosis because extubation is often difficult.
However, an acute illness may necessitate mechanical ventilation in a
child with a chronic respiratory acidosis. When intubation is necessary,
the Pco2 should be lowered only to the patient’s normal baseline, and
this should be done gradually. These patients normally have an elevated
serum [HCO3−] as a result of metabolic compensation for their respiratory acidosis. A rapid lowering of the Pco2 can cause a severe metabolic alkalosis, potentially leading to complications, including cardiac
arrhythmias, decreased cardiac output, and decreased cerebral blood
flow. In addition, prolonged mechanical ventilation at a normal Pco2
causes the metabolic compensation to resolve. When the patient is subsequently extubated, the patient will no longer benefit from metabolic
compensation, causing a more severe acidemia because of the respiratory acidosis.

RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS

A respiratory alkalosis is an inappropriate reduction in the blood CO2
concentration. This is usually secondary to hyperventilation, initially
causing removal of CO2 to surpass production. Eventually, a new
steady state is achieved, with removal equaling production, although
at a lower CO2 tension (Pco2). A respiratory alkalosis that is not the
result of hyperventilation may occur in children receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, with CO2 lost directly from the blood in
the extracorporeal circuit.
With a simple respiratory alkalosis, the pH increases, but there is
a normal metabolic response that attenuates some of the change in
the blood pH. A metabolic response to an acute respiratory alkalosis
occurs within minutes, mediated by hydrogen ion release from nonbicarbonate buffers. The metabolic response to an acute respiratory alkalosis is predictable: Plasma bicarbonate falls by 2 for each 10 mm Hg
decrease in the Pco2 (acute compensation).
A chronic respiratory alkalosis leads to more significant metabolic
compensation because of the actions of the kidneys, which decrease
acid secretion, producing a decrease in the serum [HCO3−]. Both the
proximal and distal tubules decrease acid secretion. Metabolic compensation for a respiratory alkalosis develops gradually and takes 2-­3
days to produce the full effect: Plasma bicarbonate falls by 4 for each 10
mm Hg decrease in the Pco2 (chronic compensation).
A chronic respiratory alkalosis is the only acid-­base disturbance in
which appropriate compensation may normalize the pH, although >7.4.
A mixed disorder is present if the metabolic compensation is inappropriate. A higher than expected HCO3− level occurs in the setting of
a concurrent metabolic alkalosis, and a lower than expected HCO3−
level occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic acidosis. Evaluating whether compensation is appropriate during a respiratory alkalosis
requires clinical knowledge of the acuity of the process, because the
expected compensation differs according to whether the process is
acute or chronic.
A low Pco2 value does not always indicate a respiratory alkalosis.
The Pco2 also decreases as part of the appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis; this is not a respiratory alkalosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

524 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 73.16  Causes of Respiratory Alkalosis
HYPOXEMIA OR TISSUE HYPOXIA
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema
Cyanotic heart disease
Congestive heart failure
Asthma
Severe anemia
High altitude
Laryngospasm
Aspiration
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Pulmonary embolism
Interstitial lung disease
Hypotension
LUNG RECEPTOR STIMULATION
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema
Asthma
Pulmonary embolism
Hemothorax
Pneumothorax
Respiratory distress syndrome (adult or infant)
CENTRAL STIMULATION
Central nervous system disease
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Encephalitis or meningitis
Trauma
Brain tumor
Stroke
Fever
Pain
Anxiety (panic attack)
Psychogenic hyperventilation or anxiety
Liver failure
Sepsis
Pregnancy
Mechanical ventilation
Hyperammonemia
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation or hemodialysis
Medications
Salicylate intoxication
Theophylline
Progesterone
Exogenous catecholamines
Caffeine

A metabolic acidosis is the dominant acid-­base disturbance in a
patient with acidemia and a low Pco2, even though there could still
be a concurrent respiratory alkalosis. In contrast, a respiratory alkalosis is always present in a patient with alkalemia and a low Pco2.
Even a normal Pco2 value may be consistent with a respiratory alkalosis in a patient with a metabolic alkalosis, because an elevated Pco2
is expected as part of appropriate respiratory compensation for the
metabolic alkalosis.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

A variety of stimuli can increase the ventilatory drive and cause a respiratory alkalosis (Table 73.16). Arterial hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia
stimulates peripheral chemoreceptors to signal the central respiratory
center in the medulla to increase ventilation. The resultant greater
respiratory effort increases the oxygen content of the blood (Po2) but
depresses the Pco2. The effect of hypoxemia on ventilation begins
when the arterial oxygen saturation (Sao2) decreases to approximately
90% (Po2 = 60 mm Hg), and hyperventilation increases as hypoxemia
worsens. Acute hypoxia is a more potent stimulus for hyperventilation

than chronic hypoxia; thus chronic hypoxia, as occurs in cyanotic heart
disease, causes a much less severe respiratory alkalosis than an equivalent degree of acute hypoxia. The many causes of hypoxemia or tissue
hypoxia include primary lung disease, severe anemia, and carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning.
The lungs contain chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors that
respond to irritants and stretching and send signals to the respiratory
center to increase ventilation. Aspiration or pneumonia may stimulate
the chemoreceptors, whereas pulmonary edema may stimulate the
mechanoreceptors. Most of the diseases that activate these receptors
may also cause hypoxemia and can therefore potentially lead to hyperventilation by two mechanisms. Patients with primary lung disease
may initially have a respiratory alkalosis, but worsening of the disease,
combined with respiratory muscle fatigue, often causes respiratory failure and the development of a respiratory acidosis.
Hyperventilation in the absence of lung disease occurs with direct
stimulation of the central respiratory center. This occurs with CNS diseases such as meningitis, hemorrhage, and trauma. Central hyperventilation caused by lesions, such as infarcts or tumors near the central
respiratory center in the midbrain, increases the rate and depth of the
respiratory effort. This respiratory pattern portends a poor prognosis
because these midbrain lesions are frequently fatal. Systemic processes
may cause centrally mediated hyperventilation. Although the exact
mechanisms are not clear, liver disease causes a respiratory alkalosis
that is usually proportional to the degree of liver failure. Pregnancy
causes a chronic respiratory alkalosis, probably mediated by progesterone acting on the respiratory centers. Salicylates, although often causing a concurrent metabolic acidosis, directly stimulate the respiratory
center to produce a respiratory alkalosis. The respiratory alkalosis during sepsis is probably caused by cytokine release.
Hyperventilation may be secondary to an underlying disease that
causes pain, stress, or anxiety. In psychogenic hyperventilation or in
panic attacks, there is no disease process accounting for the hyperventilation. This disorder may occur in a child who has had an emotionally
stressful experience. Alternatively, it may be part of a panic disorder,
especially if there are repeated episodes of hyperventilation. In such a
patient, the symptoms of acute alkalemia increase anxiety, potentially
perpetuating the hyperventilation.
A respiratory alkalosis is quite common in children receiving
mechanical ventilation because the respiratory center is not controlling
ventilation. In addition, these children may have a decreased metabolic
rate and thus less CO2 production because of sedation and paralytic
medications. Normally, decreased CO2 production and the resultant
hypocapnia decrease ventilation, but this physiologic response cannot
occur in a child who cannot reduce ventilatory effort.

Clinical Manifestations

The disease process causing the respiratory alkalosis is usually more
concerning than the clinical manifestations. Chronic respiratory
alkalosis is usually asymptomatic because metabolic compensation
decreases the magnitude of the alkalemia.
Acute respiratory alkalosis may cause chest tightness, palpitations, lightheadedness, circumoral numbness, and paresthesias of the
extremities. Less common manifestations include tetany, seizures,
muscle cramps, and syncope. The lightheadedness and syncope probably result from the reduction in cerebral blood flow caused by hypocapnia. The reduction in cerebral blood flow is the rationale for using
hyperventilation to treat children with increased intracranial pressure
(ICP). The paresthesias, tetany, and seizures may be partially related
to the reduction in ionized calcium that occurs because alkalemia
causes more calcium to bind to albumin. A respiratory alkalosis also
causes a mild reduction in the serum potassium level. Patients with
psychogenic hyperventilation tend to be symptomatic because of the
respiratory alkalosis, and these symptoms, along with a sensation of
breathlessness, exacerbate the hyperventilation.

Diagnosis

In many patients, hyperventilation producing a respiratory alkalosis is
not clinically detectable, even with careful observation of the patient’s

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 74 u Maintenance and Replacement Therapy
respiratory effort. Metabolic compensation for a respiratory alkalosis
causes a low serum [HCO3−]. When hyperventilation is not appreciated and only serum electrolytes are evaluated, there is often a presumptive diagnosis of a metabolic acidosis. If a respiratory alkalosis is
suspected, only ABG determination can make the diagnosis.
Hyperventilation does not always indicate a primary respiratory disorder. In some patients, the hyperventilation is appropriate respiratory
compensation for a metabolic acidosis. With a primary metabolic acidosis, acidemia is present, and the serum HCO3− level is usually quite
low if there is clinically detectable hyperventilation. In contrast, the
serum HCO3− level never goes below 17 mEq/L as part of the metabolic
compensation for acute respiratory alkalosis, and simple acute respiratory alkalosis causes alkalemia.
The etiology of a respiratory alkalosis is often apparent from the
physical examination or history, and it may consist of lung disease,
neurologic disease, or cyanotic heart disease. Hypoxemia is a common
cause of hyperventilation, and it is important to diagnose because it
suggests a significant underlying disease that requires expeditious treatment. Hypoxemia may be detected on physical examination (cyanosis)
or by pulse oximetry. However, normal pulse oximetry values do not
eliminate hypoxemia as the etiology of the hyperventilation. There are
two reasons why pulse oximetry is not adequate for eliminating hypoxemia as a cause of a respiratory alkalosis. First, pulse oximetry is not
very sensitive at detecting a mildly low arterial Po2 (Pao2). Second, the
hyperventilation during a respiratory alkalosis causes Pao2 to increase,
possibly to a level that is not identified as abnormal by pulse oximetry.
Only ABG measurement can eliminate hypoxia as an explanation for
a respiratory alkalosis. Along with hypoxemia, it is important to consider processes that cause tissue hypoxia without necessarily causing
hypoxemia. Examples are CO or cyanide poisoning, severe anemia,
and heart failure.
Lung disease without hypoxemia may cause hyperventilation.
Although lung disease is often apparent by history or physical examination, a chest radiograph may detect more subtle disease. The patient
with a pulmonary embolism may have benign chest radiograph findings, normal Pao2, and isolated respiratory alkalosis, although hypoxia
may eventually occur. Diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism requires a
high index of suspicion and should be considered in children without
another explanation for respiratory alkalosis, especially if risk factors
are present, such as prolonged bed rest and a hypercoagulable state
(e.g., nephrotic syndrome, lupus anticoagulant).

Treatment

There is seldom a need for specific treatment of respiratory alkalosis.
Rather, treatment focuses on the underlying disease. Mechanical ventilator settings are adjusted to correct iatrogenic respiratory alkalosis,
unless the hyperventilation has a therapeutic purpose (e.g., treatment
of increased ICP).
For the patient with hyperventilation secondary to anxiety, efforts
should be undertaken to reassure the child, usually enlisting the parents. Along with reassurance, patients with psychogenic hyperventilation may benefit from benzodiazepines. During an acute episode of
psychogenic hyperventilation, rebreathing into a paper bag increases
the patient’s Pco2. Using a paper bag instead of a plastic bag allows
adequate oxygenation but permits [CO2] in the bag to increase. The
resultant increase in the patient’s Pco2 decreases the symptoms of
the respiratory alkalosis that tend to perpetuate the hyperventilation.
Rebreathing should be performed only when other causes of hyperventilation have been eliminated; pulse oximetry during the rebreathing
is prudent.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525

Chapter 74

Maintenance and
Replacement Therapy
Larry A. Greenbaum
Maintenance intravenous (IV) fluids are used in a child who cannot be
fed enterally. Along with maintenance fluids, children may require concurrent replacement fluids if they have continued excessive losses, as may
occur with drainage from a nasogastric (NG) tube or with high urine output because of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. If dehydration is present,
the patient also needs to receive deficit replacement (see Chapter 75). A
child awaiting surgery may need only maintenance fluids, whereas a child
with diarrheal dehydration needs maintenance and deficit therapy and
also may require replacement fluids if significant diarrhea continues.

MAINTENANCE THERAPY

Children normally have large variations in their daily intake of water and
electrolytes. The only exceptions are patients who receive fixed dietary regimens orally, via a gastric tube, or as IV total parenteral nutrition (TPN).
Healthy children can tolerate significant variations in intake because of the
many homeostatic mechanisms that can adjust absorption and excretion
of water and electrolytes (see Chapter 73). The calculated water and electrolyte need that form the basis of maintenance therapy are not absolute
requirements. Rather, these calculations provide reasonable guidelines for
a starting point to estimate IV therapy. Children do not need to be started
on IV fluids simply because their intake is being monitored in a hospital
and they are not taking “maintenance fluids” orally, unless there is a pathologic process present that necessitates high fluid intake.
Maintenance fluids are most often necessary in preoperative and
postoperative surgical patients; many nonsurgical patients also require
maintenance fluids. It is important to recognize when it is necessary
to begin maintenance fluids. A normal teenager who is given nothing
by mouth (NPO) overnight for a morning procedure does not require
maintenance fluids because a healthy adolescent can easily tolerate 12-­
18 hours without oral intake. In contrast, a 6-­month-­old child waiting
for surgery should begin receiving IV fluids within 8 hours of the last
feeding. Infants become dehydrated more quickly than older patients. A
child with obligatory high urine output from nephrogenic diabetes insipidus should begin receiving IV fluids soon after being classified as NPO.
Maintenance fluids are composed of a solution of water, glucose, sodium
(Na+), and potassium (K+). This solution has the advantages of simplicity,
long shelf life, low cost, and compatibility with peripheral IV administration.
Such a solution accomplishes the major objectives of maintenance fluids
(Table 74.1). Patients lose water, Na+, and K+ in their urine and stool; water
is also lost from the skin and lungs. Maintenance fluids replace these losses,
thereby avoiding the development of dehydration and Na+ or K+ deficiency.
Table 74.1  Goals of Maintenance Fluids
• Prevent dehydration
• Prevent electrolyte disorders
• Prevent ketoacidosis
• Prevent protein degradation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

526 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
The glucose in maintenance fluids provides approximately 20% of
the normal caloric needs of the patient, prevents the development of
starvation ketoacidosis, and diminishes the protein degradation that
would occur if the patient received no calories. Maintenance fluids do
not provide adequate calories, protein, fat, minerals, or vitamins. This
fact is typically not problematic for a patient receiving IV fluids for a
few days. A patient receiving maintenance IV fluids is receiving inadequate calories and will lose 0.5–1% of weight each day. It is imperative that patients not remain on maintenance therapy indefinitely; TPN
should be used for children who cannot be fed enterally for more than a
few days, especially patients with underlying malnutrition.
Prototypical maintenance fluid therapy does not provide electrolytes such as calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and bicarbonate. For most patients, this lack is not problematic for a few days,
although there are patients who will not tolerate this omission, usually because of excessive losses. A child with proximal renal tubular acidosis wastes bicarbonate in urine. Such a patient will rapidly
become acidemic unless bicarbonate (or another base) is added to
the maintenance fluids. It is important to remember the limitations
of maintenance fluid therapy.

MAINTENANCE WATER

Water is a crucial component of maintenance fluid therapy because
of the obligatory daily water losses. These losses are both measurable
(urine, stool) and not measurable (insensible losses from the skin and
lungs). Failure to replace these losses leads to a child who is thirsty,
uncomfortable, and ultimately dehydrated.
The goal of maintenance water is to provide enough water to
replace these losses. Although urinary losses are approximately 60%
of the total, the normal kidney can greatly modify water losses, with
daily urine volume potentially varying by more than a factor of 20.
Maintenance water is designed to provide enough water so that the
kidney does not need to significantly dilute or concentrate the urine.
It also provides a margin of safety so that normal homeostatic mechanisms can adjust urinary water losses to prevent overhydration and
dehydration. This adaptability obviates the need for absolute precision in determining water requirements. This fact is important, given
the absence of absolute accuracy in the formulas for calculation of
water needs.
Table 74.2 provides a system for calculating maintenance water
on the basis of the patient’s weight and emphasizes the high water
needs of smaller, less mature patients. This approach is reliable,
although calculations based on weight do overestimate the water
needs of an overweight child, in whom it is better to base the calculations on the lean body weight, which can be estimated by using
the 50th percentile of body weight for the child’s height. It is also
important to remember that there is an upper limit of 2.4 L/24 hr

Table 74.2  Body Weight Method for Calculating Daily
Maintenance Fluid Volume
BODY WEIGHT

FLUID PER DAY

0-­10 kg

100 mL/kg

11-­20 kg

1,000 mL + 50 mL/kg for each kg >10 kg

>20 kg

1,500 mL + 20 mL/kg for each kg >20 kg*

*The maximum total fluid per day is normally 2,400 mL.

Table 74.3  Hourly Maintenance Water Rate
For body weight 0-­10 kg: 4 mL/kg/hr
For body weight 10-­20 kg: 40 mL/hr + 2 mL/kg/hr × (wt − 10 kg)
For body weight >20 kg: 60 mL/hr + 1 mL/kg/hr × (wt − 20 kg)*
*The maximum fluid rate is normally 100 mL/hr.

in adult-­sized patients. IV fluids are written as an hourly rate. The
formulas in Table 74.3 enable rapid calculation of the rate of maintenance fluids.

INTRAVENOUS SOLUTIONS

The components of available solutions are shown in Table 74.4. These
solutions are available with 5% dextrose (D5), 10% dextrose (D10), or
without dextrose. Except for Ringer lactate (lactated Ringer, LR), they
are also available with added potassium (10 or 20 mEq/L). A balanced
IV fluid contains a base (lactate or acetate), a more physiologic chloride
concentration than normal saline (NS), and additional physiologic concentrations of electrolytes such as potassium, calcium, and magnesium.
Examples include LR and Plasma-­Lyte, and there is evidence suggesting benefit versus NS in some but not all clinical situations. A hospital pharmacy can also prepare custom-­made solutions with different
concentrations of sodium or potassium. In addition, other electrolytes,
such as calcium, magnesium, phosphate, acetate, and bicarbonate, can
be added to IV solutions. Custom-­made solutions take time to prepare
and are much more expensive than commercial solutions. The use of
custom-­made solutions is necessary only for patients who have underlying disorders that cause significant electrolyte imbalances. The use of
commercial solutions saves time and expense.
A normal plasma osmolality is 285-­295 mOsm/kg. Infusing an IV
solution peripherally with a much lower osmolality can cause water to
move into red blood cells, leading to hemolysis. Thus IV fluids are generally designed to have an osmolality that is either close to 285 or greater
(fluids with moderately higher osmolality do not cause problems).
Thus 0.2NS (osmolality = 68) should not be administered peripherally,
but D5 0.2NS (osmolality = 346) or D5 1/2NS + 20 mEq/L potassium
chloride (KCl) with an osmolality of 472 can be administered.
Hypotonic fluids seem more physiologic given the low Na+ content
of breast milk and formula (∼7 mEq/L). However, hospitalized children often have impaired water excretion because of volume depletion
or nonosmotic stimuli for antidiuretic hormone (ADH) production,
such as respiratory disease, central nervous system disease, stress, pain,
nausea, and medications (e.g., narcotics). Hypotonic fluids increase the
risk of hyponatremia, which may have serious sequelae; hence, isotonic
fluids with D5 are recommended as standard maintenance fluid except
in neonates <28 days of age.

GLUCOSE

Maintenance fluids usually contain D5, which provides 17 calories/100
mL and nearly 20% of the daily caloric needs. This level is enough to
prevent ketone production and helps minimize protein degradation,
but the child will lose weight on this regimen. Maintenance fluids are
also lacking in such crucial nutrients as protein, fat, vitamins, and minerals. Hence, a patient needs to be started on TPN after a few days of
maintenance fluids if enteral feedings are still not possible.

SELECTION OF MAINTENANCE FLUIDS

An isotonic fluid (NS, LR, Plasma-­Lyte) with D5 and KCl (10-­20
mEq/L is usually added to NS) is recommended for maintenance IV
fluids. Surgical patients typically receive isotonic fluids (NS, LR) during surgery and in the recovery room for 6-­8 hours postoperatively; the
rate is typically approximately two thirds the calculated maintenance
rate, with dextrose added if clinically indicated. Subsequent maintenance fluids have the addition of D5 and 10-­20 mEq/L KCl based on
the serum K+ and the clinical setting. Electrolytes should be measured
at least daily in all children receiving >50% of maintenance fluids intravenously unless the child is receiving prolonged IV fluids (TPN).
These guidelines assume that no disease process is present that
would require an adjustment in either the volume or the electrolyte
composition of maintenance fluids. Neonates, and especially premature infants, are outside the scope of these guidelines given their unique
physiology. Children with renal insufficiency may be hyperkalemic or
unable to excrete K+ and may not tolerate 10 or 20 mEq/L of potassium.
Patients with persistent ADH production because of an underlying
disease process (syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion, congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, liver disease) should receive less

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 74 u Maintenance and Replacement Therapy

527

Table 74.4  Composition of Intravenous Solutions*
FLUID

[NA+]

[CL−]

[K+]

[CA2+]

[LACTATE−]

Normal saline
(0.9% NaCl)

154

154

—

—

—

Half-­normal saline
(0.45% NaCl)

77

77

—

—

—

0.2 normal saline
(0.2% NaCl)

34

34

—

—

—

Ringer lactate

130

109

4

3

28

*Electrolyte concentrations in mEq/L.

than maintenance fluids. Children with meningitis are fluid restricted
unless intravascular volume depletion is present (see Chapter 643.1).
Treatment is individualized, and careful monitoring is critical.
In children with complicated pathophysiologic derangements, it
may be necessary to adjust empirically the electrolyte composition
and rate of maintenance fluids on the basis of electrolyte measurements and assessment of fluid balance. In all children it is critical to
monitor weight, urine output, and electrolytes carefully to identify
overhydration or underhydration, hyponatremia, and other electrolyte
disturbances, and then adjust the rate or composition of the IV solution accordingly.

VARIATIONS IN MAINTENANCE WATER AND
ELECTROLYTES

The calculation of maintenance water is based on standard assumptions
regarding water losses. In some patients, however, these assumptions
are incorrect. To identify such situations, it is helpful to understand the
source and magnitude of normal water losses. Table 74.5 lists the three
sources of normal water loss.
Urine is the most important contributor to normal water loss. Insensible losses represent approximately one third of total maintenance
water (40% in infants; 25% in adolescents and adults). Insensible losses
are composed of evaporative losses from the skin and lungs that cannot be quantitated. The evaporative losses from the skin do not include
sweat, which would be considered an additional (sensible) source of
water loss. Stool normally represents a minor source of water loss.
Maintenance water and electrolyte needs may be increased or
decreased, depending on the clinical situation. This may be obvious, as
in the infant with profuse diarrhea, or subtle, as in the patient who has
decreased insensible losses while receiving mechanical ventilation. It is
helpful to consider the sources of normal water and electrolyte losses
and to determine whether any of these sources is being modified in a
specific patient. It is then necessary to adjust maintenance water and
electrolyte calculations.
Table 74.6 lists a variety of clinical situations that modify normal
water and electrolyte losses. The skin can be a source of very significant
water loss, particularly in neonates, especially premature infants, who
are under radiant warmers or are receiving phototherapy. Very low
birthweight infants can have insensible losses of 100-­200 mL/kg/24 hr.
Burns can result in massive losses of water and electrolytes, and there
are specific guidelines for fluid management in children with burns
(see Chapter 89). Sweat losses of water and electrolytes, especially in a
warm climate, can also be significant. Children with cystic fibrosis and
some children with pseudohypoaldosteronism have increased sodium
losses from the skin.
Fever increases evaporative losses from the skin. These losses are
somewhat predictable, leading to a 10–15% increase in maintenance
water needs for each 1°C (1.8°F) increase in temperature above 38°C
(100.4°F). These guidelines are for a patient with a persistent fever; a
1-­hour fever spike does not cause an appreciable increase in water needs.
Tachypnea or a tracheostomy increases evaporative losses from the
lungs. A humidified system (nasal cannula, mask, ventilator) causes
a decrease in insensible losses from the lungs and can even lead to
water absorption via the lungs; a ventilated patient has a decrease in

Table 74.5  Sources of Water Loss
• Urine: 60%
• Insensible losses: ≈35% (skin and lungs)
• Stool: 5%

maintenance water requirements. It may be difficult to quantify the
changes that take place in the individual patient in these situations.

REPLACEMENT FLUIDS

The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is potentially a source of considerable
water loss. GI water losses are accompanied by electrolytes and thus
may cause disturbances in intravascular volume and electrolyte concentrations. GI losses are often associated with loss of potassium, leading to hypokalemia. Because of the high bicarbonate concentration in
stool, children with diarrhea usually have a metabolic acidosis, which
may be accentuated if volume depletion causes hypoperfusion and a
concurrent lactic acidosis. Emesis or losses from an NG tube can cause
a metabolic alkalosis (see Chapter 73).
In the absence of vomiting, diarrhea, or NG drainage, GI losses of
water and electrolytes are usually quite small. All GI losses are considered excessive, and the increase in the water requirement is equal to the
volume of fluid losses. Because GI water and electrolyte losses can be
precisely measured, an appropriate replacement solution can be used.
It is impossible to predict the losses for the next 24 hours; it is better
to replace excessive GI losses as they occur. The child should receive an
appropriate maintenance fluid that does not consider the GI losses. The
losses should then be replaced after they occur, with use of a solution
with a similar electrolyte concentration as the GI fluid. The losses are
usually replaced every 1-­6 hours, depending on the rate of loss, with
very rapid losses being replaced more frequently.
Diarrhea is a common cause of fluid loss in children and can result in
dehydration and electrolyte disorders. In the unusual patient with significant diarrhea and a limited ability to take oral fluid, it is important to have
a plan for replacing excessive stool losses. The volume of stool should be
measured, and an equal volume of replacement solution should be given.
Data are available on the average electrolyte composition of diarrhea in
children (see Table 74.7). With this information, an appropriate replacement solution can be designed. The solution shown in Table 74.7 replaces
stool losses of Na+, K+, chloride (Cl−), and bicarbonate. Each 1 mL of
stool should be replaced by 1 mL of this solution. The average electrolyte
composition of diarrhea is just an average, and there may be considerable
variation. It is therefore advisable to consider measuring the electrolyte
composition of a patient’s diarrhea if the amount is especially excessive or
if the patient’s serum electrolyte levels are problematic.
Loss of gastric fluid, through emesis or NG suction, is also likely
to cause dehydration, in that most patients with either condition have
impaired oral intake of fluids. Electrolyte disturbances, particularly
hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis, are also common. These complications can be avoided by judicious use of a replacement solution. The
composition of gastric fluid shown in Table 74.8 is the basis for designing a replacement solution.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

528 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 74.6  Adjustments in Maintenance Water
SOURCE

CAUSES OF INCREASED WATER NEEDS

Skin

Radiant warmer

CAUSES OF DECREASED WATER NEEDS
Incubator (premature infant)

Phototherapy
Fever
Sweat
Burns
Lungs

Tachypnea
Tracheostomy

Gastrointestinal tract

Diarrhea

Humidified system (nasal cannula, mask,
ventilator)
—

Emesis
Nasogastric suction
Renal

Polyuria

Oliguria/anuria

Miscellaneous

Surgical drain

—

Third spacing

Table 74.7  Replacement Fluid for Diarrhea
AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF DIARRHEA
Sodium: 55 mEq/L

Table 74.9  Adjusting Fluid Therapy for Altered Renal
Output

Potassium: 25 mEq/L

OLIGURIA/ANURIA
Replacement of insensible fluid losses (25–40% of maintenance) with
D5 1/2NS

Bicarbonate: 15 mEq/L

Replace urine output mL/mL with D5 1/2NS ± KCl

APPROACH TO REPLACEMENT OF ONGOING LOSSES
Solution: D5 1/2NS + 30 mEq/L sodium bicarbonate + 20 mEq/L KCl
Replace stool mL/mL every 1-­6 hr

POLYURIA
Replacement of insensible fluid losses (25–40% of maintenance) with
D5 1/2NS ± KCl

D5, 5% dextrose; NS, normal saline.

Measure urine electrolytes
Replace urine output mL/mL with solution based on measured urine
electrolytes

Table 74.8  Replacement Fluid for Emesis or Nasogastric
Losses

D5, 5% dextrose; NS, normal saline.

AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF GASTRIC FLUID
Sodium: 60 mEq/L

when urine output is excessive. The electrolyte losses in patients with
polyuria are variable. In diabetes insipidus, the urine electrolyte concentration is usually low, whereas children with diseases such as juvenile nephronophthisis and obstructive uropathy usually have increased
losses of both water and sodium.
The approach to decreased or increased urine output is similar
(Table 74.9). The patient receives fluids at a rate to replace insensible
losses. This is accomplished by a rate of fluid administration that is
25–40% of the normal maintenance rate, depending on the patient’s
age. Replacing insensible losses in the anuric child will theoretically
maintain an even fluid balance, with the caveat that 25–40% of the normal maintenance rate is only an estimate of insensible losses. In the
individual patient, this rate is adjusted on the basis of monitoring of the
patient’s weight and volume status. Most children with renal insufficiency receive little or no potassium because the kidney is the principal
site of K+ excretion.
For the oliguric child, it is important to add a urine replacement
solution to prevent dehydration. This issue is especially important in
the patient with acute kidney injury, in whom output may increase,
potentially leading to volume depletion and worsening of kidney injury
if the patient remains on only insensible fluids. A replacement solution
of D5 1/2NS is usually appropriate initially, although its composition
may have to be adjusted if urine output increases significantly.
Most children with polyuria (except in diabetes mellitus; see Chapter 629) should be started on replacement of insensible fluid plus urine
losses. This approach avoids the need to attempt to calculate the volume of urine output that is “normal” so that the patient can be given

Potassium: 10 mEq/L
Chloride: 90 mEq/L
APPROACH TO REPLACEMENT OF ONGOING LOSSES
Solution: normal saline + 10 mEq/L KCl
Replace output mL/mL every 1-­6 hr

Patients with gastric losses frequently have hypokalemia, although
the K+ concentration of gastric fluid is relatively low. The associated
urinary K+ loss is an important cause of hypokalemia in this situation
(see Chapter 73). These patients may need additional potassium either
in their maintenance fluids or in their replacement fluids to compensate for prior or ongoing urinary losses. Restoration of the patient’s
intravascular volume, by decreasing aldosterone synthesis, lessens the
urinary K+ losses.
Urine output is normally the largest cause of water loss. Diseases
such as renal failure and syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion can
lead to a decrease in urine volume. The patient with oliguria or anuria
has a decreased need for water and electrolytes; continuation of maintenance fluids produces fluid overload. In contrast, postobstructive
diuresis, the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis, diabetes mellitus,
and diabetes insipidus increase urine production. To prevent dehydration, the patient must receive more than standard maintenance fluids

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 75 u Deficit Therapy
replacement fluid for the excess. In these patients, urine output is, by
definition, excessive, and it is often helpful to measure Na+ and K+ concentrations of the urine to help in formulating the urine replacement
solution.
Surgical drains and chest tubes can produce measurable fluid output. These fluid losses should be replaced when they are significant.
They can be measured and replaced with an appropriate solution.
Third space losses, which manifest as edema and ascites, are caused by
a shift of fluid from the intravascular space into the interstitial space.
Although these losses cannot be quantitated easily, third space losses
can be large and may lead to intravascular volume depletion, despite
the patient’s weight gain. Replacement of third space fluid is empirical
but should be anticipated in patients who are at risk, such as children
who have burns or abdominal surgery. Third space losses and chest
tube output are isotonic, so they usually require replacement with an
isotonic fluid, such as NS or LR. Adjustments in the amount of replacement fluid for third space losses are based on continuing assessment of
the patient’s intravascular volume status. Protein losses from chest tube
drainage can be significant, occasionally necessitating that 5% albumin
be used as a replacement solution.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 75

Deficit Therapy
Larry A. Greenbaum
Dehydration, most often caused by gastroenteritis, is a common problem in children. Most cases can be managed with oral rehydration (see
Chapter 387). Even children with mild to moderate hyponatremic or
hypernatremic dehydration can be managed with oral rehydration.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The first step in caring for the child with dehydration is to assess the
degree of dehydration (Table 75.1), which dictates both the urgency of
the situation and the volume of fluid needed for rehydration. The infant
with mild dehydration (3–5% of body weight dehydrated) has few clinical signs or symptoms. The infant may be thirsty; the alert parent may
notice a decline in urine output. The history is most helpful. The infant
with moderate dehydration has clear physical signs and symptoms.
Intravascular volume depletion is evident from an increased heart rate
and reduced urine output. This patient needs fairly prompt intervention. The infant with severe dehydration is gravely ill. The decrease in
blood pressure indicates that vital organs may be receiving inadequate

Table 75.1  Clinical Evaluation of Dehydration
Mild dehydration (<5% in an infant; <3% in an older child or adult):
Normal or increased pulse; decreased urine output; thirsty; normal
physical findings
Moderate dehydration (5–10% in an infant; 3–6% in an older child
or adult): Tachycardia; little or no urine output; irritable/lethargic;
sunken eyes and fontanel; decreased tears; dry mucous
membranes; mild delay in elasticity (skin turgor); delayed capillary
refill (>1.5 sec); cool and pale
Severe dehydration (>10% in an infant; >6% in an older child or
adult): Peripheral pulses either rapid and weak or absent; decreased
blood pressure; no urine output; very sunken eyes and fontanel; no
tears; parched mucous membranes; delayed elasticity (poor skin
turgor); very delayed capillary refill (>3 sec); cold and mottled; limp,
depressed consciousness

529

perfusion. Immediate and aggressive intervention is necessary. If possible, the child with severe dehydration should initially receive intravenous (IV) therapy. For older children and adults, mild, moderate, or
severe dehydration represents a lower percentage of body weight lost.
This difference occurs because water accounts for a higher percentage
of body weight in infants (see Chapter 73).
Clinical assessment of dehydration is only an estimate; thus the
patient must be continually reevaluated during therapy. The degree of
dehydration is underestimated in hypernatremic dehydration because
the movement of water from the intracellular space (ICS) to the extracellular space (ECS) helps preserve the intravascular volume.
The history usually suggests the etiology of the dehydration and may
predict whether the patient will have a normal sodium concentration
(isotonic dehydration), hyponatremic dehydration, or hypernatremic
dehydration. The neonate with dehydration caused by poor intake of
breast milk often has hypernatremic dehydration. Hypernatremic
dehydration is likely in any child with losses of hypotonic fluid and
poor water intake, as may occur with diarrhea, and poor oral intake
because of anorexia or emesis. Hyponatremic dehydration occurs
in the child with diarrhea who is taking in large quantities of low-­salt
fluid, such as water or formula.
Some children with dehydration are appropriately thirsty, but in others the lack of intake is part of the pathophysiology of the dehydration.
Even though decreased urine output is present in most children with
dehydration, good urine output may be deceptively present if a child
has an underlying renal defect, such as diabetes insipidus or a salt-­
wasting nephropathy, or in infants with hypernatremic dehydration.
Physical examination findings are usually proportional to the
degree of dehydration. Parents may be helpful in assessment of the
child for the presence of sunken eyes, because this finding may be
subtle. Pinching and gently twisting the skin of the abdominal or
thoracic wall detects tenting of the skin (turgor, elasticity). Tented
skin remains in a pinched position rather than springing quickly
back to normal. It is difficult to properly assess tenting of the skin
in premature infants or severely malnourished children. Activation
of the sympathetic nervous system causes tachycardia in children
with intravascular volume depletion; diaphoresis may also be present.
Postural changes in blood pressure are often helpful for evaluating
and assessing the response to therapy in children with dehydration.
Tachypnea in children with dehydration may be present secondary to
a metabolic acidosis from stool losses of bicarbonate or lactic acidosis
from shock (see Chapter 85).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Several laboratory findings are useful for evaluating the child with dehydration. The serum sodium concentration determines the type of dehydration. Metabolic acidosis may be a result of stool bicarbonate losses
in children with diarrhea, secondary acute kidney injury (see Chapter
572.1), or lactic acidosis from shock. The anion gap is useful for differentiating among the various causes of a metabolic acidosis (see Chapter
73). Emesis or nasogastric losses usually cause a metabolic alkalosis. The
serum potassium (K+) concentration may be low as a result of diarrheal
losses. In children with dehydration as a result of emesis, gastric K+ losses,
metabolic alkalosis, and urinary K+ losses all contribute to hypokalemia.
Metabolic acidosis, which causes a shift of K+ out of cells, and acute kidney
injury may lead to hyperkalemia. A combination of mechanisms may be
present; thus it may be difficult to predict the child’s acid-­base status or
serum K+ level from the history alone.
The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) value and serum creatinine concentration are useful in assessing the child with dehydration. Volume
depletion without parenchymal kidney injury may cause a disproportionate increase in the BUN with little or no change in the creatinine
concentration. This condition is secondary to increased passive resorption of urea in the proximal tubule as a result of appropriate renal conservation of sodium and water. The increase in the BUN with moderate
or severe dehydration may be absent or blunted in the child with poor
protein intake, because urea production depends on protein degradation. The BUN may be disproportionately increased in the child with
increased urea production, as occurs with a gastrointestinal bleed or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

530 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
with the use of glucocorticoids, which increase catabolism. A significant elevation of the creatinine concentration suggests acute kidney
injury, although a small, transient increase can occur with dehydration.
Decreased kidney perfusion is the most common etiology of acute kidney injury in a child with volume depletion, but occasionally the child
may have previously undetected chronic kidney disease or an alternative explanation for the acute kidney injury. Renal vein thrombosis is
a well-­described sequela of severe dehydration in infants; findings may
include thrombocytopenia and hematuria (see Chapter 562.2).
Hemoconcentration from dehydration causes increases in hematocrit, hemoglobin, and serum proteins. These values normalize with
rehydration. A normal hemoglobin concentration during acute dehydration may mask an underlying anemia. A decreased albumin level in
a dehydrated patient suggests a chronic disease, such as malnutrition,
nephrotic syndrome, or liver disease, or an acute process, such as capillary leak. An acute or chronic protein-­losing enteropathy may also
cause a low serum albumin concentration.

CALCULATION OF THE FLUID DEFICIT

Determining the fluid deficit necessitates clinical determination of the
percentage of dehydration and multiplication of this percentage by the
patient’s weight; a child who weighs 10 kg and is 10% dehydrated has a
fluid deficit of 1 L.

APPROACH TO SEVERE DEHYDRATION

The child with dehydration needs acute intervention to ensure that there is
adequate tissue perfusion. This resuscitation phase requires rapid restoration of the circulating intravascular volume and treatment of shock with
an isotonic solution, such as normal saline (NS), Ringer lactate (lactated
Ringer solution, LR), or Plasma-­Lyte (see Chapter 85). The child is given
a fluid bolus, usually 20 mL/kg of the isotonic fluid, over approximately
20 minutes. The child with severe dehydration may require multiple fluid
boluses and may need to receive the boluses as fast as possible. In a child
with a known or probable metabolic alkalosis (e.g., child with isolated vomiting), LR or Plasma-­Lyte should not be used because the lactate or acetate
would worsen the alkalosis. However, LR or Plasma-­Lyte may be preferable to NS in shock since it is a balanced solution (see Chapters 74 and 85);
NS may cause a hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.
Colloids, such as blood, 5% albumin, and plasma, are rarely
needed for fluid boluses. A crystalloid solution (NS or LR) is satisfactory, with both lower risk of infection and lower cost. Blood is
obviously indicated in the child with significant anemia or acute
blood loss. Plasma is useful for children with a coagulopathy.
The child with hypoalbuminemia may benefit from 5% albumin,
although there is evidence that albumin infusions increase mortality in adults. The volume and the infusion rate for colloids are generally modified compared with crystalloids (see Chapter 522).
The initial resuscitation and rehydration phase is complete when the
child has an adequate intravascular volume. Typically, the child shows
clinical improvement, including a lower heart rate, normalization of blood
pressure, improved perfusion, better urine output, and a more alert affect.
With adequate intravascular volume, it is appropriate to plan
the fluid therapy for the next 24 hours. A general approach is outlined in Table 75.2, with the caveat that there are many different

approaches to correcting dehydration. A balanced solution can be
substituted for NS. In isonatremic or hyponatremic dehydration, the
entire fluid deficit is corrected over 24 hours; a slower approach is
used for hypernatremic dehydration (discussed later). The volume
of isotonic fluids that the patient has received is subtracted from
this total. The remaining fluid volume is then administered over
24 hours. The potassium concentration may need to be decreased
or, less frequently, increased, depending on the clinical situation.
Potassium is not usually included in the IV fluids until the patient
voids and normal renal function is documented by measurement of
BUN and creatinine. Children with significant ongoing losses need
to receive an appropriate replacement solution (see Chapter 74).

MONITORING AND ADJUSTING THERAPY

The formulation of a plan for correcting a child’s dehydration is
only the beginning of management. All calculations in fluid therapy
are only approximations. This statement is especially true for the
assessment of percentage dehydration. It is equally important to
monitor the patient during treatment and to modify therapy on the
basis of the clinical situation. Table 75.3 lists the cornerstones of
patient monitoring. The patient’s vital signs are useful indicators of
intravascular volume status. The child with decreased blood pressure and an increased heart rate will probably benefit from a fluid
bolus.
The patient’s intake and output are critically important in the
dehydrated child. The child who, after 8 hours of therapy, has
more output than input because of continuing diarrhea needs to
be started on a replacement solution. See the guidelines in Chapter
74 for selecting an appropriate replacement solution. Urine output
is useful for evaluating the success of therapy. Good urine output
indicates that rehydration has been successful.
Signs of dehydration on physical examination suggest the need
for continued rehydration. Signs of fluid overload, such as edema
and pulmonary congestion, are present in the child who is overhydrated. An accurate daily weight measurement is critical for the
management of the dehydrated child. There should be a gain in
weight during successful therapy.
Measurement of serum electrolyte levels at least daily is appropriate for any child who is receiving IV rehydration. Such a child is
at risk for sodium, potassium, and acid-­base disorders. It is always
important to look at trends. For example, a sodium concentration
([Na+]) of 144 mEq/L is normal; but if the [Na+] was 136 mEq/L 12
hours earlier, there is a distinct risk that the child will be hypernatremic in 12 or 24 hours. It is advisable to be proactive in adjusting
fluid therapy.
Both hypokalemia and hyperkalemia are potentially serious (see
Chapter 73). Because dehydration can be associated with acute kidney
injury and hyperkalemia, potassium is withheld from IV fluids until
the patient has voided. The potassium concentration in the patient’s
IV fluids is not rigidly prescribed. Rather, the patient’s serum K+ level
and underlying kidney function are used to modify potassium delivery.
The patient with an elevated creatinine value and K+ level of 5 mEq/L
does not receive any potassium until the serum K+ level decreases.

Table 75.3  Monitoring Therapy
Table 75.2  Fluid Management of Dehydration
1.	Restore intravascular volume
Isotonic fluid (NS or LR): 20 mL/kg over 20 min
Repeat as needed
2.	Calculate 24 hr fluid needs: maintenance + deficit volume
3.	Subtract isotonic fluid already administered from 24 hr fluid needs
4.	Administer remaining volume over 24 hr using 5% dextrose NS +
20 mEq/L KCl
5.	Replace ongoing losses as they occur
LR, Ringer lactate; NS, normal saline.

Vital signs
Pulse
Blood pressure
Intake and output
Fluid balance
Urine output
Physical examination
Weight
Clinical signs of depletion or overload
Electrolytes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 75 u Deficit Therapy
Conversely, the patient with a K+ level of 2.5 mEq/L may require additional potassium.
Metabolic acidosis can be quite severe in dehydrated children.
Although normal kidneys eventually correct this problem, a child
with renal dysfunction may be unable to correct a metabolic acidosis, and a portion of the patient’s IV sodium chloride may have to
be replaced with sodium bicarbonate, sodium lactate (as in LR), or
sodium acetate.
The serum K+ level is modified by the patient’s acid-­base status.
Acidosis increases serum K+ by causing intracellular K+ to move into
the ECS. Thus, as acidosis is corrected, the serum potassium concentration ([K+]) decreases. Again, it is best to anticipate this problem
and to monitor the serum [K+] and adjust potassium administration
appropriately.

HYPONATREMIC DEHYDRATION

The pathogenesis of hyponatremic dehydration usually involves
a combination of sodium and water loss and water retention to
compensate for the volume depletion. The patient has a pathologic
increase in fluid loss, and the lost fluid contains sodium. Most fluid
that is lost has a lower sodium concentration, so patients with only
fluid loss would have hypernatremia. Diarrhea has, on average, a
sodium concentration of 50 mEq/L. Replacing diarrheal fluid with
water, which has almost no sodium, causes a reduction in the serum
[Na+] (see Chapter 74). The volume depletion stimulates synthesis
of antidiuretic hormone, resulting in reduced renal water excretion.
Therefore the body’s usual mechanism for preventing hyponatremia, renal water excretion, is blocked. The risk of hyponatremia is
further increased if the volume depletion is a result of loss of fluid
with a higher sodium concentration, as may occur with renal salt
wasting, third space losses, or diarrhea with high sodium content
(cholera).
The initial goal in treating hyponatremia is correction of intravascular volume depletion with isotonic fluid. An overly rapid (>8-­
10 mEq/L over the first 24 hours) or overcorrection in the serum
[Na+] (>135 mEq/L) is associated with an increased risk of osmotic
demyelination syndrome (formerly central pontine myelinolysis)
(see Chapter 73). Most patients with hyponatremic dehydration
do well with the same basic strategy outlined in Table 75.2. Again,
K+ delivery is adjusted according to the initial serum K+ level and
the patient’s renal function. Potassium is not given until the patient
voids.
The patient’s [Na+] is monitored closely to ensure appropriate correction, and the sodium concentration of the fluid is adjusted accordingly.
Patients with ongoing losses require an appropriate replacement solution (see Chapter 74). Patients with neurologic symptoms (seizures) as
a result of hyponatremia need to receive an acute infusion of hypertonic (3%) saline to increase the serum [Na+] rapidly (see Chapter 73).

HYPERNATREMIC DEHYDRATION

Hypernatremic dehydration is the most dangerous form of dehydration because of complications of hypernatremia itself and of
its therapy. Hypernatremia can cause serious neurologic damage,
including central nervous system hemorrhages and thrombosis.
This damage appears to be secondary to the movement of water
from the brain cells into the hypertonic extracellular fluid (ECF),
causing brain cell shrinkage and tearing blood vessels within the
brain (see Chapter 73).
The movement of water from the ICS to the ECS during hypernatremic dehydration partially protects the intravascular volume. Unfortunately, because the initial manifestations are milder, children with
hypernatremic dehydration are often brought for medical attention
with more profound dehydration.
Children with hypernatremic dehydration are often lethargic,
and they may be irritable when touched. Hypernatremia may cause
fever, hypertonicity, and hyperreflexia. More severe neurologic
symptoms may develop if cerebral bleeding or thrombosis occurs.

531

Overly rapid treatment of hypernatremic dehydration may cause
significant morbidity and mortality. Idiogenic osmoles are generated within the brain during the development of hypernatremia;
they increase the osmolality within the cells of the brain, providing
protection against brain cell shrinkage caused by movement of water
out of the cells and into the hypertonic ECF. Idiogenic osmoles dissipate slowly during the correction of hypernatremia. With overly
rapid lowering of the extracellular osmolality during the correction
of hypernatremia, an osmotic gradient may be created that causes
water movement from the ECS into the cells of the brain, producing cerebral edema. Symptoms of the resultant cerebral edema can
range from seizures to brain herniation and death.
To minimize the risk of cerebral edema during the correction of
hypernatremic dehydration, the serum sodium concentration should
not decrease by >10 mEq/L every 24 hours. The deficits in severe
hypernatremic dehydration may need to be corrected over 2-­4 days
(Fig. 75.1).
The initial resuscitation of hypernatremic dehydration requires
restoration of the intravascular volume with NS. LR should not be
used because it is more hypotonic than NS and may cause too rapid
a decrease in the serum [Na+], especially if multiple fluid boluses are
necessary.
To avoid cerebral edema during correction of hypernatremic
dehydration, the fluid deficit is corrected slowly. The rate of correction depends on the initial sodium concentration (see Fig.
75.1). There is no general agreement on the choice or the rate of
fluid administration for correcting hypernatremic dehydration;
these factors are not nearly as important as vigilant monitoring of
the serum [Na+] and adjustment of the therapy according to the
result. The rate of decrease of the serum [Na+] is roughly related to
the “free water” delivery, although there is considerable variation
between patients. Free water is water without sodium. NS contains
no free water, half-­normal saline (½ NS) is 50% free water, and water
is 100% free water. Smaller patients, to achieve the same decrease
in the sodium concentration, tend to need higher amounts of free
water delivery per kilogram because of higher insensible fluid
losses. Five percent dextrose (D5) with ½ NS is usually an appropriate starting solution for correction of a patient with hypernatremic
dehydration. Some patients, especially infants with ongoing high
insensible water losses, may rarely need to receive D5 0.2NS, which
should be used with great caution and constant monitoring. Others
require D5 NS. A child with dehydration as a result of pure free
water loss, as usually occurs with diabetes insipidus, usually needs
a more hypotonic fluid than a child with depletion of both sodium
and water from diarrhea.
Adjustment in the sodium concentration of the IV fluid is the
most common approach to modify the rate of decrease in the serum
concentration (see Fig. 75.1). For difficult-­to-­manage patients with
severe hypernatremia, having two IV solutions (e.g., D5 ½ NS and
D5 NS, both with the same concentration of potassium) at the bedside can facilitate this approach by allowing for rapid adjustments of
the rates of the two fluids. If the serum [Na+] decreases too rapidly,
the rate of D5 NS can be increased and the rate of D5 ½ NS can be
decreased by the same amount. Adjustment in the total rate of fluid
delivery is another approach to modifying free water delivery. For
example, if the serum [Na+] is decreasing too slowly, the rate of a
hypotonic IV fluid can be increased, thereby increasing the delivery
of free water. There is limited flexibility in modifying the rate of the
IV fluid because patients generally should receive 1.25-­1.5 times the
normal maintenance fluid rate. Nevertheless, in some situations, it
can be a helpful adjustment.
Because increasing the rate of the IV fluid increases the rate of
decline of the sodium concentration, signs of volume depletion are
treated with additional isotonic fluid boluses. The serum [K+] and
the level of renal function dictate the potassium concentration of
the IV fluid; potassium is withheld until the patient voids. Patients
with hypernatremic dehydration need an appropriate replacement
solution if they have ongoing, excessive losses (see Chapter 74).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

532 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Restore intravascular volume:
Normal saline: 20 mL/kg over 20 min
(repeat until intravascular volume restored)

Determine time for correction based on initial
sodium concentration
[Na] 145-157 mEq/L: 24 hr
[Na] 158-170 mEq/L: 48 hr
[Na] 171-183 mEq/L: 72 hr
[Na] 184-196 mEq/L: 84 hr

Administer fluid at a constant rate over the
time for correction
Typical fluid: D5 1/2 normal saline (with 20
mEq/L KCI unless contraindicated)
Typical rate: 1.25-1.5 times maintenance

Follow serum sodium concentration and
adjust fluid based on clinical status and serum
sodium concentration

Signs of volume
depletion

Administer normal
saline (20 mL/kg)

Sodium decreases
too rapidly

Sodium decreases
too slowly

Increase sodium
concentration of
IV fluid or
decrease rate of IV
fluid

Decrease sodium
concentration of
IV fluid or increase
rate of IV fluid

Replace excessive
ongoing losses as
they occur

Fig. 75.1 Algorithm for the treatment of hypernatremic dehydration. (From Londeree JT, Greenbaum LA. Dehydration and replacement therapy.
In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023. Fig 33.1.)

Seizures and a depressed level of consciousness are the most common manifestations of cerebral edema from an overly rapid decrease
of the serum [Na+] during correction of hypernatremic dehydration.
Signs of increased intracranial pressure or impending herniation may
develop quite rapidly (see Chapter 82). Acutely, increasing the serum
[Na+] through an infusion of 3% sodium chloride can reverse the cerebral edema. Each 1 mL/kg of 3% NaCl increases the serum [Na+] by
approximately 1 mEq/L. An infusion of 4 mL/kg often results in resolution of the symptoms. This strategy is similar to that used for treating
symptomatic hyponatremia (see Chapter 73).
Many patients with mild to moderate hypernatremic dehydration as
a result of gastroenteritis can be managed with oral rehydration (see

Chapter 387). In patients with severe hypernatremia, oral fluids must
be used cautiously. Infant formula, because of its low sodium concentration, has a high free water content, and especially if added to IV
therapy, it may contribute to a rapid decrease in the serum [Na+]. Less
hypotonic fluid, such as an oral rehydration solution, may be more
appropriate initially. If oral intake is allowed, its contribution to free
water delivery must be taken into account, and adjustment in the IV
fluid is usually appropriate. Judicious monitoring of the serum [Na+]
is critical.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 76 u Fluid and Electrolyte Treatment of Specific Disorders

Chapter 76

Fluid and Electrolyte
Treatment of Specific
Disorders
ACUTE DIARRHEA
See Chapter 387.

PYLORIC STENOSIS
See Chapter 375.1.

PERIOPERATIVE FLUIDS
See Chapter 91.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

533

Emergency Medicine, Critical
Care, and Anesthesia
Chapter 77

Emergency Medical
Services for Children
Charles G. Macias, Katherine E. Remick,
and Steven E. Krug
The overwhelming majority of the 27 million children who present
annually for emergency care in the United States are seen at community-­
based general emergency departments (EDs). Visits to children’s hospital
EDs account for just 10% of initial ED encounters. Additionally, across
emergency medical services, children account for approximately 10% of
all transports. This distribution suggests that the greatest opportunity to
optimize care for acutely ill or injured pediatric patients, on a population
basis, occurs broadly as part of a systems-­based approach to emergency
services, an approach that incorporates the unique needs of children at
every level. Conceptually, emergency medical services for children are
characterized by an integrated, continuum-­of-­care model (Fig. 77.1).
The model is designed such that patient care flows seamlessly from the
primary care medical home through transport and on to hospital-­based
definitive care. It includes the following five principal domains of activity:
1.	Prevention, both primary and secondary
2.	
Out-­
of-­
hospital care, both emergency response and prehospital
transport
3.	Hospital-­based care: ED and inpatient, including critical care
4.	Interfacility transport, as necessary, for definitive or pediatric medical and surgical subspecialty care (see Chapter 77.1)
5.	Rehabilitation

cy
en

erg

Em

Emergency Medical
Services for Children

Pr
eh
os
p

Re

ita

ha
bil
ita

tio

n

lc
are

e
ns
po

res

Injury prevention

Int
a
erf
ty
cili

Hospital care

ort

p
ns

tra

Fig. 77.1 The emergency medical services for children (EMSC) continuum of care. Seriously ill and injured children interface with a large number of healthcare personnel as they move through the EMSC system.

PART

VII

The federal Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC)
program of the Health Resources and Services Administration Maternal and Child Health Bureau has stewarded improvements in the care
of children in the context of the continuum-­of-­care model. The programmatic mission of the EMSC program is as follows:
• To ensure U.S. emergency care systems across the continuum of care
are pediatric-­ready, meaning pediatric-­specific needs are incorporated into every aspect of patient care, including patient safety practices, equipment and supplies, competency requirements, policies
and procedures, quality improvement efforts, and administrative
oversight and coordination of care.
• To ensure access to high-­quality emergency medical care for ill or
injured children and adolescents of all ages regardless of geographic
location.
• To ensure that pediatric services are well integrated into an emergency medical services (EMS) system and backed by optimal resources.
• To ensure that the entire spectrum of emergency services—including primary prevention of illness and injury, acute care, and rehabilitation—is provided to infants, children, and adolescents at a level
equal to that of adults.

PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN AND OFFICE
PREPAREDNESS

The primary care physician (PCP) has multiple important roles in the
EMS system. Through anticipatory guidance, the PCP can help shape
the attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors of parent and child, with the
primary goal of preventing acute medical events, such as injury and
exacerbations of illness. The point-­of-­care initiation for many acute
problems is often the PCP office. From the standpoint of personnel,
equipment, training, and protocols, the PCP office setting must be
adequately prepared to initially manage acute and emergency exacerbations of common pediatric conditions, such as respiratory distress
and seizures. Furthermore, on rare occasion, the PCP office environment may be confronted with a child in clinical extremis who requires
resuscitation and stabilization. It is therefore incumbent on the PCP
not only to ensure access to EMS, that is, 911 system activation, but
also to ensure that there is adequate equipment and supplies and on-­
site cognitive and psychomotor skill preparation to deal with such an
emergency. Office preparedness requires training and continuing
education for staff members, protocols for emergency interventions,
ready availability of appropriate resuscitation drugs and equipment,
and knowledge of local EMS resources and ED capabilities. PCPs can
also play a pivotal role in informing and advocating for pediatric emergency and disaster readiness for families (especially those of children
and youth with special healthcare needs) and in local EMS agencies,
schools and childcare programs, and community hospitals. In all communities, the medical home plays a vital role in promoting family readiness for emergencies and disasters.

Staff Training and Continuing Education

It is a reasonable expectation that all office staff, including receptionists and medical assistants, be trained in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) with recertification maintained every 2 years. Nurses and
physicians should also have training in a systematic approach to pediatric resuscitation that optimizes performance of high-­quality CPR.
Core knowledge may be obtained through standardized courses in
advanced life support (ALS) offered by national medical associations and professional organizations. Frequent practice and timely

534
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77 u Emergency Medical Services for Children
recertification are important for knowledge retention and skill maintenance. Examples include the Pediatric Advanced Life Support
(PALS) and Pediatric Emergency Assessment, Recognition and Stabilization (PEARS) courses sponsored by the American Heart Association (AHA), the Advanced Pediatric Life Support (APLS) course
sponsored by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), and the Emergency
Nurses Pediatric Course (ENPC) sponsored by the Emergency Nurses
Association (ENA).

Protocols

Standardized protocols for telephone triage of seriously ill or injured
children are essential. When a child’s clinical status is guarded and prehospital care is available, ambulance transport in the care of trained
personnel is always preferable to transport by other means (e.g., private vehicle). This obviates the potentially serious medical consequences of relying on distraught, often untrained, parents who lack
essential equipment and supplies to provide even basic life support
(BLS) measures to an unstable child during transport. Practitioners
can work with their regional pediatric emergency care resource center (e.g., children’s hospital, academic medical center, trauma center)
to develop and maintain written protocols for office-­based management of a range of conditions, including anaphylaxis, cardiopulmonary arrest, head trauma, ingestions, shock, status asthmaticus, status
epilepticus, extremity injuries, and upper airway obstruction. Regular
practice using mock code scenarios improves office-­based practitioner
and staff performance and self-­efficacy in managing these problems.

Resuscitation Equipment

Availability of necessary equipment is a vital part of an emergency
response. Every physician’s office should have essential resuscitation
equipment and medications packaged in a weight-­based pediatric
resuscitation cart or kit (Table 77.1). This cart or kit should be checked
on a regular basis and kept in an accessible location known to all office
staff. Outdated medication, a laryngoscope with a failed light source,
or an empty oxygen tank represents a potential catastrophe in a resuscitation scenario. Such an incident can be easily avoided if an equipment checklist and regular maintenance schedule are implemented. A
pediatric kit that includes posters to reinforce clinical management and
procedures, a drug-­dosing formulary, and a color-­coded length-­based
resuscitation tape specifying weight and emergency equipment size are
invaluable in avoiding critical therapeutic errors during resuscitation.
To facilitate emergency response when a child needs rapid intervention in the office, all personnel should have designated roles. Organizing a “rapid response team” within the office ensures that necessary
equipment is made available to the physician in charge, an appropriate
medical record detailing all interventions and the child’s response is
generated, and the 911 call for EMS response or a critical care transport
team is made in a timely fashion. Regular practice for these infrequent
events will promote timely response when needed.

Transport

Once efforts to stabilize the child have begun, a decision must be made
on how best to transport a child to a facility capable of providing definitive care. If a child requires airway or cardiovascular support, has an
altered mental state or unstable vital signs, or has significant potential
to deteriorate en route, it is not appropriate to send the child via privately owned vehicle, regardless of proximity to a hospital. Even when
an ambulance is called, it is the PCP’s responsibility to initiate essential life support measures and to attempt to stabilize the child before
transport.
In metropolitan centers with numerous public and private ambulance agencies, the PCP must be knowledgeable about the scope of
service provided by each. The availability of BLS vs ALS services,
the configuration of the transport team, and pediatric expertise vary
greatly among agencies and across jurisdictions. BLS services provide
basic support of airway, breathing, and circulation, whereas ALS units
are capable of providing resuscitation drugs and procedural interventions as well. Some communities may have only BLS services available,

535

Table 77.1  Recommended Drugs and Equipment for
Pediatric Office Emergencies
DRUGS/EQUIPMENT
DRUGS
Oxygen
Albuterol for inhalation
Epinephrine (1:1,000 [1 mg/mL])
Activated charcoal
Antibiotics
Anticonvulsants (diazepam/lorazepam)
Corticosteroids (parenteral/oral)
Dextrose (25%)
Diphenhydramine (parenteral, 50 mg/mL)
Epinephrine (1:10,000 [0.1 mg/mL])
Atropine sulfate (0.1 mg/mL)
Naloxone (0.4 mg/mL)
Sodium bicarbonate (4.2%)
INTRAVENOUS FLUIDS
Normal saline (0.9 NS) or lactated Ringer solution
(500-­mL bags)
5% dextrose, 0.45 NS (500-­mL bags)
EQUIPMENT FOR AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
Oxygen and delivery system
Bag-­valve-­mask (450 mL and 1,000 mL)
Clear oxygen masks, breather and non-­rebreather, with
reservoirs (infant, child, adult)
Suction device, tonsil tip, bulb syringe
Nebulizer (or metered-­dose inhaler with spacer/mask)
Oropharyngeal airways (sizes 00-­5)
Pulse oximeter
Nasopharyngeal airways (sizes 12-­30F)
Magill forceps (pediatric, adult)
Suction catheters (sizes 5-­16F and Yankauer suction tip)
Nasogastric tubes (sizes 6-­14F)
Laryngoscope handle (pediatric, adult) with extra
batteries, bulbs
Laryngoscope blades (straight 0-­2; curved 2-­3)
Endotracheal tubes (uncuffed 2.5-­5.5; cuffed 6.0-­8.0)
Stylets (pediatric, adult)
Esophageal intubation detector or end-­tidal carbon
dioxide detector
EQUIPMENT FOR VASCULAR ACCESS AND FLUID
MANAGEMENT
Butterfly needles (19-­25 gauge)
Catheter-­over-­needle device (14-­24 gauge)
Arm boards, tape, tourniquet
Intraosseous needles (16 and 18 gauge)
Intravenous tubing, micro-­drip
MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
Color-­coded tape or preprinted drug doses
Cardiac arrest board/backboard
Sphygmomanometer (infant, child, adult, thigh cuffs)
Splints, sterile dressings
Automated external defibrillator with pediatric
capabilities
Spot glucose test
Stiff neck collars (small/large)
Heating source (overhead warmer/infrared lamp)

PRIORITY
E
E
E
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
E
E
E
E
S
S
S
S

E, essential; S, strongly suggested.
From Frush K, American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Pediatric Emergency
Medicine. Policy statement-­preparation for emergencies in the offices of pediatricians
and pediatric primary care providers. Pediatrics. 2007;120:200-­212. Reaffirmed in
Pediatrics. 2011;128:e748.

whereas others may have a two-­tiered system, providing both BLS and
ALS. It may be appropriate to consider medical air transport when
definitive or specialized care is not available within the community or
when ground transport times are prolonged. In that case, initial transport via ground to an appropriate helicopter landing zone or a local
hospital for interval stabilization may be undertaken, pending arrival

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

536 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
of the air transport team. Independent of whether a child is to be
transported by air or ground, copies of the pertinent medical records
and any imaging or laboratory studies should be sent with the patient
and a call made to the physician at the receiving facility to alert them
to the referral and any treatments administered. Such notification is
not merely a courtesy; direct physician-­to-­physician communication
is essential for optimal care quality and to ensure adequate transmission of patient care information, to allow mobilization of necessary
resources in the ED, and to redirect the transport if the emergency
physician believes that the child would be more optimally treated at
an alternative facility.

PEDIATRIC PREHOSPITAL CARE

Prehospital care refers to emergency assistance rendered by trained
emergency medical personnel before a child reaches a treating medical facility. The goals of prehospital care are to further minimize systemic insult or injury through a series of well-­defined and appropriate
interventions and serve as the first link in high-­quality emergency care.
Prehospital emergency care services embrace patient safety, family-­
centered care, and timely and effective interventions as core tenets.
Most U.S. communities have a formalized EMS system; the organizational structure and nature of emergency medical response depend
greatly on local demographics and population base. EMS may be provided by volunteers or career professionals working in a fire department–based or independent third-­service response system. All EMS
and fire-­based agencies have an identified medical director who defines
provider competencies and scope of practice. Key points to recognize
in negotiation of the juncture between the community physician and
the local EMS system include access to the system, provider capability,
and destination determination.

Access to the EMS System

Virtually all Americans have access to the 911 telephone service that
provides direct access to a dispatcher who coordinates police, fire,
and EMS responses. Many communities have a next-­generation 911
system, in which the location of the caller is automatically provided
to the call taker and/or dispatcher regardless of landline or mobile
device use, permitting emergency response even if the caller, such
as a young child, cannot give an address. Next-­generation 911 also
provides text-­messaging capabilities. The extent of medical training
for call takers and dispatchers varies among communities, as do the
protocols by which they assign an emergency response level (BLS
vs ALS). Many dispatch centers have adopted the Medical Priority
Dispatch System (MPDS) to use standardized protocols and prearrival/postdispatch instructions. MPDS requires emergency medical
dispatchers to ask a series of questions that determine the appropriate level of priority and EMS response. In some smaller communities, no coordinated dispatch exists, and emergency medical calls
are handled by the local law enforcement agency or fire department.
When activating the 911 system, the physician must make clear to
the dispatcher the nature of the medical emergency and the condition of the child.

Provider Capability

There are many levels of training for prehospital EMS providers, ranging from individuals capable of providing only first aid to those trained
and licensed to provide ALS. All EMS personnel, whether basic emergency medical technicians (EMTs) or paramedics, receive some initial training in pediatric emergencies; however, in most programs the
dedicated time allotted to pediatric emergencies is minimal. Furthermore, state requirements vary for pediatric continuing education, and
exposure to critically ill or injured children in the prehospital setting is
infrequent, even in urban settings. PCPs should recognize that prehospital providers may need additional consultation or support, especially
when managing children with uncommon medical conditions. PCPs
can support maintenance of pediatric knowledge by EMS providers by
serving as or working closely with an identified pediatric emergency
care coordinator (PECC) within the EMS agency to fully integrate
the needs of children into every aspect of system-­based care: policies,

protocols, quality improvement, patient safety, family-­centered care,
staff competencies, and equipment and supplies. Although children
represent a minority population in the prehospital setting, the joint
policy statement, Pediatric Readiness in Emergency Medical Services
Systems, provides a comprehensive overview of how EMS systems can
address the needs of children throughout all aspects of care. The identification of a PECC and physical demonstration of pediatric-­specific
skills represent two of the reference standards that the federal EMSC
program has adopted as performance measures for state-­level operational readiness to care for children in an EMS system.
First responders may be law enforcement officers or firefighters, who
are dispatched to provide emergency medical assistance, or bystanders.
Public safety personnel have a minimum of 40 hours of training in first
aid and CPR. Their role is to provide rapid response and stabilization
pending the arrival of more highly trained personnel. In some smaller
communities, this may be the only prehospital emergency medical
response available.
In the United States the bulk of emergency medical response is provided by EMTs, who may be volunteers or paid professionals. Basic
EMTs may staff an ambulance after undergoing a training program of
approximately 100 hours. They are licensed to provide BLS services
but may receive further training in some jurisdictions to expand their
scope of practice to include intravenous catheter placement and fluid
administration, management of airway adjuncts, and use of an automated external defibrillator (AED).
Paramedics, or EMT-­Ps, represent the highest level of EMT
response, with medical training and supervised field experience of at
least 1,000 hours. Paramedic skills include advanced airway management, including endotracheal intubation; placement of peripheral vascular or intraosseous lines; intravenous administration of drugs and
blood products; administration of nebulized aerosols; needle and finger thoracostomy; and cardioversion, cardiac pacing, and manual defibrillation. These professionals provide ALS services, functioning out
of an ambulance equipped as a mobile intensive care unit (ICU). The
joint position statement Recommended Essential Equipment for Basic
Life Support and Advanced Life Support Ground Ambulances 2020 published by the AAP, ACEP, American College of Surgeons Committee on
Trauma, EMSC Innovation and Improvement Center, ENA, National
Association of EMS Physicians, and National Association of EMS Officials outlines national standards for essential equipment, medications,
and supplies necessary to provide BLS and ALS care across the age
spectrum.
Both basic EMTs and paramedics function under the delegated
licensing authority of a supervisory EMS medical director. This physician oversight of prehospital practice is broadly characterized under
the umbrella term medical control. Direct, or online, medical control
refers to medical direction either at the scene or in real time via voice
or video transmission. Indirect, or offline, medical control refers to
the administration of medical direction before and after the provision
of care (i.e., clinical protocols). Offline activities, such as provider education and training, protocol development, and medical leadership of
quality assurance/quality improvement programs, represent areas in
need of greater pediatric input. Whether in the presence or absence of
a PECC, a pediatric advisory committee may provide additional pediatric knowledge and expertise. Evaluation and tracking of pediatric
performance is critical to ensuring high-­quality care for children in a
community. The National EMS Information System (NEMSIS) serves
as a registry for standardized EMS data collection. EMS agency participation in NEMSIS-­compliant data submission is one of the federal
EMSC performance measures. The National EMS Quality Alliance
(NEMQA) and the National EMS Model Clinical Guidelines complement the NEMSIS program by providing evidence-­derived pediatric
quality measures for adoption in any EMS agency. As a measure of the
degree to which EMSC permanence is being established in state EMS
systems, the federal EMSC program has required demonstration of
the presence of an EMSC advisory committee at the state level. These
advisory bodies are well positioned to support EMS agencies in their
pediatric readiness and provide a forum for the active engagement of
pediatric care experts at a system level.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77 u Emergency Medical Services for Children
Destination Determination

The destination to which a pediatric patient is transported may be
defined by parental preference, provider preference, or jurisdictional
protocol, which is typically predicated on field assessment and, in the
case of trauma, mechanism of injury. The 2021 National Guidelines
for the Field Triage of Injured Patients relies on injury patterns, physiologic criteria, mechanism of injury, and other special considerations
(e.g., suspicion for child maltreatment). Based on these criteria, EMS
providers determine the optimal trauma center destination in the setting of injury. In communities served by an organized trauma system
that incorporates pediatric designation based on objectively verified
hospital capabilities (i.e., pediatric readiness), seriously injured children may be triaged by protocol to the highest-­level pediatric-­capable
trauma center reachable within a reasonable amount of time. Other
communities have established state or regional emergency care systems
that use pediatric readiness criteria to recognize EDs appropriate for
pediatric patients. A high level of pediatric readiness in both medical
and trauma centers is linked to decreased mortality in critically ill and
injured children. The mantra is to deliver the child to the right care in
the right time, even if it requires bypassing closer hospitals.
Regionalization in the context of EMS is defined as a geographically organized system of services that ensures access to care at a level
appropriate to patient needs while maintaining efficient use of available resources. This system concept is especially germane in the care
of children, given the relative scarcity of facilities and their associated
providers that are capable of managing the full range and scope of
pediatric conditions (Fig. 77.2). Regionalized systems of care coordinated with emergency medical dispatch, field triage, and EMS transport have demonstrated efficacy in improving outcomes for pediatric
medical and trauma patients. The existence of statewide or regional
standardized systems that formally recognize hospitals able to stabilize and/or manage pediatric medical and traumatic emergencies is a
federal EMSC performance measure against which operational capacity to provide optimal pediatric emergency care in the United States is
currently being evaluated. Over 15 states now offer pediatric medical
facility recognition programs. For the majority, hospital participation
in these programs is voluntary. EMSC state partnership programs in
the respective jurisdiction can provide further guidance on the application process and requirements for participation. Similarly, several
state trauma systems now integrate elements of pediatric readiness into
trauma center designation. Moreover, beginning in 2023, the American College of Surgeons (ACS) Committee on Trauma requires all

Community
hospital/
stroke center

Urgent care
center

County A

County B
Community
hospital

Scene
Treat and
release

Community
hospital
Primary transport
Interfacility transport

Children’s hospital/
tertiary hospital/
Trauma 1

Fig. 77.2 Transport options within a coordinated, regionalized emer-

gency medical services system model. The objective is to ensure access
to definitive care at a level appropriate to meet patient needs. Solid arrows, Primary transport; dashed arrows, interfacility transport. (Adapted
from Institute of Medicine, Committee on the Future of Emergency
Care in the U.S. Health System. Hospital-­Based Emergency Care: At
the Breaking Point. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2006.)

537

ACS-­verified trauma centers to adhere to specific pediatric readiness
criteria.
In communities that do not have a hospital with the equipment
and personnel resources to provide definitive pediatric inpatient care,
interfacility transport of a child to a regional pediatric center should
be undertaken after initial stabilization (see Chapter 77.1). In the end,
all emergency care facilities must stand ready to provide care to ill and
injured children of all ages.

THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT

The ability of EDs to respond to critically ill and injured children
depends on all aspects of pediatric readiness: administrative oversight, staff competencies, pediatric-­specific policies and procedures,
patient and medication safety, quality improvement, and equipment
and supplies. Training, awareness, and experience of the staff as well
as access to support services, pediatricians, and medical and surgical subspecialists also play a key role. The majority of children who
require emergency care are evaluated in community EDs. Emergency
care staff, including physicians, nurses, and advanced practice providers, may have variable degrees of pediatric training and experience.
Although children account for approximately 25% of all ED visits, only
a fraction of these encounters represents true emergencies. Because
the volume of critical pediatric cases is low, emergency physicians and
nurses working in lower-­volume EDs often have limited opportunity
to reinforce and sustain their knowledge and skills in the assessment
and stabilization of severely ill or injured children. Indeed, nearly 70%
of U.S. EDs provide care for <15 children per day. General pediatricians from the community or pediatric hospitalists may be consulted
when a seriously ill or injured child presents to the ED, and they should
have a structured approach to the initial evaluation and treatment of
an unstable child of any age, regardless of the underlying diagnosis.
Telemedicine and e-­health may serve as a mechanism to provide better
connectivity between patients, primary care, EDs, and tertiary/quaternary institutions. Early recognition of life-­threatening abnormalities in
oxygenation, ventilation, perfusion, and central nervous system function
and rapid intervention to correct those abnormalities are key to successful
resuscitation and stabilization of the pediatric patient.
The National Pediatric Readiness Project (NPRP) is a national
quality improvement initiative started by the federal EMSC program,
AAP, ACEP, and ENA to ensure high-­quality emergency care for all
children. The effort began in 2013 with a national assessment of pediatric readiness in U.S. EDs (as measured by compliance with published
guidelines). Initial results demonstrated a high level of engagement
in pediatric readiness but notable gaps in the ability of U.S. EDs to
meet the needs of children: 48% of EDs had a physician PECC; 59%
of EDs had a nurse PECC; 46% of EDs included pediatric-­specific
needs in quality improvement efforts; and 47% had a disaster plan
that addressed the needs of children. Higher readiness levels are seen
in larger-­volume EDs and in EDs with physician and nurse PECCs
and/or quality improvement plans that included children. Since then,
numerous efforts, including national quality improvement collaboratives, have targeted key areas of readiness. A second NPRP assessment was completed in 2021, and national efforts continue to promote
widespread adoption of pediatric readiness within U.S. EDs. In 2019,
the National Prehospital Pediatric Readiness Project launched with
similar efforts focused on ensuring high-­quality prehospital emergency care for children. Table 77.2 lists essential policies, procedures, and protocols specifically addressing the needs of children in
the ED. ED staff and other stakeholders can access pediatric readiness checklists and toolkits and identify opportunities to participate
in pediatric readiness efforts on the website of the EMSC Innovation
and Improvement Center, https://emscimprovement.center/. Given
the link between pediatric readiness and increased survival for critically ill and injured children, baseline readiness standards must be met
by all EDs and EMS agencies to ensure that children receive the best
emergency care possible.
The way the family supports the child during a crisis, and consequently how the family is supported by the local EMS agency and
in the ED when caring for the child, are critical to patient recovery,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

538 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 77.2  Guidelines for Pediatric-­Specific Policies, Procedures, and Protocols for the Emergency Department (ED)
Illness and injury triage
Pediatric patient assessment and reassessment
Documentation of pediatric vital signs, abnormal vital signs, and
actions to be taken for abnormal vital signs
Identification and notification of the responsible provider of
abnormal vital signs (age or weight based)
Immunization assessment and management of the underimmunized
patient
Sedation and analgesia for procedures, including medical imaging
Consent (including situations in which a parent is not immediately
available)
Social and mental health issues
Physical or chemical restraint of patients
Child maltreatment (physical and sexual abuse, sexual assault, and
neglect) mandated reporting criteria, requirements, and processes
Death of the child in the ED
Do-­not-­resuscitate orders
Lack of a medical home
Children with special healthcare needs
Family-­centered care, including:
1.	Involving families in patient care decision-­making and in
medication safety processes
2.	Family and guardian presence during all aspects of emergency
care, including resuscitation
3.	Education of the patient, family, and regular caregivers
4.	Discharge planning and instruction
5.	Bereavement counseling
Communication with patient’s medical home or primary healthcare
provider
Telehealth and telecommunications
Medical imaging policies that address age-­or weight-­appropriate
dosing for children receiving studies that impart ionizing radiation,
consistent with ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) principles
All-­hazard disaster preparedness plan that addresses the following
pediatric issues:
1.	Availability of medications, vaccines, equipment, and
appropriately trained providers for children in disasters
2.	Pediatric surge capacity for both injured and noninjured
children

3.	Decontamination, isolation, and quarantine of families and
children of all ages
4.	Minimization of parent-­child separation and includes
system tracking of pediatric patients, allowing for the timely
reunification of separated children with their families
5.	Access to specific medical and mental health therapies, as well
as social services, for children in the event of a disaster
6.	Disaster drills, which should include a pediatric mass casualty
incident at least every 2 years
7.	Care of children with special healthcare needs
8.	A plan that includes evacuation of pediatric units and pediatric
critical care and specialty units
Evidence-­based clinical pathways, order sets, or decision support
tools
Written interfacility transfer procedure and agreements that include
the following components:
1.	Defined process for initiation of transfer, including the roles
and responsibilities of the referring facility and referral center
(including responsibilities for requesting transfer, method of
transport, and communication)
2.	Transport plan to deliver children safely (including the use of
child passenger restraint devices) and in a timely manner to
the appropriate facility capable of providing definitive care
3.	Process for selecting the appropriate care facility for pediatric
specialty services not available at the hospital
4.	Process for selecting the appropriately staffed transport
service to match the patient’s acuity level (i.e., level of care
required and equipment needed for transport) and appropriate
for children with special healthcare needs
5.	Process for patient transfer (including obtaining informed
consent)
6.	Plan for transfer of critical patient information (i.e., medical
record, imaging, copy of signed transport consent), as well as
personal belongings and provision of directions and referral
institution information to family
7.	Process for return transfer of the pediatric patient to the
referring facility as appropriate
8.	Integration with telehealth/telecommunications processes and
mobile integrated health/community paramedicine as appropriate

Adapted from Remick K, Gausche-­Hill M, Joseph MM, Brown K, Snow SK, Wright JL; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Pediatric Emergency Medicine and Section
on Surgery; American College of Emergency Physicians Pediatric Emergency Medicine Committee; Emergency Nurses Association Pediatric Committee. Pediatric readiness in the
emergency department. Pediatrics. 2018;142(5):e20182459.

family satisfaction, and mitigation of behavioral and mental health
impact. Commitment to patient-­and family-­centered care in the ED
ensures that the patient and family experience guides the practice of
culturally sensitive care and promotes patient dignity, comfort, and
autonomy. In both the ED and EMS settings, particular issues, such
as family presence, deserve specific attention. Surveys of parents have
indicated that most want to be with their child during invasive procedures and even during resuscitation. Allowing their presence has
been shown to reduce parental and patient anxiety and does not interfere with procedure performance. Patient-­and family-­centered care
practices are also strongly associated with improved care quality and
patient safety.

Disaster Preparedness

Throughout a public health emergency or catastrophic event, natural
or human-­made, several unique factors place children at disproportionate, increased risk. Combined with other factors, global climate
change has promoted increased frequency and severity of weather-­
related disasters. During an average workday, an estimated 69 million
U.S. children are separated from their families in schools and childcare
centers, where mass casualty events can easily occur. This separation
adds the further challenge of safe and timely reunification of children
with family during or after an incident. Furthermore, in the event of a
biologic, chemical, or radio-­nuclear attack, unique anatomic, developmental, and physiologic features make children especially vulnerable to
absorption, ingestion, or inhalation of toxic agents and related morbidity and mortality (see Chapter 763).

Pediatric planning considerations include training of first responders and other care providers, patient triage, decontamination, surge
capacity and capabilities, medical countermeasures (medications,
vaccines, equipment, supplies), evacuation, transport, sheltering, and
family reunification. The community plays a significant role in preparedness and is inclusive of schools, school nurses, faith-­based organizations, and other community entities.
All levels of the healthcare system must be prepared for disaster-­
driven surges in patient care needs. Surge capacity refers to the ability
to evaluate and care for a markedly increased volume of patients—one
that challenges or exceeds normal variations in operating capacity.
Surge capability refers to the ability to provide specialized medical services for unique patient populations, such as children, that may not
be routinely available under normal operating conditions. Surges may
require alternative care processes and additional resources to meet
the demand for services. Critical surges may require consideration of
contingency plans that typically require activation of alternative care
standards. Surges that exceed the additional capacity of contingency
plans may require implementation of crisis care standards as a means
to increase capacity beyond levels that exceed normal daily operations.
During a public health emergency, surge requirements may extend
beyond direct patient care to include tasks such as laboratory screening or epidemiologic investigations. All levels of the healthcare system
may be challenged to increase their capabilities, providing medical
services for patient populations, such as children, that may not be routinely available. As an example, the community hospital that routinely
transfers higher-­acuity ill or injured children or children with medical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77 u Emergency Medical Services for Children
Yes

Able to
walk?

Secondary triage*

Minor

*Using the JS algorithm,
evaluate first all children who
did not walk under their own
power.

No
No

Breathing?

539

Position upper airway

Breathing

Immediate

APNEIC
PEDI
No pulse

+ Pulse
Yes
5 rescue breaths

Adult

APNEIC

Expectant/Deceased

Breathing

Respiratory
rate

Neurological assessment

Immediate

A

Alert

>30 adult

V

Responds to
verbal stimuli

P

Responds to
painful stimuli

U

Unresponsive to
noxious stimuli

<15 or >45 PEDI

Immediate

<30 adult
15–45 PEDI
Perfusion

CR> 2sec (Adult)
No palpable pulse (PEDI)

Immediate
“P” (inappropriate; e.g, posturing) or “U”

Yes

(Pediatric)
Mental status

Does not obey commands
(Adult)
Obeys commands (Adult)
“A”, “V” or “P” (Appropriate) (Pediatric)

Immediate
Delayed

Fig. 77.3 Combined START/Jump START triage algorithm. (Copyright 2002, Lou Romig, MD.)
complexity to a pediatric tertiary center may be unable to do so during
a disaster. Mechanisms for remote consultation and support of pediatric care, leveraging community pediatricians and tertiary pediatric
subspecialists via telemedicine, should be considered.
Beyond acute medical treatment needs, pediatric planning must also
consider the typically broad mental and behavioral health impact disasters have on children and families. Mental and behavioral health concerns commonly represent the largest impact of disasters on children
and adolescents. Pediatric plans must also be in place for locations where
children congregate, such as schools and childcare; these plans must be
aligned with local jurisdiction planning and communicated to families.
Community practice and healthcare system readiness and resiliency
begin with personal and family readiness planning engaged by healthcare providers and support staff; these efforts should also include attention to provider wellness.
The AAP’s Children and Disasters website* (https://www.aap.org/
en/community/aap-­councils/council-­on-­disaster-­preparedness-­and-­
recovery-­codpr/) contains toolkits, checklists, and other resources
pertinent to pediatric readiness within the community, schools, the
medical home, and hospitals; educational materials are also available
for families. Reliable information and excellent disaster readiness
resources are also located on the websites of the EMSC Innovation and
Improvement Center and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response
(ASPR) Eastern Great Lakes Pediatric Disaster Center of Excellence
* https://www.aap.org/en-­us/advocacy-­and-­policy/aap-­health-­initiatives/Children-­and-­
Disasters/Pages/default.aspx.

(https://emscimprovement.center), U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (https://emergency.cdc.gov), U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (https://www.phe.gov/preparedness/Page
s/default.aspx), U.S. HHS ASPR Technical Resources, Assistance Center, and Information Exchange (TRACIE) (https://asprtracie.hhs.gov/),
U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (https://www.fema.
gov), HHS ASPR Western Regional Alliance for Pediatric Emergency
Management (WRAPEM) (https://www.wrap-em.org/index.php/
resources-edocman-public), and HHS HRS Pediatric Network (PPN)
(https://pedspandemicnetwork.org/).

Triage in Disaster Pediatric Medical Care

Mass causality events (hurricanes, bombings, gas leaks, bus or plane
crashes, earthquakes, mass shootings, fires, others) require scene-­based
assessment, assignment, and tagging (Figs. 77.3 and 77.4). Assessment
must be rapid (∼30 seconds) and includes breathing, circulation, and
mental status. These parameters are incorporated in the START (simple
triage and rapid treatment) triage tool for adolescent and adults and the
Jump START assessment for 0-­to 14-­year-­old children. The combined
algorithm is noted in Figure 77.3. The “jump” in Jump START relates to
one difference between pediatric and adult approaches wherein children
are given a rescue breath if they remain apneic with a pulse after positioning the airway (see Fig. 77.3). Triage categories are color coded (see
Fig. 77.4) at the site of the disaster based on risk. Red – immediate life-­
threatening injury; Yellow – potentially stable for a short period; Green –
minor injury, walking wounded; Black – dead or not expected to survive.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

540 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Triage categories
Expectant

Black triage tag color

• Victim unlikely to survive given severity
of injuries, level of available care, or both
• Palliative care and pain relief should
be provided

Immediate

Red triage tag color

• Victim can be helped by immediate
intervention and transport
• Requires medical attention within
minutes for survival (up to 60)
• Includes compromises to patient’s
Airway, Breathing, Circulation

Delayed

Yellow triage tag color

• Victim’s transport can be delayed
• Includes serious and potentially
life-threatening injuries, but status not
expected to deteriorate significantly
over several hours
Minor

Green triage tag color

• Victim with relatively minor injuries
• Status unlikely to deteriorate over days
• May be able to assist in own care:
“Walking wounded”

Fig. 77.4 Triage categories. (From US Department of Health and Human Services: https://chemm.hhs.gov/startpediatric.htm.)

77.1 Interfacility Transport of the Seriously
Ill or Injured Pediatric Patient
Corina Noje, Mary Beth Howard, and Bruce L. Klein*
Patients often seek treatment at facilities that lack sufficient expertise to
treat their conditions, necessitating transfer to more appropriate specialty centers. This is especially pronounced in pediatrics. Emergency
medical services (EMS) providers or parents usually take children to
local emergency departments (EDs) first, where their conditions and
physiologic stabilities are assessed. Although bringing a child directly
to the local ED may be proper logistically, community-­based local EDs
can be less than ideal for pediatric emergencies. Children have been
reported to account for about 20% of all ED visits, but not all EDs have
the necessary supplies for pediatric emergencies. Also, general EDs are
less likely to have pediatric expertise or policies in place for the care of
children. Outcomes for critically ill children treated in pediatric intensive care units (PICUs) are better than for those treated in adult ICUs.
When pediatric critical care is required, transport to a regional PICU is
indicated. In addition, often the type of subspecialty care needed (e.g.,
pediatric orthopedics) is available only at the pediatric center.
Pediatric transport medicine consists of the interfacility transfer of
infants, children, and adolescents from community facilities to pediatric centers that can provide the needed level of expertise. Transport
is performed by professionals proficient in pediatric transport using
age-­equipped ground, rotorcraft, or fixed-­wing ambulances. Pediatric transport medicine is a multidisciplinary field comprising pediatric critical care and pediatric emergency medicine (PEM) physicians
(and, sometimes for newborn infants, neonatologists); nurses, respiratory therapists, and paramedics with advanced training for pediatric
transport; and communications specialists. The goal is to deliver quality pediatric care to the region’s children, while optimizing the use of
regional resources. For the individual child, the aim is to stabilize and,
when appropriate, begin treating as soon as possible—that is, at the
local ED and during transport, well before arrival at the referral center.
Models for pediatric transport services vary depending on the needs
and available resources in a geographic region, but all should have certain basic components: a network of community hospitals and regional
pediatric centers; an established communications and dispatch system
that easily facilitates transfer to the pediatric center; ground and/or air
ambulances; medical and nursing leadership from pediatric critical
care or PEM (or neonatology); experienced pediatric medical control
physicians (MCPs); a multidisciplinary team of pediatric transport
professionals specially trained and equipped to provide the appropriate
level of care required during transport; operational and clinical policies
* Adapted initially from Dr. Lorry R. Frankel’s chapter in the 18th edition of this book. We
also want to thank Dr. Beth Edgerton, who co-­authored a prior version of this chapter.

and procedures that guarantee safe, state-­of-­the-­art, and timely pediatric critical care transport; and a database for quality and performance
assessment.

COMMUNICATIONS AND DISPATCH CENTER

Communications are one of the most vital components of a regional
transport system. Treating a critically ill or injured child is generally an
uncommon event for most community physicians. Therefore they need
to know whom, how, and when to call for assistance in the stabilization
and transfer of a pediatric patient. The communications and dispatch
center provides a single telephone number for such calls.
The communications and dispatch center coordinates communications among the outlying facility, receiving unit, MCP, transport team,
and other consultants. This center may be part of a hospital unit (e.g.,
ED, PICU), self-­contained in a single institution (e.g., emergency communications and information center), or based off-­site as a freestanding center coordinating communications and dispatch for multiple
transport programs.
Staffing varies depending on the type of center. On-­duty nurses
or physicians may receive calls at unit-­based models with low volumes. In contrast, dedicated communications specialists usually staff
self-­contained or freestanding centers, which tend to be busier. The
communications specialist has numerous responsibilities, including
answering the referring physician’s call promptly; documenting essential patient demographic information; arranging for immediate consultation with the MCP; dispatching the transport team to the referring
facility expeditiously; updating the referring facility with any changes
in the arrival time; and coordinating medical control and other necessary transport-­related calls. The transport team must be able to contact
the receiving and referring facilities immediately, when necessary. Furthermore, with advances in technology and wireless communication
systems, telemedicine—either interactive (synchronous) or store and
forward (asynchronous)—is being used during pediatric transport,
and certain programs have incorporated it into their routine transport
operations.

MEDICAL CONTROL PHYSICIAN

The MCP is involved in the clinical care and safe transport of the
patient from the time of referral through arrival at the receiving hospital unit. The MCP’s oversight increases once the transport team arrives
at the referring facility. The MCP should have expertise in pediatric
critical care or PEM (or sometimes neonatology). Besides having the
knowledge required to stabilize a critically ill or injured child, the MCP
must be familiar with the transport environment; the transport team
members’ resources and capabilities; the program’s policies and procedures; and the region’s geography, medical resources, and regulations regarding interhospital transport. The MCP must possess good
interpersonal and communication skills and must be able to maintain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77 u Emergency Medical Services for Children
collegiality with the referring hospital’s staff during a potentially difficult and stressful situation.
Once a transport call is received, the MCP must be immediately
available to confer with the referring physician. Although the MCP may
have other responsibilities, these transport responsibilities take priority
in order to avoid undue delays when transferring a critically ill child.
Often the MCP recommends further testing or therapeutic interventions that can be delivered by the referring hospital before the transport
team arrives. The MCP may seek additional guidance from other specialists, as necessary. Because the child’s condition may change rapidly,
the MCP must remain ready to give additional advice. All conversations and recommendations regarding the care of the patient should be
documented. Some centers record these conversations.
After discussion with the referring physician—and when warranted,
with the transport staff—the MCP determines the best team composition and vehicle for transport. The MCP usually does not accompany
the team but remains available to supervise care. With advances in
video conferencing capabilities, there has been increased use of telemedicine in the pediatric transport medical direction process. For
some acutely ill patients or those requiring visual diagnoses, telemedicine has been reported to improve disposition at the receiving hospital,
potentially leading to improved clinical outcomes.

TRANSPORT TEAM

Transport team composition varies greatly among programs—and
sometimes within an individual program. The team’s composition is
based on a variety of factors, including the child’s age; the severity of
the illness or injury; the distance to the referring facility; the transport
vehicle used; the team members’ advanced practice scope and abilities; the referrer’s insistence that a physician be present; the program’s
historical professional makeup; and the region’s staffing regulations.
The pediatric transport workforce may include physicians, advanced
practice providers, nurses, respiratory therapists, and paramedics who
have expertise in pediatric critical care, PEM, or neonatology (in some
cases), as well as advanced education and training in those cognitive
and procedural areas important for pediatric critical care transport.
Physician trainees—usually fellows and, less often, residents—may also
participate in transport in some capacity. There is a lower incidence
of transport-­related morbidity for critically ill and injured children
transported by pediatric specialty teams than for those transported by
generalist teams. Nevertheless, in-­transit critical events occur in ∼10%
of pediatric critical care transports.
Various scoring systems that can help guide team composition and/
or mode of transport have been developed to aid in transport planning.
A team member’s training, experience, and skill in treating critically ill
patients are more important considerations than that team member’s
professional degree. Team members must understand basic pediatric
pathophysiology and collectively must be able to assess and monitor
a critically ill or injured child; manage the airway and provide respiratory support; obtain vascular access; perform point-­of-­care testing;
and administer fluids and medications (including infusions) typically
used in pediatric critical care transport. They must be familiar with the
physiologic alterations and practical difficulties of the transport environment and, importantly, must be comfortable working in an out-­of-­
hospital setting. Physicians are less often deployed on transport teams
in part because of the advanced training that other healthcare professionals on the transport team receive.
The transport team should have a designated team leader who, in
addition to the team leader’s many other responsibilities, interacts
with the MCP during the transport. Once the team arrives at the referring facility, the team should reassess the child’s condition, review all
the pertinent diagnostic studies and therapies, and discuss the situation with the referring staff and parents. If the patient’s condition has
changed significantly, the team leader may need to contact the MCP for
additional advice. Otherwise, the team leader should generally notify
the MCP before starting to bring the child to the receiving facility. Any
care delivered by the team during transport should be documented,
and copies of all medical records—including laboratory data, radiographs, and scans—should accompany the child to the pediatric center.

541

The receiving unit must be updated before arrival so it can finalize
preparations for the patient.

GROUND VS AIR AMBULANCE

Transport vehicle options include ground, rotorcraft, and fixed-­wing
ambulances. Vehicle selection depends on the child’s emergency needs,
transport team’s capabilities, any out-­of-­ordinary staffing or equipment
requirements (e.g., extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, inhaled
nitric oxide, heliox), referring facility’s abilities, distance, terrain, traffic
patterns, ground or air ambulance availability, helicopter landing pad
or airport access, weather conditions, and expense.
The transport vehicle must be equipped with electrical power, oxygen, and suction and must have sufficient space for the equipment and
supplies that the team brings along—stretcher or isolette, monitor,
ventilator, oxygen tank(s), medication pack(s), infusion pumps, and
more. Compared with helicopters, ambulances typically are more spacious and able to carry more weight, so they can accommodate larger
teams and more equipment. Another advantage of ground ambulance
transport is the ability to stop en route if the patient’s condition deteriorates; this may facilitate the performance of certain interventions or
procedures, such as intubation.
An airplane may be able to fly to an area when distance (>150 miles),
altitude, or weather precludes helicopter use. However, the use of an
airplane necessitates several ambulance transfers, with their attendant
delays and additional risks. There also are delays when the plane must
fly from a remote base to the program’s jurisdiction.

TRANSPORT PHYSIOLOGY

When possible, the transport team tries to provide the same care during transport as the patient would receive in the specialty center. This
can be difficult, however, because of limitations in personnel, equipment, and space, as well as other environmental challenges.
The team and child are subjected to variable intensities of background noise and vibration while traveling in the vehicle cabin. Noise
can impair the team’s ability to auscultate breath sounds and heart
sounds or accurately measure the blood pressure manually—another
reason for monitoring vital signs mechanically and relying on other
assessment modalities, such as the level of mentation, skin color, and
capillary refill. For rotor transports in particular, the crew and patient
should wear helmets or headphones (or another wearable noise attenuator) to mitigate noise. Motion and vibration are additional transport hazards and can lead to increased metabolic rate, shortness of
breath, and fatigue in the patient, as well as motion sickness in the
patient and staff.
On fixed-­wing or certain rotary-­wing transports, the patient may
suffer adverse physiologic effects from altitude. With increasing
altitude, the barometric (atmospheric) pressure decreases, and gas
expands to occupy a greater volume due to the decreased pressure
exerted on it. Therefore, as barometric pressure drops with altitude,
the partial pressures of inspired oxygen (Pio2) and, consequently, arterial oxygen (Pao2) decrease, as does the arterial oxygen-­hemoglobin
saturation (Spo2). For example, at 8,000 feet—an elevation at which
unpressurized airplanes may fly, as well as the effective cabin altitude
for many pressurized airplanes flying at 35,000-­40,000 feet—the barometric pressure, Pio2, Pao2, and Spo2 fall to 565 mm Hg, 118 mm Hg,
61 mm Hg, and 93%, respectively. In comparison, the barometric pressure, Pio2, Pao2, and Spo2 are 760 mm Hg, 159 mm Hg, 95 mm Hg,
and 100% at sea level. Although healthy individuals usually tolerate
these changes well, patients with respiratory insufficiency, pulmonary
hypertension, significant blood loss, or shock may decompensate and
should receive supplemental oxygen and/or have the cabin pressurized
at sea level.
Gases expand up to 10% at the few thousand feet where helicopters
typically fly, and approximately 30–40% at 8,000 feet. Gases within the
body itself also expand as the altitude increases. The degree of gas expansion must be considered during transport via air of any patient with
pneumocephalus, pneumothorax, bowel obstruction, or another condition involving entrapped gas. Before transport, a pneumothorax should
generally be decompressed and a nasogastric tube inserted for ileus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

542 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
SAFETY

Safety is of paramount importance and mandates constant vigilance by
everyone involved. Accident rates for pediatric air and ground transport have been estimated at approximately 1 in 1,000 transports. The
team should routinely attend pilot briefs and perform safety inspections
of the vehicles and equipment, aided by checklists. When in doubt, the
MCP should solicit input from the staff about whether to transport via
air or ground ambulance or to employ lights and sirens, decisions that
cannot be taken lightly. The pilot’s or driver’s judgment as to the safety
of proceeding during inclement weather or with a mechanical problem
must not be overruled.
Organizations such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
and the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) play a role in
ensuring safe interfacility transport. The Commission on Accreditation of Medical Transport Systems (CAMTS) is an independent,
peer-­review organization established in 1990 in response to the number of air medical accidents in the 1980s. CAMTS, through voluntary
participation, audits and accredits fixed-­wing, rotary-­wing, and ground
interfacility medical transport services.

FAMILY-­CENTERED CARE

Family-­centered care represents a philosophy that respects the important role that family members play in a child’s care. It recognizes family
members and healthcare providers as partners in caring for the child.
Family presence during transport is beneficial because it provides support to both children and parents in stressful situations and assists
healthcare providers in delivering care to patients with complex and
chronic medical problems.
As care is transitioned from the referring hospital, it is the transport
team’s responsibility to maintain culturally sensitive, family-­centered
care. The team meets with family members to explain the transport
process, help obtain consent, and discuss anticipated management.
When possible, the transport team should attempt to accommodate a
family member’s presence onboard. However, the family member and
child may need to be separated when the child is critically ill and rapid
transport is essential, or in case of space or weight limitations in the air
or ground ambulance. In these situations, it is important that family
members have a clear understanding of how the child will be cared for
during the separation.

REFERRING HOSPITAL RESPONSIBILITIES

Transfer of a child to another facility requires written documentation
by the referring physician of the need and reasons for transfer, including a statement that the risks and benefits, as well as any alternatives,
have been discussed with the parents. Informed consent should be
obtained from the parent/legal guardian before transfer.
Federal law under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active
Labor Act (EMTALA), part of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act (COBRA), imposes specific requirements that a
patient presenting to an ED be given a medical screening examination without regard for ability to pay. If on examination an emergency medical condition is found, the hospital is required to stabilize
the patient or to transfer the patient to another facility if unable to
stabilize the patient (or if requested by the patient in writing after
being informed of the risks). The primary requirement is that the
referring physician must certify that the medical risks of transfer
are outweighed by its potential benefits. The receiving hospital must
agree to accept the patient if it has the space and staff to provide the
necessary level of care. The transferring hospital is responsible for
arranging for the transfer and ensuring that it is performed by qualified medical personnel with appropriate equipment. The transferring hospital must also send copies of the patient’s medical records
and test results, even those that become available after the transfer
is complete.
Some referring hospitals have entered into transfer agreements with
specialty centers to facilitate the smooth and safe transfer of pediatric
patients. Having prepared forms for all the purposes noted earlier also
aids in the transfer process.

Each hospital needs to review its facility’s guidelines; if established guidelines do not exist, the Emergency Medical Services for
Children National Resource Center in partnership with the Emergency Nurses Association and the Society of Trauma Nurses has
developed the “Interfacility Transfer Tool Kit for the Pediatric
Patient” (available at: https://emscimprovement.center/education-­
and-­resources/toolkits/interfacility-­transfer-­toolbox/). This tool kit
includes the essentials for comprehensively and safely transferring
the pediatric patient to the most appropriate level of care in a timely
manner.

EDUCATIONAL OUTREACH

Besides safe and rapid transport, regional pediatric transport programs
(and their specialty centers) have an obligation to provide educational
opportunities to community healthcare providers so that these providers can acquire the necessary skills to evaluate and stabilize a critically
ill or injured child until the transport team arrives. These learning
activities may include transport case reviews; lectures on pediatric
acute care topics; resuscitation and related programs such as the Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) course, Advanced Pediatric Life
Support (APLS) course, Pediatric Education for Prehospital Professionals (PEPP) course, and S.T.A.B.L.E. (sugar and safe care, temperature, airway, blood pressure, lab work, emotional support) program;
and rotations through the specialty center’s pediatric ED and PICU.
These activities also help cement relationships with the referring facility’s staff.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

77.2 Risk Adjustment and Outcomes
Measurement of Pediatric Emergency
Medical Services
Anna K. Weiss
Health services research has demonstrated wide variation in implementation of equitable, evidence-­based care for pediatric patients in
U.S. hospitals, a reality that can negatively affect the health of children
and youth (see Chapter 2). The complexities of delivering high-­quality,
evidence-­based care are magnified in the emergency department (ED),
where patients are often in crisis, patient-­physician interactions are
brief, and the variety and volume of complaints and diagnoses are
immense. In the context of this frenetic environment, practitioners can
only assess their local system relative to recognized benchmarks and
standards of care if there are clear guidelines for measurement of performance. However, no two places of practice are the same, and a single
ED may differ significantly from a theoretical “best practice” standard.
To reflect this, practitioners seeking to make local improvements must
assess not only raw outcomes (e.g., throughput times, mortality, patient
satisfaction) but must also adjust for severity of illness, case mix, and
risk of morbidity.

OUTCOME MEASURES IN EMERGENCY MEDICAL
SERVICES FOR CHILDREN

To ensure delivery of equitable, evidence-­based care in the ED, pediatric emergency medical systems must support the use of national standards for emergency care performance measurement. The Donabedian
structure-­process-­outcome model provides a framework for most contemporary quality measurement and improvement activities. In this
framework, structural elements provide indirect quality-­of-­care measures related to a physical setting and resources (e.g., available staff,
equipment, and supplies). Process indicators provide a measure of the
quality of care and services by evaluating the method or process by
which care is delivered, including both technical and interpersonal
components. Outcome elements describe valued results related to
lengthening life, relieving pain, reducing disabilities, and satisfying the
consumer.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77 u Emergency Medical Services for Children
A true outcome-­based approach to performance improvement
describes observable measures such as mortality, risk of organ system failure, and disability. An alternative approach is a resource-­based
outcome measure with a definition that is relative to the level of care
required. Children who are more ill generally require more resources;
therefore resource use across groups of patients reflects relative severity of illness within the groups, provided clinicians have a similar
approach to practice. Examples of resource-­based outcomes include
need for hospital admission (ED disposition), ED length of stay, costs,
and diagnostic and therapeutic interventions performed in the ED.
Although this approach provides a measurement of clinical activity,
when used in a vacuum it does not indicate whether the patient receiving the therapeutic interventions or resources actually needed them
(i.e., data may also reflect physician behavior and/or [lack of] experience). Therefore some other assessment is needed that incorporates
information on how sick the patient is or their specific diagnosis.
Table 77.3 provides a list of performance measures for pediatric
ED care developed by the Emergency Medical Services for Children Innovation and Improvement Center supported by the Health
Resources and Services Administration of the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.

RISK ADJUSTMENT

The purpose of measuring outcomes in the ED is to evaluate performance—offering EDs and other components of the healthcare
system the opportunity to make meaningful improvements over
time using benchmarks within and between units. When making
comparisons over time, one must ensure that patient-­related attributes (e.g., age, preexisting conditions, severity of illness) have not
changed; otherwise, one may be looking at changes in demography
and case mix rather than at true change in performance. To ensure
fair and meaningful measurement across time, risk adjustment is
necessary to level the playing field. As an example, illness severity
typifies the concept of risk—the higher the severity, the higher the
risk of a given outcome. Without risk adjustment, EDs with sicker
patients may appear to have poorer outcomes.

Risk Adjustment Tools in the ED

Although other risk adjustment scoring systems—such as the PRISM
score for pediatric critical care—use mortality and morbidity as primary outcomes, this approach is not appropriate for the ED setting.
Across U.S. EDs, pediatric mortality is low, and a patient’s presenting
physiology may reflect interventions performed in the prehospital setting. Similarly, eventual morbidity and/or mortality may reflect what
happens in the PICU or during hospital ward care.

Table 77.3  Stakeholder-­Endorsed Performance Measures
for Pediatric Emergency Care
• Measuring weight in kilograms for patients <18 years of age
• Presence of a method to identify age-based abnormal pediatric
vital signs
• Pediatric equipment in the ED
• Presence of on-site pediatric coordinator(s)
• Parent/caregiver understanding of discharge instructions
• Door to provider time
• Total length of stay
• Reducing pain in children with acute fractures
• Children with minor head trauma receiving a head CT scan
• Protocol for suspected child abuse in place
• Systemic corticosteroids in asthma patients with acute
exacerbation
• Evidence-based guideline for bronchiolitis
• Reducing antibiotic use in children with viral illnesses
• Return visits within 48 hours resulting in admission
• Medication error rates
ACEP, American College of Emergency Physicians; AAP, American Academy of
Pediatrics; ENA, Emergency Nurses’ Association; GCS, Glasgow Coma Score; CT,
computed tomography.

543

In the ED, the choice of a risk adjustment tool depends on ED-­
specific outcomes of interest. Two general risk adjustment tools have
been developed specifically for PEM, the second-­generation Pediatric
Risk of Admission (PRISA II) score and the Revised Pediatric Emergency Assessment Tool (RePEAT).

Pediatric Risk of Admission II

PRISA II uses components of acute and chronic medical history as
well as acute physiology to determine the probability of hospitalization. The outcome measure of interest is mandatory hospital admission
(admissions using therapies that are best delivered in the inpatient
setting). Table 77.4 lists the patient-­related attributes contributing to
the PRISA II risk adjustment score. Analytic models, including the
PRISA II score, have good calibration (how well the probabilities predicted from the model correlated with the observed outcomes in the
population) and discrimination (the ability to categorize subjects correctly into the categories of interest) with respect to mandatory hospital
admission. Construct validity of the PRISA II score has been demonstrated by measuring rates of the secondary outcomes: mandatory
admission, PICU admission, and mortality. As the probability of hospital admission rises, the proportion of patients with these increasing
care requirements also increases. This finding supports the use of the
PRISA II score as a measure of illness severity. PRISA II has also been
used to demonstrate racial/ethnic differences in severity-­adjusted hospitalization rates, as well as variation in hospitalization rates between
teaching and nonteaching hospitals.

Revised Pediatric Emergency Assessment Tool

RePEAT uses a limited set of data collected at the time of ED triage to
model severity of illness as reflected by the level of care provided in
the ED—for example, routine assessment (clinical examination only
± nonprescription medicine) vs specific ED care (ED diagnostics and/
or therapeutics) vs hospital admission. In this model, it is assumed
that patients needing a higher level of care have a higher severity of
illness. Table 77.5 lists the patient-­related attributes contributing to
Table 77.4  Elements of the PRISA II Score
• Age
• Injury severity
• Temperature
• Referral status (e.g., self-­referral vs referral from physician’s office
or from another ED)
• Presence of:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Abdominal pain in an adolescent
Immunodeficiency
Indwelling medical device
Controller asthma medication
Decreased mental status
Low systolic blood pressure (<70 neonates and infants; <83 children;
<100 adolescents)
High diastolic blood pressure (>59 neonates and infants; >70 children;
>90 adolescents)
Low serum bicarbonate value (<20 mEq/L)
High potassium value (>4.9 mEq/L)
High blood urea nitrogen value (>80 mg/dL)
High white blood cell count (>20,000/mm3)
Oxygen therapy other than during inhaled bronchodilator treatments
Low bicarbonate and high potassium values

Table 77.5  Elements of the RePEAT Score
• Age
• Chief complaint
• Triage category
• Current use of prescription medications
• Arrival via EMS (ground/air)
• Heart rate (relative to age-­based norms)
• Respiratory rate (relative to age-­based norms)
• Temperature

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

544 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the RePEAT risk adjustment score. Analytic models such as RePEAT
have good calibration and discrimination with respect to predicting ED care and hospital admission. Furthermore, analytic models
that compare costs and length of stay between EDs are improved by
adjusting for severity of illness using the RePEAT score. RePEAT is a
reasonable objective marker of severity of illness that could be used in
the administrative process comparing outcomes between EDs. With
implementation of scoring systems such as PRISA II and RePEAT,
U.S. EDs can benchmark the care that they provide to children and
make meaningful improvements to ensure that this care is equitable
and evidence-­based.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

77.3 Principles Applicable to the
Developing World
David M. Walker and Victorio R. Tolentino Jr.
The maturity of pediatric emergency medicine (PEM) in any given
area depends on the healthcare priorities and resources of that geographic or physical setting. The places in which emergency care takes
place range from the community (especially for those with no access
to organized medical care) to state-­of-­the-­art pediatric emergency
departments (EDs), typically in larger population centers. The scope
ranges from the care of the individual patient to the management of
populations of children involved in large-­scale disasters. Barriers to
quality care vary in each situation and in each part of the world, with
the implication for the PEM practitioner that the care provided must
be relevant to the local context of healthcare.

CONTINUUM-­OF-­CARE MODEL

This Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC) framework can
also be applied to discussion of emergency care for children on a global
level (see Chapter 77). Although medical infrastructure in some parts
of the developing world may not be consistent or well organized, or
has been weakened by civil strife, natural disasters, or economic loss,
the EMSC framework can still apply generally to individual healthcare
systems.

Prevention
Infectious Diseases

International child health has focused mainly on reducing the incidence of preventable childhood illnesses, primarily through immunization initiatives. Enormous advances have been realized in measles,
neonatal tetanus, and polio; wild-­type smallpox was eradicated in
1978. Although there are advocates for providing primary care interventions (e.g., vaccinations) in the ED, the role of the PEM practitioner
in this area of prevention has been limited.

Injuries

Injuries are a leading cause of childhood morbidity and mortality.
Unintentional injuries constitute 90% of injury mortality to children 5-­19 years old and are the cause of 9% of the world’s mortality
(see Chapter 14). Intentional injuries, which remain underrecognized and underreported, make a smaller but significant contribution. Unintentional injuries cause more than 2,000 childhood deaths
daily, or 950,000 annually worldwide. The burden of these deaths is
borne disproportionately by children in middle-­and lower-­income
countries, where >95% of all injury-­related deaths occur. For each
of these deaths, many more children are permanently disabled, and
an even larger number are treated and released without permanent
sequelae.
Traffic-­related injuries, burns, and drowning are the main causes of
injury-­related mortality in children. The World Health Organization
(WHO) and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) have outlined several proven injury prevention strategies of which child health
practitioners in the global community must be aware. Although these

strategies have proved effective, the data are based on U.S. research and
may not be generalizable to other countries.

Out-­of-­Hospital Care

Out-­of-­hospital care comprises access to emergency services, prehospital care, and interfacility transport of patients. Morbidity and
mortality arise from delayed or limited access to emergency care,
lack of prehospital care, transport without proper monitoring or
trained personnel, or delayed transport to a higher level of care.
Safe transport of seriously ill children is a neglected global health
issue. An emergency response system must address the following
links in the patient’s care: a communication system with prompt
activation of emergency medical services (EMS), the correct assessment and initial treatment of the patient, and the rapid transport to
definitive care.

Access to Care

When a child is injured or ill, a parent or caretaker must be able to
access help and activate EMS. In the majority of low-­and middle-­
income countries, no universal emergency numbers have been established, requiring access by direct dialing to an ambulance, if such
private services exist. In countries that have a universal emergency
number, barriers remain related to absence of phones in some households, unclear addresses in rural areas, and insufficient reach of the
emergency system.
In most low-­and middle-­income countries, the family must bring
the ill or injured child to the health facility for stabilization and
treatment. For this to occur, families must also overcome financial
and geographic barriers, which can result in delayed presentation
for care. This delay predictably increases the likelihood of associated complications and decreases the likelihood of full recovery and
survival.

Prehospital Care

In regions with maturing EMS systems, there must be adequately
trained personnel to stabilize and transport the child to a medical facility. The quality and level of training of such prehospital personnel vary
among countries and within regions of the same country. In urban
areas, there is a greater concentration of medical care and therefore
a greater opportunity to have strong prehospital training. In most of
Asia and sub-­Saharan Africa, trained personnel are used primarily to
transfer patients between health facilities, not from the initial site of
illness or injury. In most high-­income countries, medical services are
dispatched to the patient.
Around the world, the effort to establish standardized approaches
to prehospital care exists primarily in the form of courses to educate EMS and hospital personnel in the emergency management of
patients. The WHO manuals Prehospital Trauma Care Systems and
Guidelines for Essential Trauma Care focus on guidelines for prehospital and trauma care systems that are affordable and sustainable. The
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) course “Pediatric Education
for Prehospital Professionals” is a dynamic, modularized teaching tool
designed to provide specific pediatric prehospital education that can
be adapted to any EMS system. Table 77.6 describes additional prehospital resources.
Although most middle-­and high-­income countries have a system
of trained EMS workers, lower-­income countries lack this advanced
tier of emergency care. In these countries, commercial drivers, volunteers, and willing bystanders provide the first line of care. Training
a cadre of first responders can rely on existing networks of aid or
can be drawn from specific populations, such as students, soldiers,
or public servants. Training needs to emphasize basic lifesaving and
limb-­saving interventions, including how to stop bleeding and support breathing, access advanced care, and splint broken limbs. In
Ghana, for example, taxi drivers participated in a first-­aid course that
relied heavily on demonstration and practice rather than knowledge
transfer through didactic sessions. Taxi drivers were selected because
they already provided much of the transport for injured patients. Two
years after the course, external evaluators favorably rated the quality

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77 u Emergency Medical Services for Children

545

Table 77.6  Pediatric Emergency Care Resources
PREHOSPITAL CARE
Emergency Pediatric Care
Course developed by the National Association of Emergency
Medical Technicians (NAEMT) focused on field treatment of sick
and injured children. Course is open to physicians, nurses, EMTs,
and paramedics.
Website: https://www.naemt.org/education/epc
Pediatric Trauma Life Support for Prehospital Care Providers
An 8-­hour pediatric prehospital course sponsored by the global
organization International Trauma Life Support (ITLS)
Website: https://www.itrauma.org/education/itls-­pediatric/
Pediatric Education for Prehospital Professionals (PEPP)
Curriculum designed specifically to teach prehospital professionals
how to assess and manage ill or injured children.
Website: https://www.peppsite.com/
HOSPITAL CARE
Pocket Book of Hospital Care for Children: Second Edition
WHO publication providing guidelines for the management of
common illnesses in resource-­limited settings; incorporates
both the Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment (ETAT)
and Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI)
guidelines.
Website: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/978-­92-­4-­
154837-­3
African Federation of Emergency Medicine (AFEM) Handbook of
Acute and Emergency Care
Management strategies organized according to low-­, moderate-­, and
full-­resource settings.
Website: https://afem.africa/project/afem-­handbook-­of-­acute-­and-­
emergency-­care/
African Federation of Emergency Medicine (AFEM) Rapid Approach
Protocols for Children
Open-­access clinical protocols for common presenting problems in
children. Includes differential diagnoses and recommendations on
initial investigations.
Website: https://www.dropbox.com/sh/cwhcl3eu8vrvwqu/AAA-­
MSDs9u3Y0SIgwU1R3hFxa?dl=0
African Federation of Emergency Medicine (AFEM) Tier 1 Paediatric
Emergency Medicine Curriculum
Open-­access curriculum targeted to nurses, EMS personnel,
pharmacists, and other providers who care for acutely ill and injured
children. Organized into modules by clinical presentation or disease
processes.
Website: https://www.dropbox.com/sh/pgv8zd5y6z1elvo/AAA_df2fUj
1bSzABbjZFjSgfa?dl=0
Standards of Care for Children in Emergency Departments,
Version 3.0
Open-­access document from the International Federation of
Emergency Medicine that proposes worldwide standards for
pediatric emergency care.
Website: https://www.ifem.cc/standards_of_care_for_children_in_
emergency_departments_v3_2019
African Emergency Nursing Curriculum
Open-­access educational framework for emergency nursing practice
in resource-­limited settings. Developed by the African Federation of
Emergency Nurses.
Website: http://afem.co.za/wp-­content/uploads/2017/10/AFEM-­
African-­Emergency-­Nursing-­Curriculum.pdf
HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

of their care compared with untrained drivers. In rural areas, such
first responders become vital in providing emergency interventions
when more definitive care is distant. Thus a system of trained first
responders forms the foundation of an effective prehospital system.
In the French model, a physician, often an emergency medicine specialist, will review calls for acuity and can dispatch a physician-­led team
by ambulance to go to the patient’s home to assess, stabilize, and initiate treatment. This Franco-­German system is used in other countries,

Manual for the Health Care of Children in Humanitarian Emergencies
WHO publication that provides comprehensive guidance on childcare
in emergencies; includes information on care of traumatic injuries
and mental health emergencies.
Website: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241596879
Pediatric Disaster Care Centers of Excellence (United States)
Coalition of medical centers and government agencies established to
guide the delivery of pediatric healthcare services in a disaster.
Website: https://emscimprovement.center/domains/preparedness/asprcoe/
MENTAL HEALTH EMERGENCIES
The Mental Health & Psychosocial Support Network
A hosted online practice network organized around crowdsourcing
of mental health and psychosocial support resources for use in
emergencies and ongoing humanitarian crises in the developing world.
Website: https://mhpss.net/
Save the Children Psychological First Aid Training
Practitioner training manual dedicated to the provision of
psychological first aid to children exposed to trauma.
Website: https://resourcecentre.savethechildren.net/document-­
collections/save-­children-­psychological-­first-­aid-­training
Psychological First Aid: Guide for Field Workers
Open-­access training manual from the WHO for those who may
respond to large-­scale crises.
Website: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241548205
ACCESS TO ACADEMIC PUBLICATIONS RELEVANT TO PEM
PEMdatabase.org
A website devoted to pediatric emergency medicine (PEM). Contains
links to conferences, evidence-­based medicine reviews, research
networks, and professional organizations.
Website: www.pemdatabase.org
HINARI Access to Research for Health Programme
Program established by WHO and others to enable developing
countries to gain access to one of the world’s largest collections of
biomedical and health literature.
Website: https://partnership.who.int/hinari
ORGANIZATIONS INVOLVED IN GLOBAL PEM ACTIVITIES
	American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) Ambassador Program
Provides the names of U.S.-boarded emergency medicine physicians who
can provide advice and information on issues pertaining to the progress
and status of emergency medicine in their assigned countries.
Website: https://www.acep.org/intl/ambassador-program/
U.	S. Agency for International Development (USAID)
Government agency providing U.S. economic and humanitarian
assistance worldwide.
Website: https://www.usaid.gov/global-­health/health-­areas/maternal-­
and-­child-­health/technical-­areas/child-­health
Child Health and Development Unit, World Health Organization (WHO)
United Nations agency dedicated to child health.
Website: https://www.who.int/teams/maternal-­newborn-­child-­
adolescent-­health-­and-­ageing/child-­health
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
Organization dedicated to providing lifesaving assistance to children
affected by disasters and to protecting their rights in any circumstances;
formerly United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund.
Website: www.unicef.org
Safe Kids Worldwide
International nonprofit organization dedicated to preventing
unintentional childhood injury.
Website: www.safekids.org

including many in Latin America and Europe. There are no clear data
on the cost-­effectiveness and patient outcomes associated with delivery
of patients to the nearest facility vs bringing hospital resources to the
patient.

Methods of Transport

In many low-­income countries, there is no reliable means of transport. Health centers may only have one vehicle for transport to a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

546 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
higher-­level facility. This vehicle may also be used for outreach primary care services, such as offering immunizations and collecting
drugs and equipment from a central supply location, and sometimes, improperly for personal reasons by local officials or politicians. In large cities, taxis and auto rickshaws are frequently used
because they are rapidly available, well disseminated, and able to
pass around traffic jams. Where organized prehospital systems exist,
different types of vehicles are adapted for emergency transportation.
The WHO recommends identifying transport vehicles in advance,
choosing vehicles that can be repaired and maintained locally, and
equipping the vehicles according to recognized standards. The provision of available and appropriately staffed and equipped transport
vehicles is crucial to the realization of recommended emergency
care plans.

Practitioners

Hospital-­Based Care

Clinical Guidelines

Once a child has reached a medical facility for the care of an injury
or illness, adequate emergency services should be available. In many
countries the ED serves only as a triage area where patients are distinguished by their likely disease process and directed for admission to
the corresponding unit within the hospital. Strengthening emergency
services includes seeing the ED as a unit where definitive treatment
can be provided to the ill and injured child. Critically ill children must
receive not only prompt care but also correct care. Such expedience and
accuracy are ensured by implementation of an effective triage system,
moving the sickest patients to immediate care and standardizing the
initial care of emergency conditions.

Triage

Too often, children presenting to EDs are treated on a first-­come first-­
served basis in an approach that creates long waiting times for critically
ill children, a contributor to unnecessary mortality. Medical facilities
should adopt an efficient and effective triage system to respond rapidly to the needs of patients and to assign the appropriate amount of
resources. The WHO has developed a course entitled Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment (ETAT). This course teaches emergency, priority, or nonurgent signs and how to provide emergency
treatment for life-­threatening conditions. ETAT emphasizes the evaluation of a patient’s ABCD status to identify emergency situations—the
patency of the airway (A), the quality of breathing (B), the quality of
circulation and presence of coma or convulsions (C), and the presence
of severe dehydration (D).
One of the benefits of the ETAT guidelines is that they can be adapted
to centers with limited resources and are applicable to areas with high
morbidity and mortality from meningitis, dehydration, malaria, respiratory illness, and malnutrition. Another benefit is that the care algorithms are based on limited diagnostic studies, that is, hemoglobin
measurement, blood smear for malaria, and bedside blood glucose
testing. Widely accepted triage assessment guidelines are teachable to
emergency care staff, and their adoption can provide better organization within a healthcare center. At the Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital in Blantyre, Malawi, for example, the institution of triage and rapid
treatment in its emergency care center led to a 50% decrease in the
mortality of children within 24 hours of presentation to the hospital,
with a further 50% decrease as implementation and practice of triaging
patients have continued.
Beyond triage, education on overall emergency center organization
is a low-­resource intervention that can reduce some of the obstacles to
quality care delivery. Additionally, the arrangement of short-­stay areas
(hydration and infusion rooms) within or near the ED can lessen the
burden on inpatient units.

Pediatric-­Specific Emergency Centers

Anecdotally, most countries have developed at least one pediatric-­
capable center, usually as part of an academic medical center. The
emergency services in these centers are variable, but certainly can be
a starting point from which to build overall improvement in pediatric
emergency care.

Throughout the world, nurses, paramedics, nonphysician clinicians,
and nonspecialist physicians deliver most of the care to acutely ill or
injured children. The majority of sick children attend local clinics or
district or central hospitals, where financial and human resources
are not always matched to the potential acuity of presenting patient
complaints. Nominal supervision is provided to staff attending these
patients. Pediatric EDs located in tertiary hospitals are often staffed
by training physicians with little or no supervision from faculty, who
themselves may have limited exposure to or training in pediatric emergencies. General hospitals lack dedicated pediatric staff; guidelines as
to which patients should be moved to a higher level of care are often
not standardized and depend on local influences and/or cultural beliefs
about health and illness.
The Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) guidelines were developed by the WHO and UNICEF to provide assistance
in the initial triage and management of the presenting signs and symptoms of the major killers of children <5 years old in first-­level health
facilities (e.g., clinics, health centers, outpatient departments of hospitals). The flow charts within each chapter of the IMCI manuals allow
easy accessibility to materials that can enhance education and outreach
to less experienced health workers.
Evaluations in various countries of the implementation of IMCI
guidelines have shown improvements in health worker performance
and quality of care, as well as decreases in delay in treatment and mortality of the under-­5 population. These guidelines also dramatically
reduce the cost of healthcare. The WHO website provides all the necessary implementation tools, including course manuals and evaluation
tools.
The International Federation of Emergency Medicine developed
Standards of Care for Children in Emergency Departments to improve
emergency care globally. These standards are not just aimed at dedicated EDs, but at any setting where emergency care takes place, regardless of the providers or the resources available. At the same time,
however, the existence of the standards allows sites to advocate for
improved resources dedicated to expertise in the various aspects of
providing quality emergency care for children. The standards address
design of care spaces, child-­and family-­centered care, assessment of
ill and injured children, staff training and competencies, quality and
safety, and disaster response.

Trauma

Morbidity and mortality from trauma are among the most prevalent
problems for children worldwide. Trauma care presents the challenge
of sequential, often simple, interventions that must be performed in
a timely manner to limit the severity of the outcome. However, with
lack of specific training, signs and symptoms of pediatric trauma may
go unrecognized or may be underappreciated. Trauma courses such as
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) are educational tools that can
be disseminated to improve the quality of care at emergency centers
worldwide. For low-­resource settings, the WHO has developed the
Integrated Management for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care
toolkit, which provides clear directions and reasoning for the initial
care of injured patients. Not expressly addressed in the ATLS course
is specific concern about child abuse as the cause of trauma. This is
an area of pediatric care that many countries do not yet address comprehensively in their medical training, their law enforcement, or their
judicial systems. The epidemiologic need for reliable trauma registries
is great, as is the need to identify personnel with trauma management
skill sets and dedicated trauma centers to serve as higher-­level referral sites.

Equipment

Pediatric emergency equipment guidelines are available for a variety of
settings where acutely ill and injured children would present. Although
these equipment guidelines may represent minimum supplies to treat

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77 u Emergency Medical Services for Children
the widest variety of pediatric emergencies, the roles of substitution
and improvisation often provide for the equivalent function of recommended supplies.

Inpatient Services

After the initial stabilization, children requiring ongoing care are
admitted to the hospital. The quality of inpatient services varies
greatly depending on institutional and provider experience, comfort
with pediatric conditions, and the resources available to treat them.
The WHO has produced the Pocket Book of Hospital Care for Children,
which is based on IMCI guidelines and focuses on inpatient management of high-­morbidity/high-­mortality illnesses common in developing countries.

Mental Health Emergencies

The recognition of mental health conditions among the pediatric population is continuing to evolve. It is estimated that about 15% of children globally suffer from anxiety, depression, or other mental health
challenges. The prevalence of mental health problems is likely higher,
as much of the existing data comes from Europe and North America, whereas a majority of children live in middle-­and lower-­income
regions of the world.
Mental health capacity varies by country and is reflective of cultural
beliefs about mental health and the priority and funding that local
governments have allocated to address these concerns. It is widely
accepted that the current global mental health infrastructure fails to
meet the existing demands of the world’s population. These concerns
are amplified in the developing world and disproportionately affect
children whose lives are often touched by emotional and social trauma
(e.g., poverty, natural disasters, armed conflict).
Increasingly, children are presenting to emergency settings in crisis.
In many developing countries, mental health services are concentrated
in urban settings and lacking in rural areas. Where there is no shortage
of medical personnel, expertise in child psychiatry corresponds with
the local development of this specialty. In areas with no formal mental health system, care is provided by an informal network of family
members, faith healers, or community leaders who do not have formal medical training. It is essential that children presenting for mental
health evaluation receive a comprehensive examination, as certain psychiatric presentations can be rooted in infectious diseases conditions
or inadequate nutrition, which are prevalent in some developing world
contexts.
The WHO has provided examples of best practice in the acute treatment of mental health conditions in Hospital-­Based Mental Health
Services: Promoting Person-­
Centered and Rights-­
Based Approaches.
This document is available as a section of the Guidance and Technical Packages on Community Mental Health Services available on the
WHO website. Although the publication does not include examples
of pediatric-­specific care, the document is meant to be tailored to the
local context and can be adapted to the needs of children.

Telemedicine

Telemedicine technology is one way to overcome provider shortages or
geographic challenges that can affect the care of acutely ill and injured

547

children. Patients and families can potentially access basic emergency
care through video-­based platforms. The responding provider can use
established triage techniques to help determine the severity of illness
and the need for consultation at a healthcare center; they can also recommend basic first aid as needed.
Access to real-­time lectures, case discussions, and conferences,
led by experts in PEM, can increase the capacity of those in limited-­
resource settings to provide care for pediatric emergency patients.
These educational offerings can also provide a forum for a bilateral exchange of ideas and perspectives. Expert consultations via
real-­time telemedicine programs or a store-­and-­forward process,
in which the request for consultation is recorded and sent to an
expert who can reply typically over email, can be used. Additionally,
within a given region, telemedicine can link the referring hospital
to the receiving hospital in order to collaborate on decisions about
management and the need for transfer.
The success of telemedicine collaborations depends on a variety of
factors, including availability of easy-­to-­use technology and reliable
internet access.

HUMANITARIAN DISASTERS

Children are a vulnerable population who experience disproportionate suffering during humanitarian emergencies, either natural
(earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes, floods, droughts) or manmade
(armed conflicts, terrorist attacks). The under-­5 population is especially susceptible to infectious diseases, malnutrition, and trauma
after disasters.
The WHO Manual for the Health Care of Children in Humanitarian Emergencies is based on IMCI guidelines and addresses the
emergency care of children in disaster situations where hospital facilities and resources are not immediately available. It goes
beyond the IMCI guidelines by discussing initial assessment and
management of trauma, burns, poisonings, neonatal illness, and
psychosocial problems, which are considered high priority in acute
care settings.

Exchange and Dissemination of Information

The WHO established the internet-­based HINARI Access to Research
for Health Programme in 2002 to provide institutions in low-­resource
countries free or reduced-­cost access to medical literature. Registration
for the program is required. Eligibility is based on national economic
or development criteria.
Another valuable tool is the website pemdatabase.org. This nonproprietary site was started as an online resource for PEM practitioners. It
contains links to PEM abstracts and articles, evidence-­based reviews,
pediatric resuscitation websites, and relevant journals, as well as PEM
conferences and professional organizations.
In countries where internet access continues to be a barrier, resources
for education and research may be limited to out-­of-­date textbooks and
journals.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

548 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Chapter 78

Triage of the Acutely Ill
Child
Anna K. Weiss and Frances B. Balamuth
Identifying the acutely ill child in the ambulatory setting is a challenge. Children presenting to pediatricians’ offices, urgent care practices, and emergency departments (EDs) may have a range of illnesses
from simple viral infections to life-­threatening emergencies. Although
most children in this setting will have a benign course of illness, it is
incumbent on the pediatric practitioner to discern quickly and accurately which children are likely to deteriorate from potentially serious
or life-­threatening disease. When assessing an acutely ill child, practitioners must remember that the early signs of severe illness may be
subtle. There are about five pediatric triage system tools that assess the
severity of illness and thus the degree of needed interventions. One
example is presented in Table 78.1.

ASSESSMENT OF VITAL SIGNS

Assessment of vital signs is critical in all pediatric visits for acute illness, including temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood
pressure. Normal vital signs vary with age. Although there have been
increasing efforts to build evidence-­based vital sign cutoffs for different age-­groups, most institutions use nonempirically derived cutoffs
such as those in Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS). Tachycardia
is common in children presenting for acute care and can result from
benign (fever, pain, dehydration) to life-­threatening (septic shock,
hemorrhage, multisystem inflammatory system in children [MIS-­C],
dysrhythmia, heart failure, hyperthyroidism) conditions. An abnormal
heart rate should prompt a full history and physical examination, as
described later, and careful reassessment (often multiple times) after the
presumed cause is identified and treated. Most children will improve
after initiation of simple interventions such as antipyretics or analgesia.
Tachycardia that persists after fever, pain, and dehydration have been
treated must be evaluated further, particularly if the child appears ill or
has a deficit in perfusion or altered mental state.
Tachypnea is also common among ill children and has many causes,
including fever, respiratory conditions (bronchiolitis, asthma, pneumonia), cardiac disease (heart failure), and metabolic acidosis (shock,
poisoning, diabetic ketoacidosis). Like tachycardia, tachypnea often
resolves with antipyretics in febrile children and should be reassessed
to ensure resolution once fever has been managed. In cases where
bronchiolitis and asthma have been ruled out, persistent tachypnea
and fever can be a sign of pneumonia, even in the absence of focal
lung findings on examination. Consider evaluation for metabolic acidosis in cases of significant tachypnea without apparent pulmonary
or cardiac causes. Apnea is a sign of respiratory failure and should be
treated emergently with bag-­valve-­mask ventilation and immediate ED
evaluation.
Hypotension is rare in children and, when present, it is a sign of
critical illness. Children with hypotension should be evaluated in an
ED. Hypotension is evidence of decompensated circulatory shock and
can result from severe dehydration, sepsis, hemorrhage, neurogenic
spinal shock, anaphylaxis, or cardiogenic shock.
Pulse oximetry (oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation, Spo2) should be
assessed in children with respiratory or cardiac illness/compromise
and in children with underlying abnormalities of oxygenation. Healthy
children have Spo2 >95%. The practitioner should consider evaluating
for any underlying respiratory or cardiac causes in children with Spo2
<93–95%. For children with underlying abnormalities, the child’s baseline Spo2 should be assessed and alterations from that baseline should
be investigated further.

The combination of bradycardia, hypertension, and altered breathing known as Cushing triad can be a sign of life-­threatening increased
intracranial pressure (ICP) and should be evaluated in an ED. Anisocoria and a sixth cranial nerve palsy are other signs of increased ICP.
Toxidromes should also be considered in children with abnormal
combinations of vital signs (see Chapter 94).

HISTORY

A thorough history is paramount to identifying patients whose condition will require prompt intervention. Obtaining an accurate history from young patients is challenging, particularly with preverbal or
anxious children who are unable or unwilling to localize the source of
their discomfort. In such instances, parents or caretakers often provide
the most important information, and their perceptions of the child’s
course of illness must be carefully considered. Pediatricians should be
guided by the patient’s chief complaint to ask open-­ended questions that
help distinguish between benign and potentially life-­threatening disease entities. The most common complaints leading to acute care visits among children include fever, headache and altered mental status,
trauma, abdominal pain and vomiting, respiratory distress, and chest
pain. Table 78.2 describes signs and symptoms and risk factors that
should prompt immediate transfer to an ED or, if already in the ED,
initiation of rapid intervention.
Fever is the most common reason for a sick-­child visit. Most cases
of fever are the result of self-­limited viral infection. However, pediatricians need to be aware of the age-­dependent potential for serious bacterial or viral infections, such as urinary tract infection (UTI), sepsis,
meningitis, pneumonia, acute abdominal infection, and osteoarticular
infection.
During the first 2 months of life, the neonate is at risk for sepsis
caused by pathogens that are uncommon in older children. These
organisms include group B streptococcus, Escherichia coli, Listeria
monocytogenes, and herpes simplex virus (HSV). In neonates, the history must include maternal obstetric information and the patient’s
birth history. Risk factors for sepsis include untreated maternal group
B streptococcus colonization, prematurity, chorioamnionitis, and prolonged rupture of membranes. If there is a maternal history of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) during the pregnancy, the differential
diagnosis must be expanded to include infection with those pathogens.
Septic infants can present with lethargy, poor feeding, grunting respirations, and cool or mottled extremities in addition to fever (or hypothermia). Febrile infants in the first 1 to 2 months of life should be
evaluated broadly for infection, including sampling blood, urine, and,
in some cases, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (see Chapter 220).
When the infant matures beyond 2 months of age and receives their
first set of vaccinations, serious bacterial infections become less common. Evaluation to rule out serious infection is an important part of
treating the febrile older child. Children with fever should have a full
set of vital signs, history, and physical examination to ensure that critical illness is absent and to identify any focal source. Red flags for septic
shock include hypotension, poor perfusion, altered mental status, or
the presence of purpuric or erythrodermic rash. Red flags for meningitis include severe headache, meningismus, and altered mental state.
The presence of any of these signs should prompt emergency evaluation in the ED or rapid treatment if the patient is already in the ED.
Additional focal findings to consider include evaluation for acute
otitis media, pharyngitis, pneumonia, abdominal infections (bacterial
enteritis, appendicitis), skin and soft tissue infections, septic arthritis,
and osteomyelitis. Occult UTI should be considered if three of the
following risk factors are present: age <1 year, fever >39°C, fever >48
hours, and no focal source of fever. Pneumonia should be considered in
the presence of tachypnea, hypoxia, or focal findings on chest examination. Bacteremia is rare in the post–pneumococcal and Haemophilus
influenzae vaccine era but should be considered if staphylococcal infection or meningococcemia is suspected and in unvaccinated children or
children with signs of septic shock. In addition to infection, inflammatory conditions to consider include juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA),
macrophage activating syndrome (MAS), Kawasaki disease (KD), and
MIS-­C. The diagnosis of KD, MIS-­C, or MAS should be considered if

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 78 u Triage of the Acutely Ill Child
Table 78.1  	

549

Definition of Emergency Severity Index for Children

LEVEL 1
Cardiac arrest
Respiratory arrest
Severe respiratory distress
SpO2 <90
Critically injured and unresponsive
trauma patient
Severe respiratory distress
with agonal or
Gasping-­type respirations
Severe bradycardia or tachycardia
with signs of
Hypoperfusion
Hypotension with signs of
hypoperfusion
Trauma patient who needs
resuscitation
Anaphylactic reaction
Baby who is flaccid
Hypoglycemia with a change in
mental status

LEVEL 2

LEVEL 3

LEVEL 4

LEVEL 5

Seizures
Sepsis, severe dehydration
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Child abuse, burns
Head trauma
Vitamins/iron or other overdoses/
ingestions
Infant less than 28 days of age with
a fever of 38°C (100.4°F) or greater
1-­3 mo of age with a fever of 38°C
(100.4°F) or greater may be
considered up to II
Vital signs not stable

Multiple resources needed
3 mo to 3 yr of age
T >39°C (102.2°F)

Single resource
needed

Only history,
physical exam
required

From Wang L, Zhou H, Zhu JF. Application of emergency severity index in pediatric emergency department. World J Emerg Med. 2011;2(4):279-­282, Table 1, p. 280.

the patient meets the diagnostic criteria for that illness, although some
patients may have an atypical or incomplete presentation (see Chapters
207 and 208).
For patients presenting in an altered mental state, the pediatrician
should inquire about symptoms such as fever or headache. Screening
questions should explore feeding changes, medications in the household,
ill contacts, and the possibility of trauma. Parents will often describe
a febrile child as lethargic, but further questioning will reveal a tired-­
appearing child who interacts appropriately when no longer febrile. The
child who appears ill only when febrile must be differentiated from the
lethargic patient who presents with suspected sepsis or meningitis and
from the child whose altered behavior is secondary to an intracranial
emergency or seizure. Infants with meningitis, sepsis, or cardiac defects
may have a history of irritability, inconsolability, poor feeding, grunting breathing, seizures, poor urine output, and/or color changes such as
pallor, mottling, or cyanosis. Patients with poisoning or inborn error of
metabolism can also present with lethargy, poor feeding, unusual odors,
seizures, and vomiting. Nonaccidental trauma should always be considered in a lethargic infant, particularly in the absence of additional signs
or symptoms. In infants and young toddlers, rapidly growing head circumference or bulging anterior fontanel may signal increased ICP. Older
children may present with altered mental state as a result of meningitis/
encephalitis, trauma, or ingestions. School-­age children and adolescents
with meningitis may have a history of fever and neck pain; other associated symptoms may include rash, headache, photophobia, or vomiting.
Children with ingestions can present with other abnormal neurologic
symptoms, such as ataxia, slurred speech, and seizures, or with characteristic constellations of vital sign changes and other physical findings
consistent with certain toxidromes.
In patients with headache, ask questions about the chronicity of the
headache and any accompanying symptoms. Headaches that occur
upon arising in the morning, that are worse when lying flat, or that
are accompanied by vomiting are concerning for increased ICP. Similarly, headache accompanied by focal neurologic deficit(s) should be
referred to an ED for urgent head imaging. Although migraine headaches in teenagers are similar in presentation to those in adults (unilateral, throbbing, accompanied by an aura), pediatric practitioners
should be aware that migraines in prepubertal children may have a
nonclassic presentation; may be bilateral; and may not be accompanied
by aura, photophobia, or phonophobia.

Parents may interpret a variety of symptoms as respiratory distress,
and care must be taken to distinguish normal and benign respiratory
patterns from true respiratory distress. Tachypnea secondary to fever is
a common source of parental anxiety, and parents of newborn infants
are sometimes alarmed by the presence of periodic breathing. Parents
should be questioned about their child’s other symptoms, such as fever,
limitation of neck movement, drooling, choking, and the presence of
stridor or wheezing. A history of apnea or cyanosis warrants further
investigation. Practitioners should also remember that tachypnea in
a child without evidence of true respiratory distress may be evidence
of compensation for shock or metabolic acidosis, both of which will
require rapid treatment. Although wheezing is often secondary to
bronchospasm, it can also be caused by cardiac disease or congenital
airway anomalies such as vascular rings. Parents may interpret stridor
as noisy breathing or wheezing. Stridor is most frequently caused by
upper airway obstruction such as croup. However, anatomic abnormalities such as laryngeal webs, laryngomalacia, subglottic stenosis,
and paralyzed vocal cords also cause stridor. Toddlers who present
with breathing difficulty after a coughing or choking episode should
be evaluated for foreign body aspiration. In these cases, practitioners
must ask about the possibility of button-­battery ingestion, as this constitutes a true medical emergency that warrants immediate endoscopic
removal or transfer to a facility that can perform the procedure. In
toxic-­appearing children with stridor, the pediatrician should consider
epiglottitis, bacterial tracheitis, or a rapidly expanding retropharyngeal abscess. The incidence of epiglottitis has greatly declined with the
advent of the H. influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine, but it remains a possibility in the unimmunized or partially immunized patient. Children
with retropharyngeal abscesses may also present with drooling and
limitation of neck movement (especially hyperextension) after a recent
upper respiratory infection or penetrating mouth injury.
Abdominal pain is a common complaint in the ambulatory setting and can herald either acute intraabdominal or pelvic pathology,
or it can be a subtler sign of systemic illness. Both relatively benign
(e.g., streptococcal infection, UTI, pneumonia) and severe abdominal (e.g., appendicitis) or systemic (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis, MIS-­
C) illness can present with abdominal pain, and questions to the
patient and parent should include whether there is an extraabdominal source of discomfort. Questions should include details about
pain onset and location; presence of accompanying symptoms, such

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

550 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 78.2  History and Examination Findings that Should
Prompt Immediate Intervention and/or Transfer
to Emergency Department
HISTORY AND EXAM
FINDINGS

RISK FACTORS

RED FLAGS FOR RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Tachycardia
Tracheostomy
Tachypnea
Ventilator dependence
Cyanosis
History of critical airway
Apnea
Brief resolved unexplained event
(BRUE) with cyanosis or change
in tone
Suspected button-­battery
ingestion
Foreign body aspiration with
respiratory distress
Sitting up, leaning forward,
drooling
Respiratory distress with
hypoxemia
Altered mental status
RED FLAGS FOR CIRCULATORY FAILURE
Tachycardia
Oncology (or other
Tachypnea
immunosuppressed) patients
Cyanosis
Bone marrow or solid organ
Cold extremities, poor pulses
transplants
Apnea
Sickle cell (or otherwise asplenic)
Petechial or purpuric rashes
patients
Erythroderma
Infants <60 days old
Peritonitis
Unrepaired or repaired congenital
Bilious emesis
heart disease with change from
Post-­tonsillectomy or post-­
baseline pulse oximetry
adenoidectomy with bleeding
Bleeding disorder with trauma
Extremity trauma with
neurovascular deficits
RED FLAGS FOR NEUROLOGIC FAILURE
Tachycardia
Ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Bradycardia-­hypertension
Diabetes or metabolic disease
Double vision
with altered mental status
Ptosis
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy
Unequal pupils
Clotting disorder with neurologic
Apnea
change(s)
Frequent or prolonged seizure(s) Drug ingestion
Focal neurologic deficit(s)
Acute onset of severe headache
Suicidal or homicidal ideation
Psychosis
Adapted from Farah MM, Tay Y, Lavelle J. A general approach to ill and injured
children. In: Shaw KN, Bachur RG, eds. Fleischer and Ludwig’s Textbook of Pediatric
Emergency Medicine, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2020.

as fever and abdominal distention; and changes in feeding, urination, and stooling patterns. Care should be taken to elicit a history
of peritonitis or obstruction, including worsening pain with abrupt
movements and persistent or bilious vomiting.
In neonates, a tender abdomen with or without bilious emesis
should raise concern for the presence of a small bowel obstruction (e.g., volvulus). These infants appear ill and may have a history of decreased stooling. Pediatricians should be wary of neonates
with abdominal tenderness and bloody stools, as 10% of cases of
necrotizing enterocolitis occur in term infants. Infants with milk
protein intolerance can also present with bloody stools, but these
infants appear well and do not have abdominal tenderness. In older
patients the differential diagnosis for emergency causes of abdominal pain expands to include intussusception and appendicitis.
Patients with intussusception present in a variety of ways, ranging
from colicky abdominal pain but otherwise well between episodes
to being lethargic or in shock. The diagnosis of appendicitis in the

child younger than 3 years is extremely difficult because children in
this age-­group cannot localize pain well. In adolescent females with
abdominal pain, practitioners must obtain a menstrual and sexual
history, as acute lower abdominal pain may be caused by adnexal
pathology, including ovarian torsion or ectopic pregnancy.
For patients with vomiting, pediatricians should ask if they have
experienced bilious or blood-­stained emesis, abdominal distention
or constipation, weight changes, and diarrhea or bloody stools.
An infant with bilious emesis and abdominal distention may have
intestinal obstruction (as with midgut volvulus or Hirschsprung
disease), whereas an infant who appears immediately hungry after
nonbilious projectile vomiting may have pyloric stenosis. In an
older child, vomiting may be caused by peritonitis or obstruction
and by systemic illnesses, including diabetic ketoacidosis, ingestion, or trauma. Patients with headache and vomiting raise the concern for increased ICP and should be questioned about neurologic
changes, meningismus, and fever.
Practitioners should also obtain a thorough account of the child’s
past medical history. It is important to be aware of any underlying
chronic problems that might predispose the child to recurring infections or a serious acute illness. Children with sickle cell anemia,
indwelling central venous access devices, or immune compromise
are at increased risk for bacteremia and sepsis. Similarly, children
with prior surgery, including ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement or
intraabdominal procedures, can develop complications from their previous surgeries.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Observation is important when evaluating the acutely ill child. Most
observational data that the pediatrician gathers should focus on assessing the child’s response to stimuli. Does the child awaken easily? Does
the child smile and interact with the parent or with the examiner? Evaluating these responses requires knowledge of normal child development and an understanding of the manner in which normal responses
are elicited, depending on the child’s age.
During the physical examination, the pediatric practitioner seeks
evidence of illness. The portions of the exam that require the child to be
most cooperative are completed first. Initially, it is best to seat the child
on the parent’s lap; the older child may be seated on the examination
table. It is also important to assess the child’s willingness to move, as
well as ease of movement. It is reassuring to see the child moving about
on the parent’s lap with ease and without discomfort. Vital signs are
often overlooked but are invaluable in assessing ill children. The presence
of tachycardia out of proportion to fever and the presence of tachypnea
and blood pressure abnormalities raise the suspicion for more serious
illness. The respiratory evaluation includes determining respiratory
rate; noting the presence or absence of hypoxia by Spo2; and noting
any evidence of inspiratory stridor, expiratory wheezing, grunting,
coughing, or increased work of breathing (e.g., retractions, nasal flaring, accessory muscle use). The skin should be carefully examined for
rashes. Frequently, viral infections cause an exanthem, and many of
these eruptions are diagnostic, such as the reticulated rash and slapped-­
cheek appearance of parvovirus infections and the stereotypical appearance of hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease caused by coxsackieviruses, as
well as measles, chickenpox, and roseola. The skin examination may
also yield evidence of more serious infections, including petechiae and
purpura associated with bacteremia and erythroderma associated with
a toxin-­producing systemic infection. Cutaneous perfusion should be
assessed by warmth and capillary refill time. The extremities may then
be evaluated not only for ease of movement but also for the presence of
swelling, warmth, tenderness, or alterations in perfusion. Such abnormalities may indicate focal infections (e.g., cellulitis, bone/joint infection) or vascular changes (e.g., arterial or venous thromboembolus).
When an infant is seated and is least perturbed, the examiner should
assess the anterior fontanel to determine whether it is depressed, flat,
or bulging. While the child is calm and cooperative, the eyes should
be examined to identify features that might indicate an infectious or
neurologic process. Often, viral infections result in watery discharge
or redness of the bulbar conjunctivae. Bacterial infection, if superficial,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 78 u Triage of the Acutely Ill Child
results in purulent drainage; if the infection is more deep-­seated, tenderness, swelling, and redness of the tissues surrounding the eye may
be present, as well as proptosis, altered visual acuity, and impaired
extraocular movements. Abnormalities in pupillary response, extraocular movements, or ptosis may also be indicators of cranial nerve
abnormalities and, if new, are indications for head imaging.
During this initial portion of the physical examination, when the
child is most comfortable (and therefore most likely to be quiet), the
heart and lungs are auscultated. It is important to assess the adequacy of air entry into the lungs; the equality of breath sounds; and
any evidence of adventitial breath sounds, especially wheezes, rales,
or rhonchi. The coarse sound of air moving through a congested nasal
passage is frequently transmitted to the lungs. The examiner can
become attuned to these coarse sounds by placing the stethoscope
near the child’s nose and then compensating for this sound as the
chest is auscultated. The cardiac examination is next; findings such
as pericardial friction rubs, loud murmurs, irregular rhythms, gallop
rhythm, and distant heart sounds may indicate cardiac inflammation
or infection. In the neonate, murmurs may herald congenital heart
disease, especially in the presence of cyanosis, unequal extremity
pulses, or a differential in upper-­vs lower-­extremity blood pressures.
A complete cardiac exam should also look for displacement of the
point of maximal impulse (PMI) and the presence of jugular venous
distention or facial plethora.
The components of the physical examination that are more bothersome to the child are completed last. This is best done with the patient
on the examination table. Initially, the neck is examined to assess for
areas of swelling, redness, or tenderness, as may be seen in cervical
adenitis. Resistance to neck movement should prompt evaluation
for signs of meningeal irritation or retropharyngeal abscess. During
examination of the abdomen, the diaper—if present—is removed.
The abdomen is inspected for distention. Auscultation is performed to
assess adequacy of bowel sounds, followed by palpation. Every attempt
should be made to quiet a fussing child during this part of the exam;
if this is not possible, practitioners should note that increased crying
as the abdomen is palpated may indicate tenderness, especially if this
finding is focally reproducible. In addition to focal tenderness, palpation may elicit involuntary guarding or rebound tenderness (including
tenderness to percussion); these findings indicate peritoneal irritation,
as may be seen in appendicitis. During palpation of the abdomen,
practitioners should look for signs of hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.
When palpating the bottom-­most edge of the liver or spleen, examiners
should begin in the pelvis and work upward toward the ribs, because
severe organomegaly can be missed if the examiner begins palpating
in the mid-­abdomen. The inguinal area and genitals are then examined. One should assess the inguinal area for hernias. Care should be
taken to examine the testicles of males with abdominal pain; testicular trauma, testicular torsion, and epididymitis all may present with
abdominal discomfort. A unilateral swollen or painful testicle with an
absent cremasteric reflex on the affected side is concerning for testicular torsion and should be referred for emergent ultrasound and urologic consultation. After the genital exam, the child is then placed in
the prone position, and abnormalities of the back are sought. The spine
and costovertebral angle areas are percussed to elicit any tenderness;
such findings may be indicative of vertebral osteomyelitis or diskitis
and pyelonephritis, respectively.
Examining the ears and throat completes the physical examination.
These are usually the most bothersome parts of the examination for
the child, and parents frequently can be helpful in minimizing head
movement. During the oropharyngeal examination, it is important
to document the presence of enanthems; these may be seen in many
infectious processes, such as stomatitis caused by herpes or enteroviruses. This portion of the examination is also important in documenting inflammation or exudates on the tonsils, which may indicate viral
or bacterial infection. Findings such as trismus or unilateral tonsillar
swelling are concerning for peritonsillar abscess and for infections in
the parapharyngeal and retropharyngeal spaces; such cases should be
referred for specialist ear, nose, and throat evaluation and potential
imaging of the neck.

551

Repeating portions of the assessment may be indicated. If the child
cried continuously during the initial clinical evaluation, the examiner
may not be certain whether the crying was caused by the high fever,
stranger anxiety, or pain or is indicative of a serious or localizing illness. Constant crying also makes portions of the physical examination, such as auscultation of the chest, more difficult. Before a repeat
assessment is performed, efforts to make the child as comfortable as
possible are indicated. In young infants, persistent irritability, even
when the examiner is absent from the room, is concerning for meningitis, encephalitis, or other causes of meningeal irritation (e.g., intracranial injury from nonaccidental trauma). When faced with a truly
inconsolable infant, practitioners should have a low threshold to obtain
head imaging and/or perform lumbar puncture, as the clinical scenario
dictates.

MANAGEMENT

Most patients who present to the pediatrician’s office with an acute
illness will not require acute stabilization. However, the pediatrician
needs to be prepared to evaluate and begin resuscitation for the seriously ill or unstable child. Outpatient pediatric offices and urgent care
facilities should be stocked with appropriate equipment necessary to
stabilize an acutely ill child. Maintenance of that equipment and ongoing training of the office staff in its use are required, and every effort
should be made to ensure that pediatric clinicians are PALS certified
(see Chapter 79).
The evaluation of the potentially unstable child must begin with
assessment of the ABCs—airway, breathing, and circulation. When
assessing the airway, chest rise should be evaluated and evidence of
increased work of breathing sought. The examiner should ensure
that the trachea is midline and should listen carefully for evidence
of air exchange at the level of the extrathoracic airway. If the airway is patent and no signs of obstruction are present, the patient
is allowed to assume a position of comfort. If the child shows signs
of airway obstruction, repositioning of the head with the chin-­
lift maneuver may alleviate the obstruction. An oral or nasal airway may be necessary in patients in whom airway patency cannot
be maintained. These devices are not well tolerated in conscious
patients because they may induce gagging or vomiting; instead, they
are most often used to facilitate effective bag-­valve-­mask ventilation
in semiconscious or unconscious children. Once airway patency has
been established, the adequacy of breathing should be evaluated.
Slow respiratory rates or cyanosis may signal impending respiratory failure. If the airway is patent but the child’s respiratory effort
is inadequate, positive pressure ventilation via bag-­
valve-­
mask
support should be initiated. Oxygen should be administered to all
seriously ill or hypoxic children via nasal cannula or face mask.
Auscultation of the lung fields should assess for air entry, symmetry
of breath sounds, and presence of adventitious breath sounds such
as crackles or wheezes. Bronchodilator therapy can be initiated to
alleviate bronchospasm. Racemic epinephrine is indicated for stridor at rest in a patient with upper airway obstruction (e.g., croup).
Once airway and breathing have been addressed, circulation must
be evaluated. Symptoms of shock include tachycardia, cool extremities, delayed capillary refill time, mottled or pale skin, and effortless
tachypnea. In children, hypotension is a late finding in shock and
indicates that significant decompensation has already taken place.
Vascular access is necessary for volume resuscitation in patients
with impaired circulation, and an intraosseous line should be considered early if there is any difficulty in obtaining vascular access
for a patient requiring resuscitation. Each time an intervention is
performed, the clinician should reassess the patient to determine
whether interventions have been successful and whether additional
care is needed.

DISPOSITION

Most children evaluated for acute illness in the office or urgent care
setting can be managed on an outpatient basis. These patients should
have a reassuring physical examination, stable vital signs, and an adequate follow-­up plan before being sent home. A mildly dehydrated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

552 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
patient can be discharged home for a trial of oral rehydration. Patients
with respiratory illness who exhibit signs of mild respiratory distress
may be monitored at home, with a repeat examination scheduled the
next day. Depending on the child’s condition, the comfort of the parents, and the relationship of the family with the physician, telephone
follow-­up may be all that is necessary. When no specific diagnosis
has been established at the first outpatient visit, a follow-­up examination may yield the diagnosis and can provide reassurance for both the
caregiver and the practitioner that a child’s severity of illness has not
progressed.
However, if it is deemed that the child needs a higher level of care,
it is the pediatrician’s responsibility to decide what method of transfer
is appropriate. Physicians may be reluctant to call for help because of
a misperception that emergency 911 services should be activated only
for ongoing resuscitation. Emergency medical services (EMS) transport should be initiated for any child who is physiologically unstable
(e.g., with severe respiratory distress, hypoxia, signs of shock, or altered
mental state). If the family’s ability to adhere promptly to a recommendation for ED evaluation is in question, this patient also should be
transported by EMS. Some physicians and families may defer calling
EMS because of the perception that a parent can reach the hospital
faster by private motor vehicle. Although rapidity of transport should
be considered, the need for further interventions during transport and
the risk of clinical decompensation are other important factors in the
decision to activate EMS. Ultimately, the legal responsibility for choosing an appropriate level of transport for a patient lies with the referring
physician until responsibility of care is officially transferred to another
medical provider.

General Assessment

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Once the emergency response system has been activated and the child
is determined not to require CPR, the provider should proceed with
a primary assessment that includes a brief, hands-­on evaluation of
cardiopulmonary and neurologic function. This assessment includes
a limited physical examination, evaluation of vital signs, and measurement of pulse oximetry if available. The American Heart Association
(AHA), in its Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) curriculum,
supports the structured format of airway, breathing, circulation,
disability, exposure (ABCDE). The goal of the primary assessment is
to obtain a focused, systems-­based assessment of the child’s injuries or
abnormalities so that resuscitative efforts can be rapidly targeted to these
areas; if the provider identifies a life-­threatening abnormality, further
evaluation is postponed until appropriate corrective action has been
taken.
The exam and vital sign data can be interpreted only if the provider
has a thorough understanding of normal values. In pediatrics, normal respiratory rate, heart rate, and blood pressure have age-­specific
norms (Table 79.1). These ranges can be difficult to remember, especially if used infrequently, and providers should therefore maintain
ready access to these normal ranges. Hypotension is defined as blood
pressure less than the fifth percentile for age. This is considered a systolic blood pressure of <60 mm Hg for neonates up to 28 days, <70
mm Hg for infants from 1 month to 1 year, <70+ (age in years ×2)
mm Hg for children 1-­10 years, and <90 mm Hg for children older
than 10 years of age.

Chapter 79

Pediatric Cardiorespiratory
Emergencies and
Resuscitation
Ryan W. Morgan and Alexis A. Topjian
Children in the community and those in the hospital are at risk for a
variety of injuries and life-­threatening disease processes that lead to
cardiac or respiratory compromise, which require prompt evaluation
and intervention.

ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION OF CHILDREN
WITH CARDIORESPIRATORY EMERGENCIES

The first response to a pediatric emergency of any cause is a rapid and
systematic general assessment of the scene and the child to identify immediate threats to the child, care providers, and others. If an
emergency is identified, the emergency response system (emergency
medical services [EMS]) should be activated immediately. Care providers should then proceed through primary, secondary, and tertiary
assessments as allowed by the child’s condition, safety of the scene, and
resources available. This standardized approach organizes what might
otherwise be a confusing or chaotic situation and ensures that key elements of assessment and treatment are not omitted. If at any point during these assessments the provider identifies a life-­threatening problem,
progression through the systematic assessment is paused and targeted
lifesaving interventions are prioritized. Further assessments and interventions should be delayed until other providers arrive to assist or until
the life-­threatening condition is successfully treated or stabilized.

Upon arrival at the scene of a critically ill or injured child or upon
the child’s presentation for medical care, a provider’s first task is a
quick survey of the scene itself. Is the rescuer or child in imminent
danger because of circumstances at the scene (e.g., fire, high-­voltage
electricity)? If so, can the child be safely extricated to a safe location
for assessment and treatment? Can the child be safely moved with the
appropriate precautions (e.g., cervical spine protection) if indicated? A
rescuer is expected to proceed only if these important safety conditions
have been met so that they do not jeopardize their own safety.
Once the provider’s and child’s safety have been ensured, the
provider performs a rapid visual survey of the child, assessing the
child’s general appearance and cardiopulmonary function. This
action should only take a few seconds and includes assessment of (1)
general appearance, determining color, tone, alertness, and responsiveness; (2) adequacy of breathing, distinguishing between normal,
comfortable respirations versus respiratory distress or apnea; and (3)
adequacy of circulation, identifying cyanosis, pallor, or mottling. If
a child is found unresponsive or becomes unresponsive during the
provider’s assessment, the provider should stimulate the patient and
assess the patient’s response to voice. If there is no response, the provider should assess for breathing. If the child is breathing but ineffectively, rescue breathing should be started. If the child is not breathing
or has agonal respirations, the provider should initiate cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and follow Basic Life Support (BLS) pediatric cardiac arrest algorithms for one rescuer or two or more rescuers
(Figs. 79.1 and 79.2).

Primary Assessment

Airway and Breathing

The most common precipitating event for cardiac instability in infants
and children is respiratory failure (the inability to adequately oxygenate or
ventilate). Therefore rapid assessment for respiratory failure and immediate restoration of adequate ventilation and oxygenation remain the first
priorities in the resuscitation of a child. Using a systematic approach,
the provider should first assess whether the child’s airway is patent and
maintainable. A patent airway is unobstructed, allowing normal respiration without noise or effort. A maintainable airway is one that is
either already patent or can be made patent with a simple maneuver.
To assess airway patency, the provider should look for breathing movements in the child’s chest and abdomen, listen for breath sounds, and
feel for the movement of air at the child’s mouth and nose. Abnormal
breathing sounds (e.g., snoring or stridor), increased work of breathing,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation

553

Pediatric BLS for healthcare providers—single rescuer

Verify scene safety.

• Check for responsiveness.
• Shout for nearby help.
• Activate the emergency response system
via mobile device (if appropriate).

Monitor until
emergency
responders arrive.

Normal
breathing,
pulse felt

Look for no breathing
or only gasping and check
pulse (simultaneously).
Is pulse definitely felt
within 10 seconds?

No normal
breathing,
pulse felt

• Provide rescue breathing,
1 breath every 2–3 seconds,
or about 20–30 breaths/min.
• Assess pulse rate for no
more than 10 seconds.

Yes

No breathing
or only gasping,
pulse not felt

HR <60/min
with signs of poor
perfusion?

Start CPR.

Witnessed
sudden collapse?

Yes

No

• Continue rescue
breathing; check
pulse every
2 minutes.
• If no pulse, start
CPR.

Activate emergency response
system (if not already done),
and retrieve AED/defibrillator.

No
Start CPR
• 1 rescuer: Perform cycles of
30 compressions and 2 breaths.
• When second rescuer arrives,
perform cycles of 15 compressions
and 2 breaths.
• Use AED as soon as it is available.

After about 2 minutes, if still alone, activate
emergency response system and retrieve AED
(if not already done).

Check rhythm.
Shockable rhythm?
Yes,
shockable
• Give 1 shock. Resume CPR
immediately for 2 minutes
(until prompted by AED to allow
rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
over or the child starts to move.

No,
nonshockable
• Resume CPR immediately for
2 minutes (until prompted by AED
to allow rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
over or the child starts to move.

Fig. 79.1 Basic Life Support (BLS) algorithm for healthcare providers: Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm for the single rescuer—2020 update. AED,

Automated external defibrillator; ALS, advanced life support; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation. (From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al.
Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency
Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469-­S523.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

554 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Pediatric BLS healthcare providers—2 or more rescuers
Verify scene safety.

• Check for responsiveness.
• Shout for nearby help.
• First rescuer remains with the child.
Second rescuer activates emergency
response system and retrieves the
AED and emergency equipment.

Monitor until
emergency
responders arrive.

Normal
breathing,
pulse felt

No normal
breathing,
pulse felt

Look for no breathing
or only gasping and check
pulse (simultaneously).
Is pulse definitely felt
within 10 seconds?

• Provide rescue breathing,
1 breath every 2–3 seconds,
or about 20–30 breaths/min.
• Assess pulse rate for no
more than 10 seconds.

Yes
No breathing
or only gasping,
pulse not felt
Start CPR.

Start CPR
• First rescuer performs cycles of
30 compressions and 2 breaths.
• When second rescuer returns,
perform cycles of 15 compressions
and 2 breaths.
• Use AED as soon as it is available.

HR <60/min
with signs of poor
perfusion?

No

• Continue rescue
breathing; check
pulse about
every 2 minutes.
• If no pulse, start
CPR.

Check rhythm.
Shockable rhythm?
Yes,
shockable
• Give 1 shock. Resume CPR
immediately for 2 minutes
(until prompted by AED to allow
rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
over or the child starts to move.

No,
nonshockable
• Resume CPR immediately for
2 minutes (until prompted by AED
to allow rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
over or the child starts to move.

Fig. 79.2 Basic Life Support (BLS) algorithm for healthcare providers: Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm for two or more rescuers—2020 update.

AED, Automated external defibrillator; ALS, advanced life support; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation. (From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D,
et al. Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469-­S523.)

and apnea are all findings potentially consistent with airway obstruction. If there is evidence of obstruction, the provider should start with
repositioning and “head-­tilt, chin-­lift” if neck injury is not suspected or
a jaw thrust if neck injury is a concern (Fig. 79.3). Suctioning of the airway or placement of adjunct airway devices such as a nasopharyngeal
airway should be considered based on the exam findings and the likely
etiologies of airway obstruction. Maneuvers to relieve the obstruction
should be instituted before the provider proceeds to evaluate the child’s
breathing.
Assessment of breathing includes evaluation of the child’s respiratory rate, respiratory effort, breath sounds, and peripheral oxygen
saturation via pulse oximetry. Normal breathing appears comfortable,
is quiet, and occurs at an age-­appropriate rate. Abnormal respiratory

rates include apnea and rates that are either abnormally slow (bradypnea) or fast (tachypnea). Bradypnea and irregular respiratory patterns (such as gasping or agonal respirations) require urgent attention
because they are often signs of impending respiratory failure, apnea, or
cardiorespiratory arrest. Signs of increased respiratory effort include
nasal flaring, grunting, chest or neck muscle retractions, head bobbing, and seesaw respirations. Hypoxemia, measured by pulse oximetry, often accompanies parenchymal lung disease, apnea, or airway
obstruction. However, providers should keep in mind that adequate
perfusion is required to produce a reliable peripheral oxygen saturation measurement. Central cyanosis is a sign of severe hypoxemia
and indicates an emergent need for oxygen supplementation and
respiratory support.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation
Table 79.1

Normal Vital Signs According to Age
HEART RATE
(beats/min)

BLOOD
PRESSURE†
(mm Hg)

RESPIRATORY
RATE+
(breaths/min)

Premature

120-­205*

60-­76/31-­45

40-­70

Neonate

100-­205*

67-­84/35-­53

35-­55

Infant

100-­180

72-­104/37-­56

30-­53

Toddler

98-­140

86-­106/42-­63

22-­37

Preschooler

80-­120

89-­112/46-­72

20-­29

School-­age child

75-­118

97-­120/57-­80

18-­25

Adolescent

60-­100

110-­131/64-­83

12-­20

AGE

*In sleep, heart rates may be significantly lower, but if perfusion is maintained, no
intervention is required.
†A blood pressure cuff should cover approximately two-­thirds of the arm; too small a

cuff yields spuriously high pressure readings, and too large a cuff yields spuriously
low pressure readings. Values are systolic/diastolic and assume 50th percentile for
height for children 1 year and older.
+The respiratory rate is expected to increase in the presence of fever and stress.
‡Approximately equal to postconception age in weeks (may add 5 mm Hg).
Modified from Hazinski MF. Children are different. In Hazinski MF, ed. Nursing Care of
the Critically Ill Child, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2013:1-­18.

Fig. 79.3 Opening the airway with the head-­tilt/chin-­lift maneuver.

One hand is used to tilt the head, extending the neck. The index finger of the rescuer’s other hand lifts the mandible outward by lifting
the chin.

Circulation

Cardiovascular function is assessed by evaluation of skin color
and temperature, heart rate, heart rhythm, presence and quality of
pulses, capillary refill time, and blood pressure. In nonhospital settings, much of this important information can be obtained without
measuring the blood pressure; lack of blood pressure data should
not prevent the provider from determining adequacy of circulation
or implementing lifesaving support. Mottling, pallor, delayed capillary refill, cyanosis, weak pulses, and cool extremities are all signs of
diminished perfusion and compromised cardiac output. Tachycardia
is the earliest and most common sign of shock but lacks both sensitivity and specificity and should be correlated with other components
of the exam, such as weakness, threadiness, or absence of pulses. An
age-­specific approach to heart rate assessment will yield the most reliable interpretation. Bradycardia can be normal in athletic children

Table 79.2

555

AVPU Neurologic Assessment

A

The child is awake, alert, and appropriately responsive
to caregivers and stimuli.

V

The child responds only to voice such as calling the
child’s name or speaking loudly.

P

The child responds only to painful stimuli, such as sternal
rub or pinching the trapezius.

U

The child is unresponsive to all stimuli.

A, Alert; V, verbal; P, pain; U, unresponsive.
From Ralston M, Hazinski MF, Zaritsky AL, et al., eds. Pediatric Advanced Life
Support Course Guide and PALS Provider Manual. Dallas: American Heart
Association; 2007.

Table 79.3

Modified Pediatric Glasgow Coma Scale

≥2 YEARS

<2 YEARS

EYE OPENING
Spontaneous

4

Spontaneous

4

To sound

3

To sound

3

To pressure

2

To pressure

2

None

1

None

1

VERBAL RESPONSE
Oriented; words/phrases
normal for chronological
age

5

Babbles, coos; words/
phrases normal for
chronological age

5

Confused; some words/
phrases not normal for
chronological age

4

Some words/phrases not
normal for chronological
age

4

Words

3

Inconsolable crying

3

Sounds

2

Sounds

2

None

1

None

1

MOTOR RESPONSE
Obeys commands

6

Normal spontaneous
movement

6

Localizes pain

5

Rapidly withdraws
extremity to stimulation

5

Normal flexion

4

Normal flexion

4

Abnormal flexion

3

Abnormal flexion

3

Extension

2

Extension

2

None

1

None

1

Adapted from Kirschen MP, Snyder M, Smith K, et al. Inter-­rater reliability between
critical care nurses performing a pediatric modification to the Glasgow Coma Scale.
Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2019;20(7):660-­666.

but should be assessed in the context of the child’s perfusion, blood
pressure, mental status, and oxygen saturation, as it can be a sign of
impending cardiac arrest.

Disability

In the setting of a pediatric emergency, disability refers to a child’s
neurologic function in terms of the level of consciousness and cortical
function. Standard evaluation of a child’s neurologic condition can be
done quickly with an assessment of pupillary response to light (if one
is available) and use of either of the standard scores used in children:
the Alert, Verbal, Pain, Unresponsive (AVPU) Pediatric Response
Scale and the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (Tables 79.2 and 79.3). The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

556 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 79.4

Pupillary Responses

DILATED (MYDRIASIS)

PINPOINT (MIOSIS)

Bilateral
Anticholinergic agents (systemic,
topical)
Sympathomimetic agents
Serotonin syndrome
Botulism
Brain death (fixed, nonreactive
usually midposition)

Bilateral
Opiates
Organophosphates
Barbiturates
Pontine lesions

Unilateral
Third nerve compression with
uncal herniation

Unilateral
Horner syndrome

causes of decreased level of consciousness in children are numerous
and include conditions as diverse as respiratory failure with hypoxia
or hypercarbia, hypoglycemia, poisonings or drug overdose, trauma,
seizures, infection, and shock. Most often, an acutely ill or injured child
has an altered level of consciousness because of respiratory compromise,
circulatory compromise, or both. Any child with a depressed level of
consciousness should be immediately assessed for abnormalities in
cardiorespiratory status.
Alert, Verbal, Pain, Unresponsive (AVPU) Pediatric Response
Scale: The AVPU scoring system is used to determine a child’s level of
consciousness and cerebral cortex function (see Table 79.2). Unlike the
GCS, the AVPU scale is not developmentally dependent—a child does
not have to understand spoken language or follow commands, merely
respond to a stimulus. The child is scored according to the amount of
stimulus required to obtain a response, from alert (no stimulus; the
child is already awake and interactive) to unresponsive (child does not
respond to any stimulus).
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS): Although it has not been systematically validated as a prognostic scoring system for infants
and young children, the GCS is frequently employed to describe
level of consciousness and neurologic status. It has value as a way
to communicate mental status to other providers and when used
serially to detect improvement or deterioration. The GCS has three
components: eyes, verbal, and motor. Individual scores for eye
opening, verbal response, and motor response are added together,
with a maximum of 15 points (see Table 79.3). There are numerous versions of the pediatric GCS, but most importantly, the pediatric GCS accounts for differences in development and the inability
for children <2 years of age to follow commands and talk. Patients
who have severe head injury with a GCS score ≤8 require aggressive
management, generally including securement of the airway with
endotracheal intubation and breathing with mechanical ventilation
and, if indicated, placement of an intracranial pressure monitoring
device.
The Full Outline of Unresponsiveness (FOUR) score is a neurologic assessment that incorporates brainstem reflex components and
is associated with outcomes; it is commonly used in the intensive care
unit setting (Table 82.1).
The pupillary response can give insight to causes of altered mental status. Pinpoint pupils can be due to many conditions, including
narcotic ingestion, and dilated asymmetric pupils (anisocoria) can be
caused by uncal herniation (Table 79.4 and Fig. 79.4). If a patient has
a normal mental status, other causes of pupillary dilation and asymmetry should be considered.

Exposure

Exposure is the final component of the pediatric primary assessment. This component of the exam is reached only after the child’s
airway, breathing, circulation, and disability have been assessed and
reasonably stabilized. In this setting, exposure stands for the dual
responsibility of the provider both to expose the child to assess for
previously unidentified injures and to consider prolonged exposure

Lesion/process
associated with coma

Pupils

Comment

Metabolic

Normal

Bilateral
hypothalamic

Small but reactive

Uncal herniation

Ipsilateral “blown,”
unreactive pupil,
ptosis

Tectal

Midposition and
unreactive to light

Midbrain

Dilated and
unreactive

Pontine

Pinpoint but
reactive

Brain death

Midposition to large,
unreactive

Fig. 79.4 Pupils in comatose patients. (From Balcer LJ: Pupillary disorders. In Liu G, Volpe L, Galetta S (eds): Liu, Volpe, and Galetta’s Neuro-Ophthalmology: Diagnosis and Management, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2018. Fig 13.32.)

in a cold environment as a possible cause of hypothermia and cardiopulmonary instability. The provider should undress the child (as
is feasible and reasonable) to perform a physical exam, assessing for
burns, bruising, bleeding, joint laxity, and fractures. If possible, the
provider should assess the child’s temperature. All maneuvers should
be performed with careful maintenance of cervical spine precautions
when indicated.

Secondary and Tertiary Assessment
Secondary Assessment

For healthcare providers in community or outpatient settings, transfer
of care of a child to emergency or hospital personnel may occur before
a full secondary assessment is possible. However, before the child is
removed from the scene and separated from witnesses or family, a brief
history should be obtained for medical providers at the accepting facility. The components of a secondary assessment include a focused history and focused physical examination.
The history should be targeted to information that could explain
cardiorespiratory or neurologic dysfunction and should take the
form of a SAMPLE history: signs/symptoms; allergies; medications;
past medical history; timing of last meal; and events leading to this
situation. Medical personnel not engaged in resuscitative efforts can
be dispatched to elicit history from witnesses or relatives. The physical
examination during the secondary assessment is a thorough head-­to-­
toe exam, although the severity of the child’s illness or injury could
necessitate curtailing portions of the exam or postponing nonessential
elements until a later time.

Tertiary Assessment

The tertiary assessment occurs in a hospital setting, where ancillary
laboratory and radiographic assessments contribute to a thorough
understanding of the child’s condition. A basic blood chemistry profile, complete blood count, liver function tests, coagulation studies, and
arterial blood gas analyses provide estimates of renal function, acid-­
base balance, cardiorespiratory function, and presence or absence of
shock. Chest radiographs can be useful to evaluate both the heart and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation

557

Fig. 79.6 Abdominal thrusts with the conscious victim standing or
sitting.

Fig. 79.5 Back blows (top) and chest thrusts (bottom) to relieve foreign body airway obstruction in the infant.

lungs, although more detailed assessment of cardiac function can be
performed with echocardiography.

RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT OF RESPIRATORY
DISTRESS AND FAILURE

The goals of initial management of respiratory distress or failure are
to rapidly stabilize the child’s airway and breathing and to identify the
cause of the problem so that further therapeutic efforts can be appropriately directed.

Airway Obstruction Due to Foreign Body

Children under 5 years of age are particularly susceptible to foreign
body aspiration and choking. Liquids are the most common cause of
choking in infants, whereas small objects and food (e.g., grapes, nuts,
hot dogs, candy) are the most common source of foreign bodies in the
airways of toddlers and older children. A history consistent with foreign body aspiration is considered diagnostic. Any child in the proper
setting with the sudden onset of choking, stridor, or wheezing should
be considered to have a foreign body aspiration until proven otherwise.

Unfortunately, this classic history is not always present in all cases of
foreign body aspiration.
Airway obstruction is treated with a sequential approach starting with the head-­tilt/chin-­lift maneuver to open and support the
airway, followed by inspection for a foreign body, and finger-­sweep
clearance or suctioning if one is visualized. Blind suctioning or finger sweeps of the mouth are not recommended. A conscious child
suspected of having a partial foreign body obstruction should be
permitted to cough spontaneously until coughing is no longer effective, respiratory distress and stridor increase, or the child becomes
unconscious. They can be allowed to find a comfortable position to
facilitate air entry.
For conscious infants, providers should administer five back
blows and then five chest thrusts (Fig. 79.5). After each cycle of
back blows and chest thrusts, the child’s mouth should be visually
inspected for the presence of the foreign body. If identified within
finger’s reach, it should be removed with a gentle finger sweep. If
no foreign body is visualized and the child is conscious, repeat back
blows and chest thrusts. Do not blindly sweep for objects if they are
not visible, as this can push the object farther into the airway.
For conscious children older than 1 year, providers should give a
series of five abdominal thrusts (Heimlich maneuver) with the child
standing or sitting (Fig. 79.6). After the abdominal thrusts, the airway
is examined for a foreign body, which should be removed if visualized.
If no foreign body is seen, abdominal thrusts should be repeated. For
both infants and children, the sequence is repeated until the object is
expelled or the patient loses consciousness, at which time CPR with
ventilations should be initiated.
If the child becomes unconscious, the child should be gently
placed on the ground in a supine position and ventilations should
be initiated; compressions should also be started if the child is
pulseless. The airway should be inspected for a foreign body at the
time of ventilations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

558 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Airway Obstruction or Narrowing from Other
Causes

Airway obstruction can also be caused by airway narrowing in both the
upper and lower airways. Upper airway obstruction refers to narrowing of the extrathoracic portion of the airway, including the oropharynx, larynx, epiglottitis, and trachea. In the upper airways, narrowing
is most often caused by airway edema (e.g., croup or anaphylaxis) or
epiglottic edema (e.g., epiglottitis) and often manifests with stridor.
Stridor, in cases of extrathoracic airway obstruction, is a high-­pitched
sound heard on inspiration. When airway obstruction is intrathoracic,
stridor can be biphasic, heard during both inspiration and expiration.
Lower airway obstruction affects all intrathoracic airways, notably
the bronchi and bronchioles. Bronchiolitis and acute asthma exacerbations are the major causes of intrathoracic airway obstruction in
children, causing lower airway narrowing through a combination of
airway swelling, mucus production, and circumferential smooth muscle constriction of smaller airways.
The approach to upper airway obstruction is dictated by both the
underlying condition and the clinical severity of the problem. In cases
of mild upper airway obstruction, the child has minimally increased
work of breathing (evidenced by tachypnea and absent to mild retractions). Stridor, if present at all, should be audible with only coughing
or activity. Children with these findings can often be supported with
supplemental oxygen as needed. In cases with moderate obstruction,
in which the child has more significant work of breathing or more
pronounced stridor, nebulized racemic epinephrine and oral or intravenous (IV) dexamethasone can be added, particularly for croup
(i.e., laryngotracheobronchitis) (see Chapter 434). Heliox (combined
helium-­oxygen therapy) administration may also be considered. Children with severe upper airway obstruction have marked intercostal
retractions, prominent stridor, and decreased air entry on auscultation
of the lung fields. They can also be hypoxemic, dyspneic, and either
agitated or somnolent. A child in severe distress that does not rapidly
respond to therapies may require endotracheal intubation to overcome
the area of obstruction. Clinicians need to carefully observe patients, as
impending respiratory failure may be initially confused with improvement. Stridor becomes quieter and retractions less prominent when
a child’s respiratory effort begins to diminish. This can either be the
result of improvement or progressive respiratory failure with less air
entry. The child in respiratory failure may have poor air movement on
auscultation and decreased level of consciousness from hypercarbia,
hypoxia, or both. When anaphylaxis is suspected as the cause for upper
airway edema, providers should administer an intramuscular dose of
epinephrine as needed (see Chapter 190). Racemic epinephrine can
also help decrease localized airway edema. Epiglottitis often presents
with a muffled voice, drooling, and difficulty swallowing. Epiglottitis is
a medical emergency for which the initial focus should be on alerting
otolaryngology and/or anesthesiology experts to be immediately present while keeping the patient calm. These patients usually need to have
their airway secured in an operating room with contingency planning
for emergency surgical airway placement. No matter the cause, any
child with upper airway obstruction and impending respiratory failure
should be prepared to undergo endotracheal intubation and respiratory support. Prompt notification of providers trained in advanced airway management is essential.
In cases of lower airway obstruction, therapies are targeted to both
relieve the obstruction and reduce the child’s work of breathing. For
asthma, inhaled bronchodilators, such as albuterol, augmented by
oral or IV corticosteroids, remain the mainstay of therapy in mild
to moderate acute distress. Children with more significant obstruction appear dyspneic, with tachypnea, retractions, forced expiration,
and audible wheezing or reduced breath sounds. In these cases, the
addition of an anticholinergic agent, such as nebulized ipratropium
bromide, or a smooth muscle relaxant, such as magnesium sulfate,
may provide further relief, although the evidence for these measures
remains controversial (see Chapter 185). Supplemental oxygen and
IV fluid hydration can be useful adjuncts. Infants and young children with bronchiolitis often present with tachypnea. Patients with
moderate to severe disease may have retractions, nasal flaring, or

Fig. 79.7 Rescue breathing in an infant. The rescuer’s mouth covers

the infant’s nose and mouth, creating a seal. One hand performs the
head-­tilt while the other hand lifts the infant’s jaw.

Fig. 79.8 Rescue breathing in a child. The rescuer’s mouth covers the
child’s mouth, creating a mouth-­to-­mouth seal. One hand maintains the
head-­tilt; the thumb and forefinger of the same hand are used to pinch
the child’s nose. The other hand lifts the child’s jaw.
grunting and can be hypoxemic. These patients often do not respond
to bronchodilators. Supportive care with chest physiotherapy to support mucous clearance and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
support can be used as these patients recover from this lower airway
viral disease process.
Impending respiratory failure in children with lower airway obstruction can be insidious. When diagnosed early in a school-­age child who
is cooperative, respiratory failure can potentially be averted through
judicious use of noninvasive support, including heated, high-­flow nasal
cannula (HFNC) therapy, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP),
or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP). Endotracheal intubation
should be performed only by skilled providers, preferably in a hospital
setting, because there is a high risk of cardiorespiratory compromise in
patients with lower airway obstruction during the procedure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation

559

the mask to the child’s face with one hand and use the other hand to
compress the ventilation bag (Fig. 79.9).
The provider may have to move the head and neck through a range
of positions to find the one that best maintains airway patency with
adequate chest rise. In infants and young children, optimal ventilation is often provided when the child’s head is in the neutral sniffing
position without hyperextension of the head. Poor chest rise or persistent hypoxemia indicate inadequate ventilation. In this setting, the
care provider should recheck the mask’s seal on the child’s face, reposition the child’s head, and consider suctioning the airway. If these
maneuvers do not restore ventilation, the provider should consider
placement of a nasopharyngeal or oral airway. The inability to ventilate a patient with positive pressure after the previous measures is an
emergency requiring expert consultation while preparing for endotracheal intubation.

Endotracheal Intubation

Fig. 79.9 “C-­E” grip to secure a mask to a child’s face with appropriate seal.

Parenchymal Lung Disease

Parenchymal lung disease includes a heterogeneous list of conditions,
such as pneumonia, pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome
(PARDS), pneumonitis, bronchiolitis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia,
cystic fibrosis, and pulmonary edema. The commonalities of these
conditions are their effects on the small airways and alveoli, including inflammation and exudation leading to consolidation of lung tissue, decreased gas exchange, and increased work of breathing. Clinical
management of these conditions includes specific treatment as indicated (e.g., antibiotics for bacterial pneumonia) and supportive care
with oxygen, noninvasive respiratory support (e.g., HFNC, CPAP, or
BiPAP), or invasive mechanical ventilation. The severity of work of
breathing and degree of oxygenation or ventilation failure determine
the degree of respiratory support needed and should be expected to
evolve with time.

Airway and Breathing Management
Rescue Breathing

If a child is unconscious and not breathing effectively or apneic, rescue
breathing should be provided. The provider should open the airway
with the head-­tilt/chin-­lift maneuver and attempt mouth-­to-­mouth
ventilation (Figs. 79.7 and 79.8). In trauma patients with suspected
cervical spine injuries, a jaw thrust should be performed without the
head-­tilt maneuver. If ventilation is unsuccessful, the airway is repositioned, and ventilation should be attempted again.

Bag-­Mask Ventilation

Ventilation with a bag-­mask apparatus can be as effective as endotracheal intubation and safer when the provider is inexperienced with
intubation. Bag-­mask ventilation (BMV) requires training to ensure
that the provider is competent to select the correct mask size, open the
child’s airway, form a tight seal between the mask and the child’s face,
deliver effective ventilation, and assess the effectiveness of ventilations.
An appropriately sized mask is one that fits over the child’s mouth and
nose but does not extend below the chin or over the eyes. An adequate
seal is best achieved through a combination “C-­E” grip on the mask,
in which the thumb and index finger form the letter “C” on top of the
mask, holding the mask onto the child’s face, and the remaining three
fingers form an “E” grip under the child’s mandible, holding the jaw
forward without pressing on the soft tissues and extending the head
up toward the mask. Using this method, the care provider can secure

A child generally requires intubation when at least one of these conditions exists: (1) the child is unable to maintain airway patency or protect against aspiration (as occurs in settings of neurologic compromise
such as seizures or traumatic brain injury); (2) the child is failing to
maintain adequate oxygenation despite supplemental oxygen or noninvasive therapies; (3) the child cannot be adequately ventilated with
evidence of elevated blood carbon dioxide levels and an unsafe acid-­
base balance; (4) sedation and/or paralysis is required for a procedure;
(5) the need to decrease metabolic demand by sedating the patient to
support extrapulmonary organs (e.g., septic shock or heart failure) is
present; and (6) providers anticipate a deteriorating course that will
eventually lead to any of the first five conditions. It should be noted
that in centers experienced in noninvasive respiratory support, a trial
of HFNC, CPAP, or BiPAP may be indicated based on the specific clinical scenario.
There are few absolute contraindications to tracheal intubation,
but experts generally agree that in settings of known complete
airway obstruction (e.g., severe subglottic stenosis), endotracheal intubation should be avoided, and emergency cricothyroidotomy or tracheostomy performed instead. It is important to
assess a patient’s airway before initiating endotracheal intubation.
Any history of a difficult airway (difficult to intubate) or critical airway (unable to bag-­mask ventilate) should prompt further
investigation and expert consultation. Both history and physical exam features such as limited mouth opening, limited neck
mobility, or micrognathia should raise concern for further assessment. Another important consideration is to ensure that providers
maintain appropriate cervical spine (C-­
spine) protection during the intubation procedure when neck or spinal cord injury is
suspected.
A critical phase of the intubation procedure is the preprocedural
preparation, when the provider ensures all the equipment and staff
needed for safe intubation are present and functioning. An easy
pneumonic for this is SOAP MM: suction (Yankauer suction catheter attached to wall suction); oxygen (both preoxygenation of the
patient and devices needed to deliver oxygen, such as a bag-­mask);
airway (appropriately sized endotracheal tube and laryngoscope
as well as adjunct airway devices); people (all those needed during
and immediately after the procedure, including respiratory therapists and nurses); monitor (pulse oximetry, ECG, blood pressure,
capnography); and medications (sedation and often neuromuscular
blockade to facilitate intubation). A simple formula for selecting the
appropriately sized endotracheal tube (ETT) is:
(
)
age in years
Uncuffed ETT size (in mm) =
+4
4
Cuffed ETTs should generally be 0.5 mm smaller. Providers should
always have a range of ETTs available, given the heterogeneity of
patients and airway size. The use of cuffed ETTs is recommended
in most pediatric populations, as it may decrease the need for ETT
changes caused by difficulty ventilating and may decrease the risk of
aspiration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

560 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
colorimetric device or a capnographic device that quantifies CO2 elimination. Chest radiography should be obtained to confirm appropriate
tube position. Clinicians should assess ETT cuff pressures to minimize
the risk of airway trauma.

Base of tongue
Epiglottis

RECOGNITION AND MANAGEMENT OF SHOCK
B

A

D

C

Vocal
cords

E

Carina
Level of
T2 vertebral
body

Fig. 79.10 A-­E, Tracheal intubation technique. (From Fleisher G, Ludwig S. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Baltimore: Williams
& Wilkins;1983:1250.)

Analgesia is recommended to reduce metabolic stress, discomfort,
and anxiety during intubation. Pretreatment with a sedative, an analgesic, or an anesthetic or dissociative medication and potentially a neuromuscular relaxing agent (paralytic agent) is recommended unless the
situation is emergent (e.g., cardiac arrest) and the administration of
drugs would cause an unacceptable delay. Neuromuscular blocking
agents should generally be avoided in patients who cannot be bag-­
mask ventilated because if the patient cannot be successfully intubated
and cannot be bag-­mask ventilated, they may progress to cardiopulmonary arrest.
Because many intubations in critically ill children are emergency
procedures, providers should be prepared to rapidly intubate (Fig.
79.10). Rapid sequence intubation (RSI)—the process of intubating
with a sedative (etomidate, ketamine, propofol) and neuromuscular
blockade (rocuronium, succinylcholine) preintubation medications
(order of administration not important)—is not always feasible in
critically patients because BMV is necessary to maintain oxygenation
and ventilation due to severe lung disease or intracranial hypertension. The routine use of cricoid pressure is not recommended because
it does not decrease the risk of regurgitation of stomach contents, and
it can impede effective BMV and airway visualization. Although there
is a risk of regurgitation and aspiration, supporting the patient during
induction and supporting rapid intubation is critical to minimize the
risk to the patient.
Once the patient is intubated, proper ETT placement should be
assessed by auscultation of breath sounds, observation of symmetric chest rise, and analysis of exhaled carbon dioxide (CO2) by a

Shock occurs when oxygen and nutrient delivery to the tissues is inadequate to meet metabolic demands (see Chapter 85). A diagnosis of
shock does not require the presence of hypotension. It is important for
providers to recognize that shock can occur with hypertension, normotension, or hypotension. In early compensated shock, blood pressure is maintained, and oxygen delivery is mostly preserved through
compensatory mechanisms such as tachycardia, increased systemic
vascular resistance, or increased cardiac contractility. When compensatory mechanisms fail or are inadequate, the patient progresses to
decompensated shock, which is defined by hypotension and organ dysfunction. If shock is not rapidly identified and treated, it can progress
to multisystem organ dysfunction, cardiac arrest, and death.
Shock is also often described according to the underlying pathophysiology, which dictates the appropriate therapeutic response.
Hypovolemic shock is the most common type of shock in children
worldwide, usually related to fluid losses from severe diarrhea. Hemorrhagic shock is a specific type of hypovolemic shock after trauma
or other causes of bleeding. Distributive shock occurs because of
pathogenic dilation of the body’s blood vessels and is often accompanied by relative intravascular hypovolemia due to capillary leak and
“third-­spacing” of intravascular fluids into the extravascular compartment. The most common causes of distributive shock are sepsis, anaphylaxis, and burn injuries, in which release of inflammatory
cytokines causes massive capillary leak of fluid and proteins, leading to low oncotic pressure and intravascular volume. In the setting
of myocardial dysfunction, a child has tissue hypoperfusion from
cardiogenic shock. Common causes of cardiogenic shock are myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, and congenital heart disease, often in the
postoperative setting. Severe sepsis and septic shock are often accompanied by myocardial dysfunction, and children with septic shock
thus frequently manifest components of hypovolemic, distributive,
and cardiogenic shock. Obstructive shock occurs when cardiac output is lowered by obstruction of blood flow to the body, as occurs
with pericardial tamponade, tension pneumothorax, or massive
pulmonary embolism. Dissociative shock manifests with normal
cardiac and volume status but poor oxygen delivery due to severe
anemia and carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning.
The evaluation of a child in shock should proceed based on the
primary, secondary, and tertiary assessments. Initial resuscitation
should include the administration of crystalloid fluids in 10-­20 mL/kg
aliquots up to 60 mL/kg in the first hour if hypotension is present
while paying close attention for signs of volume overload. If shock
persists, volume overload is evident, or myocardial dysfunction is
suspected, vasoactive infusions (e.g., epinephrine, norepinephrine)
should be initiated. In hospital settings, catecholamine-­dependent
shock should trigger providers to consider placing a central venous
catheter for stable venous access and an arterial line for continuous
blood pressure monitoring. Laboratory assessment should include
studies of renal and liver function; acid-­base balance, including the
presence of lactic acidosis, hypoxemia, and/or hypercapnia; and evidence of coagulopathy or disseminated intravascular coagulation to
assess for signs of end-­organ dysfunction and response to treatment.
Assessment of peripheral perfusion, mental status, and urine output
are also important to monitor. Treatment of the various etiologies of
shock is noted in Chapter 85.

RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT OF
ARRHYTHMIAS

In the advanced life support setting, arrhythmias are most usefully
classified according to the observed heart rate (i.e., bradycardia or
tachycardia) and the presence of cardiopulmonary compromise (e.g.,
altered mental status, hypotension, signs of shock). If the primary survey identifies a child with an abnormal heart rate and altered mental

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation

561

Pediatric bradycardia with a pulse
Patient with bradycardia

Cardiopulmonary
compromise?
• Acutely altered
mental status
• Signs of shock
• Hypotension

No

Yes
Assessment and support
• Maintain patent airway
• Assist breathing with positive
pressure ventilation and oxygen
as necessary
• Cardiac monitor to identify rhythm;
monitor pulse, BP, and oximetry

• Support ABCs
• Consider oxygen
• Observe
• 12-lead ECG
• Identify and treat
underlying causes

Start CPR if HR <60/min
despite oxygenation and
ventilation.

Bradycardia
persists?

No

Yes
• Continue CPR if HR <60/min
• IV/IO access
• Epinephrine
• Atropine for increased vagal tone or
primary AV block
• Consider transthoracic/transvenous
pacing
• Identify and treat underlying causes

Yes

Check pulse
every 2 minutes.
Pulse present?
No
Go to pediatric
cardiac arrest algorithm.

Doses/details
Epinephrine IV/IO dose:
0.01 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the
0.1 mg/mL concentration).
Repeat every 3–5 minutes.
If IV/IO access not available
but endotracheal (ET) tube
in place, may give ET dose:
0.1 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the
1 mg/mL concentration).
Atropine IV/IO dose:
0.02 mg/kg. May repeat once.
Minimum dose 0.1 mg and
maximum single dose 0.5 mg.
Possible causes
• Hypothermia
• Hypoxia
• Medications

status or other signs of shock or hypotension, the rhythm is inadequate
no matter its rate.

Bradyarrhythmias

By definition, a child is bradycardic when the heart rate is slower than
the normal range for age (see Table 79.1). Sinus bradycardia can be
a harmless incidental finding in an otherwise healthy person and is
not usually associated with cardiac compromise. A clinically significant
bradycardia occurs when the heart rate is slow and there are signs of
systemic hypoperfusion (i.e., pallor, altered mental status, hypotension,

Fig. 79.11 Pediatric advanced life support: Bradycardia with a pulse algorithm. ABCs, Airway, breathing, and
circulation; AV, atrioventricular (conductor); ECG, electrocardiogram; HR, heart rate; IO/IV, intraosseous/intravenous. (From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al.
Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020
American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular
Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469-­S523.)

acidosis). Symptomatic bradycardia occurs most often in the setting
of hypoxemia but can also be caused by hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia,
other electrolyte abnormalities, hypothermia, heart block, and intracranial hypertension. Bradyarrhythmias are often the most common
prearrest rhythms in young children.
Initial management of symptomatic bradycardia includes support
or opening of the airway and confirming or establishing adequate
oxygenation and ventilation (Fig. 79.11). After adequate oxygenation and ventilation have been confirmed, the child should be
reassessed for continued bradycardia and poor perfusion. If cardiac

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

562 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Pediatric tachycardia with a pulse
Initial assessment and support
• Maintain patent airway; assist breathing as necessary
• Administer oxygen
• Cardiac monitor to identify rhythm; monitor pulse,
blood pressure, and oximetry
• IV/IO access
• 12-lead ECG if available

Yes

Evaluate
QRS duration.

• If IV/IO access is present,
give adenosine
or
• If IV/IO access is not
available, or if adenosine
is ineffective, perform
synchronized cardioversion

Adenosine IV/IO dose
• First dose: 0.1 mg/kg
rapid bolus (maximum:
6 mg)
• Second dose:
0.2 mg/kg rapid bolus
(maximum second
dose: 12 mg)

Evaluate rhythm
with 12-lead ECG
or monitor.

Search for
and treat cause.

Probable supraventricular
tachycardia
• P waves absent/abnormal
• RR interval not variable
• Infant rate usually ≥220/min
• Child rate usually ≥180/min
• History of abrupt rate change

Synchronized
cardioversion
Begin with 0.5–1 J/kg;
if not effective, increase
to 2 J/kg. Sedate if
needed, but don’t delay
cardioversion.
Drug therapy

Probable sinus
tachycardia if
• P waves present/normal
• Variable RR interval
• Infant rate usually <220/min
• Child rate usually <180/min

Narrow
(≤0.09 sec)

Doses/details

Cardiopulmonary
compromise?
• Acutely altered
mental status
• Signs of shock
• Hypotension

Wide
(>0.09 sec)

Possible ventricular
tachycardia

Synchronized
cardioversion
Expert consultation
is advised before
additional drug
therapies.

No

Narrow
(≤0.09 sec)

Evaluate
QRS duration.

Probable supraventricular
tachycardia
• P waves absent/abnormal
• RR interval not variable
• Infant rate usually ≥220/min
• Child rate usually ≥180/min
• History of abrupt rate change

Wide
(>0.09 sec)

Possible ventricular
tachycardia

If rhythm is regular and
QRS monomorphic,
consider adenosine.

Consider
vagal maneuvers.
Expert consultation
is recommended.
If IV/IO access
is present, give
adenosine.

Fig. 79.12 Pediatric advanced life support: Tachycardia with a pulse algorithm. AV, Atrioventricular (conductor); ECG, electrocardiogram; HR,

heart rate; IO/IV, intraosseous/intravenous. (From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al. Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020
American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl
2]:S469-­S523.)

compromise was solely the result of respiratory insufficiency, support of the child’s airway and breathing may have been sufficient
to restore normal hemodynamics. If respiratory support does not
quickly correct the perfusion abnormalities, further care is based
on the quality of perfusion and degree of bradycardia. A heart
rate <60 beats/min with cardiopulmonary compromise is an indication to begin CPR, including the administration of epinephrine. If
increased vagal tone or primary atrioventricular block is suspected,
atropine can be administered. For cases of refractory bradycardia,
cardiac pacing should be considered (see Fig. 79.11).

Tachyarrhythmias

Tachyarrhythmias represent a wide variety of rhythm disturbances
of atrial and ventricular origin (see Chapter 484). Sinus tachycardia
is a normal physiologic response to the body’s need for increased
cardiac output or oxygen delivery, as occurs with fever, exercise, or
stress. It can also occur in more pathologic states, such as hypovolemia, anemia, pain, anxiety, thyrotoxicosis, and shock. Non–sinus
tachyarrhythmias that do not originate in the sinus node are often
categorized as either narrow complex rhythms (i.e., originating in the
atrium, such as supraventricular tachycardia or atrial flutter) or wide

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation
Table 79.5  	

563

Medications for Pediatric Resuscitation and Arrhythmias

MEDICATION

DOSE

REMARKS

Adenosine

0.1 mg/kg (max dose: 6 mg)
Repeat: 0.2 mg/kg (max dose: 12 mg)

Monitor ECG
Rapid IV/IO bolus with flush

Amiodarone

5 mg/kg IV/IO; repeat 5 mg/kg doses up to
15 mg/kg
Max dose: 300 mg

Monitor ECG and blood pressure, as it can cause hypotension
Give over 20-­60 min (can give via IV push for patients in cardiac
arrest)
Use caution when administering with other drugs that prolong
QT interval (consider expert consultation)

Atropine

IV/IO: 0.02 mg/kg
Minimum dose: 0.1 mg for bradycardia treatment
Max dose:

Higher doses may be used with organophosphate poisoning
ETT dosing only if no IV/IO access

• Child: 0.5 mg
• Adolescent: 1 mg

Repeat once if needed
ETT* 0.04-­0.06 mg/kg
Max dose: 2 mg
Calcium chloride (10%)
Calcium gluconate

20 mg/kg IV/IO
50-­100 mg/kg
Max dose: 2 g

Administer slowly; fast push can cause heart block/asystole
Use only with documented hypocalcemia

Dextrose

0.5-­1 g/kg IV/IO

Recheck serial blood sugars after administration, as hypoglycemia
can recur

Epinephrine

IV/IO: 0.01 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the 0.1 mg/mL
concentration)
Max dose: 1 mg
ETT*: 0.1 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the 1 mg/mL
concentration)
Max dose: 2.5 mg

May repeat every 3-­5 min as needed
Only give via ETT if no IV/IO access

Lidocaine

IV/IO: 1 mg/kg bolus
Max dose: 100 mg
Infusion: 20-­50 μg/kg/min
ETT*: 2-­3 mg/kg

Repeat bolus dose if infusion is initiated >15 min after initial
bolus

Magnesium sulfate

25-­50 mg/kg IV/IO
Max dose: 2 g

Can cause hypotension
Administer over 10-­20 min; faster in torsades de pointes

Naloxone

IV/IO/IM/SQ: 0.1 mg/kg for full reversal
Max dose 2 mg
IN: 4 mg spray; may repeat q2-­3min
ETT*: 2-­3 times IV dose

Use lower doses in patients with opioid-­induced respiratory
depression from therapeutic opioid dosing (0.001-­0.005 mg/kg)
May need to redose every 2-­3 minutes, as half-­life is shorter
than most narcotics
ETT if IV/IO routine not available

Sodium bicarbonate

1 mEq/kg IV/IO

Administer slowly; ensure adequate ventilation

• D10W: 5-­10 mL/kg
• D25W: 2-­4 mL/kg
• D50W: 1-­2 mL/kg

*Flush with 5 mL of normal saline and follow with 5 ventilations.
D5W, 5% Dextrose in water; IO, intraosseous; IV, intravenous; ETT, endotracheal tube; IM, intramuscular; IN, intranasal.

complex rhythms (i.e., rhythms of ventricular origin, such as ventricular tachycardia).
The initial management of tachycardia should include assessment
for cardiopulmonary compromise (Fig. 79.12). If the patient has evidence of cardiopulmonary compromise (i.e., hypotension, altered
mental status, or other signs of shock), further treatment is based on
whether the QRS complex of the ECG is narrow (≤0.09 sec) or wide
(>0.09 sec). For narrow complex tachycardia, providers must distinguish between sinus tachycardia and supraventricular tachycardia
(SVT). In sinus tachycardia, the history and onset are consistent with
a known cause of tachycardia, such as fever or dehydration. Sinus
tachycardia usually has some degree of rate variability, and p-­waves
are consistently present on the ECG and are of normal morphology
and axis. Treatment is then geared toward identifying and treating
the cause of sinus tachycardia. In SVT, onset is often abrupt without prodrome, and p-­waves are absent or have a nonsinus ECG axis.
When SVT is associated with cardiopulmonary compromise, providers should rapidly move to convert the child’s heart rhythm back to
sinus rhythm. If the child already has IV access, adenosine should be
administered (Table 79.5). Adenosine has an extremely short half-­life,

so administration through an IV close to the heart (e.g., upper extremity) is best. Adenosine should be administered with a three-­way stopcock inline so that it can be given and immediately flushed into the
circulation. If the child does not have IV access or adenosine does not
successfully convert the heart rhythm back to sinus rhythm, then synchronized cardioversion (0.5-­1.0 joule [J]/kg) should be performed.
For wide-­complex tachycardia (i.e., ventricular tachycardia [VT])
with a pulse and evidence of cardiopulmonary compromise, synchronized cardioversion should be performed.
For patients with tachycardia without cardiopulmonary compromise, the rhythm assessment proceeds in the same fashion, but treatment potentially differs. Vagal maneuvers can be considered for SVT
in the stable patient, followed by administration of adenosine and
obtaining expert consultation. Wide-­complex tachyarrhythmias without cardiovascular compromise should also trigger expert consultation
before administration of antiarrhythmic medications. If the rhythm is
monomorphic, adenosine can be given, as some stable wide-­complex
tachycardias are SVT with aberrant conduction and thus have a wide
QRS complex. Patients should be continually reassessed for development of cardiovascular compromise.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

564 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
CARDIAC ARREST AND CARDIOPULMONARY
RESUSCITATION
Overview

Cardiac arrest occurs when the heart fails as an effective pump and
blood flow ceases. Outwardly, the patient in cardiac arrest presents
as unresponsive and apneic with no palpable pulse. Internally, the
cessation of cardiac output and oxygen delivery causes progressive
tissue ischemia and organ failure. If not rapidly reversed, cardiac
arrest leads to progressive deterioration in brain, heart, and other
organ function, such that resuscitation and recovery are no longer
possible. Cardiac arrest outcomes in children have improved as a
result of improvements in the recognition of deteriorating patients
and delivery of high-­quality CPR. Prehospital and hospital providers should understand that pediatric cardiac arrest is an intervenable process for which favorable outcomes are common. Early
recognition and rapid treatment with high-­quality CPR can be
lifesaving.

Fig. 79.13 Hand position for infant CPR for the single provider. The
two-­finger technique.

Prevention of Cardiac Arrest

Out-­of-­hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) occurs due to a variety of
causes, including sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), drowning,
foreign body aspiration, poisoning or drug overdose, and trauma.
Sudden cardiac arrest due to arrhythmias or cardiac disease do occur
(usually in adolescents and those with preexisting congenital heart
disease) and should be recognized and promptly treated, but most
pediatric OHCAs have an underlying respiratory etiology. Preventive
measures such as “back to sleep” for infants to lower the risk of SIDS
(see Chapter 423), child supervision around bodies of water, and minimizing access to high-­risk choking foods substantially decrease the
incidence of cardiac arrest. Recognition of the child with respiratory
distress or impending respiratory failure and delivery of appropriate
care, as outlined earlier, is the most common and practical means of
preventing pediatric OHCA.
In hospitalized children, cardiac arrest is most often the result of the
progression or worsening of an underlying respiratory, cardiac, or neuromuscular disease process. Most pediatric in-­hospital cardiac arrests
(IHCAs) occur in the setting of progressive respiratory failure or shock.
Recognition of deteriorating patients, transfer to monitored settings
(i.e., intensive care units), and institution of appropriate directed and
supportive therapies are effective means of preventing IHCA or ensuring that if it does occur, care is delivered in a well-­equipped and prepared setting.

Recognition of Cardiac Arrest

Cardiac arrest is recognized from general assessment and primary survey findings consistent with a pale or cyanotic child who is unresponsive, apneic, and pulseless. Even experienced providers have a relatively
high error rate when asked to determine presence or absence of pulse
in a child. Therefore lay rescuers should begin CPR immediately for
any patient without signs of life. Healthcare providers can palpate for
a pulse for up to 10 seconds but should provide CPR unless a pulse is
definitively felt.
Although initial responders should focus on signs of lifelessness when determining if a patient requires CPR, recognition and
understanding of cardiac arrest rhythms is also important for providers. Most pediatric cardiac arrest rhythms are “nonshockable”
(i.e., asystole, pulseless electrical activity [PEA], or bradycardia with
cardiopulmonary compromise). It is important pediatric providers
recognize that bradycardia with cardiopulmonary compromise that
does not swiftly resolve with ventilation and oxygenation should
be treated with CPR. “Shockable” rhythms (ventricular fibrillation
[VF] and pulseless VT) account for a relatively small proportion of
pediatric OHCAs or IHCAs. However, these rhythms can occur as
a secondary rhythm later in arrest. Because these rhythms require
prompt defibrillation in addition to high-­quality CPR, it is important to recognize and be prepared to treat VF or pulseless VT when
present.

Fig. 79.14 Hand position for infant CPR for two providers. The
2-­thumb-­encircling hands technique.

Basic Life Support

The AHA Pediatric BLS algorithms for both single-­and two-­rescuer
scenarios are depicted in Figures 79.1 and 79.2. Upon recognition of
cardiac arrest, rescuers should begin CPR with both chest compressions and rescue breaths. Single rescuers who witness a sudden collapse should activate the emergency response system and retrieve an
automated electronic defibrillator (AED) or defibrillator, if immediately available, before starting compressions, as many of these children have shockable rhythms. For single rescuers treating children
in cardiac arrest without a witnessed sudden collapse, CPR should
begin immediately with cycles of 30 compressions followed by two
rescuer breaths for at least 2 minutes. An AED should be applied, and
automated directions followed as soon as it is available. When two or
more rescuers are present, one rescuer should be responsible for activating the emergency response system and retrieving an AED while
the other rescuer(s) begins CPR. When both rescuers are providing
CPR for an infant or prepubescent child, cycles of 15 compressions
followed by two ventilations should be provided. Adolescents should
receive cycles of 30 compressions and two ventilations regardless of
the number of rescuers.

Components of High-­Quality Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation

The goal of CPR is to provide temporary blood flow and oxygen delivery to the body during cardiac arrest. High-­quality CPR that meets established goals and metrics optimizes this blood flow and is associated with
improved outcomes from cardiac arrest. Components of high-­quality
CPR include optimal hand positioning, appropriate chest compression
rate, adequate chest compression depth, allowing for full chest recoil,
minimization of interruptions, and appropriate ventilation rate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation

A

565

B

Fig. 79.15 Hand position for child CPR. A, One-­handed chest compressions in a child. B, Two-­handed chest compressions in a child or adult.
Hand positioning and CPR technique: Chest compressions in
infants <1 year old performed by a single provider may be performed
by placing two fingers or two thumbs just below the intramammary
line (Fig. 79.13). When two providers are present, the two-­thumb-­
encircling hands technique (Fig. 79.14) is recommended unless the
rescuer cannot physically encircle the victim’s chest, in which case
two fingers can be used. If goal depths cannot be reached with these
techniques, it is reasonable to use the heel of one hand for chest compressions. For children >1 year old, the care provider should perform chest compressions over the lower half of the sternum with the
heel of one hand, or with two hands as used for adult resuscitation
(Fig. 79.15). In all cases, care should be taken to avoid compression
of the xiphoid and the ribs. When feasible, a backboard should be
placed under the child’s back and the hospital bed should be placed
into “CPR mode” when applicable to maximize the effectiveness of
compressions.
Chest compression mechanics: Chest compressions should be provided at a rate of 100-­120 compressions per minute. The goal chest
compression depth for infants and children is at least one-­third the
anterior-­posterior diameter of the chest, which is approximately 4
cm (1.5 inches) in infants and 5 cm (2 inches) in children. For children who have reached puberty, the adult depth of 5-­6 cm can be used.
Rescuers should avoid leaning and allow the chest to fully recoil after
each compression in order to facilitate venous return to the heart.
Resuscitation teams should seek to minimize the duration and frequency of chest compression interruptions during CPR. These chest
compression mechanics can be measured during CPR through CPR
quality-­monitoring defibrillators, which are now widely used.

Advanced Life Support

The AHA PALS algorithm for cardiac arrest is depicted in Figure 79.16.
Chest compressions should be delivered as detailed earlier. Ventilation
is a key component of pediatric CPR because most patients have concomitant respiratory failure. For children without an advanced airway
in place, chest compressions are paused to allow for the delivery of ventilations via mask with the compression-­to-­ventilation ratios discussed
previously. For children with an advanced airway at the time of arrest,
ventilations should be provided asynchronously (i.e., without interrupting chest compressions) at a rate of 20-­30 breaths/minute. Providers should avoid overventilation during CPR, as this may increase
intrathoracic pressure and decrease venous return to the heart.
Epinephrine is administered during CPR to increase systemic vascular resistance and coronary perfusion pressure in order to restore
spontaneous circulation. Epinephrine should be administered intravenously or intraosseously (IO), though it can be administered via ETT
if IV or IO access is not available (see Table 79.5). The first dose of
epinephrine should be given within 5 minutes of the onset of cardiac

arrest and repeated every 3-­5 minutes until return of spontaneous
circulation (ROSC) is achieved. Pulse and rhythm checks should be
performed approximately every 2 minutes but should not last more
than 10 seconds.
CPR quality can also be gauged by monitoring the patient’s physiologic response to resuscitation. End-­
tidal carbon dioxide, which
reflects pulmonary blood flow, can be an indicator of the adequacy of
chest compressions. Diastolic blood pressure, measured via an arterial
line, is used as a surrogate of coronary perfusion pressure, and values
are therefore correlated with the likelihood of ROSC. Either of these
tools can be used during CPR by practitioners appropriately trained in
the nuances of their interpretation.

Defibrillation and Antiarrhythmic Medications

For those children with VF or pulseless VT, emergency defibrillation
is indicated (see Fig. 79.16). Defibrillator pads should be applied to the
bare chest during CPR regardless of initial rhythm, as these rhythms
can develop later during cardiac arrest. Lay providers should follow
the verbal instructions given by the AED. Ideally, the AED used for
children <8 years of age should deliver an attenuated adult dose or
should be designed for children; if neither of these options is available,
a standard adult AED should be used. Healthcare providers should
use either an AED or a manual defibrillator. An initial defibrillation
should be provided at a dose of 2 J/kg with subsequent dosing per the
PALS algorithm. CPR should be promptly resumed after each defibrillation attempt, with additional rhythm assessments and defibrillation
attempts every 2 minutes while a shockable rhythm persists. Either
amiodarone or lidocaine can be given as an antiarrhythmic for shock-­
refractory VF or VT (see Table 79.5).

Identification and Treatment of Underlying Causes of
Cardiac Arrest

Pediatric cardiac arrest can occur because of a discrete and clear event
(e.g., drowning), due to the progression of underlying disease processes (e.g., refractory hypoxemic respiratory failure), or for reasons
that are unclear to the resuscitation team at the time of the arrest. In
addition to providing high-­quality CPR, reversing the underlying cause
of cardiac arrest is critical in order to restore and maintain spontaneous circulation. Focused evaluation of likely etiologies based on the
patient’s history, risk factors, physical exam, and other findings often
reveals addressable cause. Additionally, providers should systematically address common and correctable causes of cardiac arrest (e.g., the
“Hs and Ts”; Table 79.6).

Duration of CPR

Unsurprisingly, children who receive prolonged CPR have worse outcomes than those who require brief CPR. However, previous assertions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

566 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm
1

CPR quality

Start CPR
• Begin bag-mask ventilation and give oxygen
• Attach monitor/defibrillator

Yes

• Push hard (≥ ³ of anteroposterior
diameter of chest) and fast
(100–120/min) and allow complete
chest recoil
• Minimize interruptions in
compressions
• Change compressor every
2 minutes, or sooner if fatigued
• If no advanced airway, 15:2
compression-ventilation ratio
• If advanced airway, provide
continuous compressions and
give a breath every 2–3 seconds

No

Rhythm
shockable?

2

9
VF/pVT

3

Asystole/PEA

Shock energy for defibrillation
Epinephrine
ASAP

Shock
10

4

CPR 2 min
• IV/IO access
• Epinephrine every 3–5 min
• Consider advanced
airway and capnography

CPR 2 min
IV/IO access

No

Rhythm
shockable?
Yes
5

Rhythm
shockable?

Yes

Shock
No

6
CPR 2 min
• Epinephrine every 3–5 min
• Consider advanced airway

11
CPR 2 min
Treat reversible causes

No

Rhythm
shockable?

No

Yes
7

Rhythm
shockable?

Yes

Drug therapy
• Epinephrine IV/IO dose:
0.01 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the
0.1 mg/mL concentration).
Max dose 1 mg.
Repeat every 3–5 minutes.
If no IV/IO access, may give
endotracheal dose: 0.1 mg/kg
(0.1 mL/kg of the 1 mg/mL
concentration).
• Amiodarone IV/IO dose:
5 mg/kg bolus during cardiac
arrest. May repeat up to
3 total doses for refractory
VF/pulseless VT
or
Lidocaine IV/IO dose:
Initial: 1 mg/kg loading dose
Advanced airway
• Endotracheal intubation or
supraglottic advanced airway
• Waveform capnography or
capnometry to confirm and
monitor ET tube placement
Reversible causes

Shock

8
CPR 2 min
• Amiodarone or lidocaine
• Treat reversible causes

12
• If no signs of return of spontaneous
circulation (ROSC), go to 10
• If ROSC, go to Post-Cardiac Arrest
Care checklist

• First shock 2 J/kg
• Second shock 4 J/kg
• Subsequent shocks ≥4 J/kg,
maximum 10 J/kg or adult dose

Go to 7.

• Hypovolemia
• Hypoxia
• Hydrogen ion (acidosis)
• Hypoglycemia
• Hypo-/hyperkalemia
• Hypothermia
• Tension pneumothorax
• Tamponade, cardiac
• Toxins
• Thrombosis, pulmonary
• Thrombosis, coronary

Fig. 79.16 Pediatric advanced life support cardiac arrest algorithm. CPR, Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; IO/IV, intraosseous/intravenous; PEA,
pulseless electrical activity; VF/VT, ventricular fibrillation/tachycardia. (From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al. Part 4: Pediatric Basic and
Advanced Life Support: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469-­S523.)

that CPR >20 minutes in duration was futile have been disproven. More
than 15% of children who received >35 minutes of CPR for IHCA survived to hospital discharge in one large registry study. Therefore decisions regarding futility and when to cease resuscitation efforts should
take into account patient factors, goals of care, arrest etiology and characteristics, and a host of other factors, rather than CPR duration alone.

Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation and
Extracorporeal Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a modified
form of cardiopulmonary bypass that can be employed in children
with severe cardiac or respiratory failure. Blood is removed from a
large central vein, carried through tubing to an oxygenator for gas

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation
Table 79.6

567

Potentially Reversible Causes of Cardiac Arrest

CONDITION

COMMON CLINICAL SETTINGS

TREATMENT

Dehydration, hemorrhage, major burns, diabetes,
gastrointestinal losses, shock, and trauma

Administer fluids
For hemorrhage, administer packed red blood cells and other blood products

Hypoxemia

Upper airway obstruction (croup, anaphylaxis,
foreign body)
Lower airway obstruction (asthma, bronchiolitis)
Parenchymal lung disease (pneumonia)
Restrictive lung disease (pleural effusion)

Provide supplemental oxygen
Confirm endotracheal tube placement and chest rise

Hydrogen ion
(acidosis)

Preexisting acidosis, diabetes, diarrhea, drugs
and toxins, prolonged resuscitation, renal
disease, and shock

Reassess the adequacy of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, oxygenation,
and ventilation; reconfirm endotracheal tube placement
Ensure adequate ventilation and avoid concomitant respiratory acidosis
Administer IV fluids
May consider bicarbonate administration with documented severe acidosis

Hypoglycemia

Starvation, toxin, diabetes medications,
metabolic disease

Administer dextrose (glucagon if dextrose not available)
Discontinue causative medications

Hyperkalemia

Metabolic acidosis, excessive administration
of potassium, renal failure, drugs and toxins,
vigorous exercise, hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis,
tumor lysis syndrome, and clinically significant
tissue injury

Stop potassium-­containing fluids
Stabilize cardiac membrane: calcium
Treat acidosis: sodium bicarbonate
Shift potassium intracellularly: sodium bicarbonate, insulin (with glucose
to prevent hypoglycemia), and albuterol
Promote potassium excretion: loop diuretics, Kayexalate
Removal of potassium: dialysis

Hypokalemia

Diabetes, diuretic use, drugs and toxins,
profound gastrointestinal losses

If profound hypokalemia is accompanied by cardiac arrest, initiate urgent
IV potassium replacement

Hypothermia

Alcohol abuse, burns, central nervous system
disease, debilitated patient, drowning, drugs
and toxins, endocrine disease, history of
exposure, homelessness, extensive skin
disease, spinal cord disease, and trauma

If hypothermia is severe (temperature <30°C [86°F]), defibrillation may be
ineffective; initiate active internal rewarming with cardiopulmonary
support; can consider extracorporeal rewarming
If hypothermia is moderate (temperature 30-­34°C [86-­93.2°F]), actively
rewarm during CPR

Procedural complication, mechanical ventilation
complication, pulmonary disease with
“air leak” (including asthma, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and necrotizing
pneumonia), thoracentesis, and trauma

Needle decompression followed by chest tube insertion or primary chest
tube insertion

Cardiac
tamponade

Hemorrhage, malignancy, pericarditis, trauma,
cardiac surgery, post–myocardial infarction

Administer fluids to increase cardiac preload (temporizing only);
obtain bedside echocardiogram, if available
Perform pericardiocentesis; immediate surgical intervention is
appropriate if pericardiocentesis is unhelpful but cardiac tamponade
is known or highly suspected

Toxins

Alcohol abuse, behavioral or metabolic
presentation, classic toxicologic syndrome,
psychiatric disease, depressed mental status
of unclear etiology, medications in the home,
history of depression/suicidality

Supportive care and toxin-­directed therapies in consultation with a
toxicologist

Thrombosis,
pulmonary

Hospitalized patient, recent surgical procedure,
peripartum, known risk factors for venous
thromboembolism, history of venous
thromboembolism, or prearrest presentation
consistent with a diagnosis of acute pulmonary
embolism, recent immobility or fractures

Administer fluids; augment with vasoactive medications as necessary
Consider pulmonary vasodilators (e.g., inhaled nitric oxide)
Consider systemic or site-­directed thrombolytic therapy
Consider mechanical thrombectomy
Consider ECMO

Thrombosis,
coronary

Known risk factors for myocardial infarction
(congenital heart disease, family history of
sudden cardiac death)

Consider fibrinolytic therapy
Consider percutaneous coronary intervention

THE H’S
Hypovolemia

THE T’S
Tension
pneumothorax

Adapted from Kleinman ME, Chameides L, Schexnayder SM, et al. Part 14: Pediatric advanced life support: 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2010;122(18 Suppl 3):S876-­S908.

exchange, and then returned to the body via either a vein (venovenous or VV-­ECMO) or an artery (venoarterial or VA-­ECMO). VV-­
ECMO is typically used in patients with refractory respiratory failure
who require ECMO for gas exchange but continue to rely on their
native cardiac function for cardiac output. VA-­ECMO is used for

patients with shock or cardiac failure, with or without concomitant
respiratory failure, with the ECMO pump and circuit augmenting or
replacing native cardiac output. The processes of determining ECMO
candidacy, performing ECMO cannulation, maintaining ECMO
circuit integrity, and caring for critically ill children on ECMO are

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

568 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 79.7

Medications to Maintain Cardiac Output and for Postarrest Stabilization*

MEDICATION

DOSE RANGE

COMMENT

Dobutamine

2-­20 μg/kg/min IV/IO

Inotrope, chronotrope, vasodilator

Dopamine

2-­20 μg/kg/min IV/IO

Inotrope, chronotrope, vasodilator at low doses,
vasoconstrictor at high doses

Epinephrine

0.01-­1 μg/kg/min IV/IO

Inotrope, chronotrope, vasodilator at low doses,
vasoconstrictor at medium and high doses

Milrinone

50 μg/kg IV/IO over 10-­60 min then 0.25-­0.75 μg/kg/min

Inodilator, lusitrope, vasodilator

Norepinephrine

0.01-­1 μg/kg/min

Vasopressor; weak inotrope

*Alternative formula for calculating an infusion: Infusion rate (mL/hr) = [weight (kg) × dose (μg/kg/min) × 60 (min/hr)]/concentration μg/mL).
Data from Kleinman ME, Brennan EE, Goldberger ZD, et al. Part 5: Adult Basic Life Support and Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Quality: 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines
Update for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2015;132(18 Suppl 2):S414-­S435.

complex; ECMO is thus performed only at centers with appropriate
expertise and equipment.
Extracorporeal support can be employed as a rescue therapy for
refractory cardiac arrest. Extracorporeal CPR (ECPR), which involves
cannulating and placing a patient on VA-­ECMO while CPR is in progress, has been successfully used in children. Its efficacy has been best
demonstrated in hospitalized children with underlying cardiac disease;
AHA guidelines therefore state that it can be considered for children
“with cardiac diagnoses who have IHCA in settings with existing
ECMO protocols, expertise, and equipment.” In addition, ECPR has
been employed in patients with noncardiac etiologies of cardiopulmonary arrest who are not responding to standard resuscitation protocols.

Post–Cardiac Arrest Care

After resuscitation from cardiac arrest, patients are at risk for developing post-­cardiac arrest syndrome (PCAS). PCAS is composed of
post–cardiac arrest brain injury, myocardial dysfunction, systemic
ischemia-­reperfusion response, and persistence of preexisting pathophysiology and can last for days to weeks after the cardiac arrest. Primary brain injury occurs due to hypoxia and ischemia during the
no-­flow (pre-­CPR) and low-­flow (during CPR) periods. Secondary
brain injury occurs during the postarrest period. Signs and symptoms of brain injury are encephalopathy, seizures, cerebral edema,
and autonomic dysfunction. Myocardial dysfunction can present
as hypotension, depressed left or right ventricular systolic or diastolic function, arrhythmias, or pulmonary edema. The systemic
ischemia-­reperfusion response is a “sepsis-­like” syndrome and has
clinical findings of hyperglycemia, coagulopathy, hypovolemia, fever,
and multisystem organ dysfunction. These three components combined with the precipitant that caused the arrest (e.g., septic shock
or PARDS) result in varied severity of PCAS ranging from minimal
symptoms, with patients returning quickly to their neurologic baseline, to severe multisystem organ failure with high risk of repeat cardiac arrest.
To address this clinical spectrum, it is important to be deliberate
and vigilant in caring for the postarrest patient. Thus close postarrest
observation in an intensive care unit, where the child can receive ongoing multiorgan system assessments and support, is critical. To prevent
secondary brain injury, which occurs during the postarrest period, clinicians should monitor for, prevent, and treat PCAS. Hypotension is
common and can lead to organ hypoperfusion. Clinicians should frequently monitor blood pressure and should do so continuously with
an arterial catheter if appropriate resources are available. IV fluids
and vasoactive agents such as epinephrine or norepinephrine should
be used to maintain a blood pressure greater than the fifth percentile
for age. Clinicians should be proactive and not wait for hypotension
to occur. Rather, they should be prepared with fluids, vasoactive infusions, and clearly defined postarrest blood pressure targets. Continuous arterial blood pressure monitoring can help the provider determine

the need for, and response to, inotropic and chronotropic medications
(Table 79.7).
Hyperoxia (Pao2 >300) and hypoxemia after cardiac arrest should
be prevented because both can worsen secondary brain injury. Clinicians should wean supplemental oxygen after ROSC, targeting a
saturation of 94–99%. In most cases, weaning supplemental oxygen
when patients are saturating 100% is not harmful. For patients with
hypoxemia, clinicians may need to try alternative ventilator strategies
if supplemental oxygen is insufficient to achieve a saturation above
94% or higher.
Fever is common after cardiac arrest and may worsen secondary brain injury. Targeted temperature management (TTM) is
performed with an active temperature control device and should
be used for children postarrest who do not return to their neurologic baseline. Because there is no difference in survival or neurologic outcomes between patients who receive TTM 33°C (32-­34°C
[89.6-­91.4°F]) and patients who receive TTM 36.8°C (98.2°F)
(36-­37.5°C [96.8-­99.5°F]), either can be selected. Patients should
have continuous core temperature monitoring and receive sedation
and analgesics to prevent discomfort. If shivering occurs, patients
should be treated with a sedative or neuromuscular blockade.
Hyperthermia must be avoided.
Seizures are common after cardiac arrest and often are nonconvulsive and therefore can only be detected on an EEG. It is unclear
if treatment improves outcomes; however, antiseizure medications
can be administered for convulsive and nonconvulsive seizures.
Most care is supportive, but close monitoring for organ injury that
can be treated (e.g., coagulopathy or adrenal insufficiency) or that may
require modification of therapies (e.g., medication dose adjusting in
patients with acute kidney injury) should be considered. Survivors of
cardiac arrest can have long-­standing neurologic, cognitive, physical,
and quality-­of-­life deficits. Clinicians should refer children for ongoing
evaluation and assessments.
Communication with the patient’s family is an essential element
of postarrest care, as it is for the care of any acutely ill or injured
child. The family should be thoroughly briefed on the elements
of the resuscitation performed, the child’s condition, and ongoing
medical concerns, uncertainties, or issues. The provider should be
available to answer the family’s questions, clarify information, and
provide comfort. Other support staff, including social workers and
chaplains, should be contacted, as the family wishes, to provide
additional support and comfort. For situations in which the resuscitation is ongoing, it is recommended that the provider make every
effort possible to have the family present at the bedside, if they
wish. Family presence during CPR or other emergency resuscitative efforts, even if the child dies, is associated with a more positive
medical experience than if they are excluded. In situations where
the child is critically ill but stable, the family should be brought to
the bedside as soon as the healthcare team deems it safe and appropriate (see Chapter 8).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79 u Pediatric Cardiorespiratory Emergencies and Resuscitation
PROCEDURES
Vascular Access
Venous Access

Veins suitable for cannulation are numerous, but there is considerable
anatomic variation from patient to patient. In the upper extremities,

Inguinal ligament

569

the median antecubital vein, located in the antecubital fossa, is often
the largest and easiest to access. Many veins on the dorsum of the hand
are also suitable for cannulation because they are often large and easily
located, and their cannulation is generally well tolerated. The cephalic
vein is usually cannulated at the wrist, along the forearm, or at the
elbow. The median vein of the forearm is also suitable as it lies along a
flat surface of the forearm. In the lower extremity, the great saphenous
vein, located just anterior to the medial malleolus, is accessible in most
patients. The dorsum of the foot usually has a large vein in the midline,
passing across the ankle joint, but catheters are difficult to maintain in

Femoral
nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral
vein

Clavicle

Subclavian vein
Right leg

Sternal notch

Fig. 79.17 Approach to the femoral vein. The patient is flat and su-

pine, with the thigh slightly abducted and externally rotated. The introducer needle enters the skin 1-­2 cm distal to the inguinal ligament
and 0.5-­1 cm medial to the pulse of the femoral artery. Remember the
lateral to medial mnemonic NAVEL for nerve, artery, vein, empty space,
and lymphatics. (From Edwards LR, Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric vascular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ,
Rotta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 14.6, p. 102.)

Fig. 79.19 Approach to the subclavian vein. The patient is supine, in

slight Trendelenburg position, with a small roll along the spine between
the shoulders. The needle enters the skin at the junction of the lateral
and middle thirds of the inferior clavicle and is directed toward the suprasternal notch, passing along the inferior edge of the clavicle. (From
Edwards LR, Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric vascular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ, Rotta AT, eds. Fuhrman
& Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier:
2022: Fig. 14.5, p. 102.)

Carotid artery

Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Internal jugular vein

Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Internal jugular vein

Ipsilateral nipple

A

Ipsilateral nipple

B

Fig. 79.18 Approaches to the internal jugular vein. The patient is supine, in slight Trendelenburg position, with the neck extended over a shoulder

roll and the head rotated to the contralateral side. A, Middle approach: The introducer needle enters the skin at a 30-­degree angle at the apex of
the triangle formed by the heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and clavicle, directing it toward the ipsilateral nipple. B, Anterior approach: The
carotid pulse is palpated and may be slightly retracted medially. The introducer needle enters along the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid,
about halfway between the suprasternal notch and mastoid process, while being directed toward the ipsilateral nipple. (Modified from Edwards LR,
Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric vascular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ, Rotta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 14.4, p. 101.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

570 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Tibial tuberosity
Insert needle into
medial flat surface
of the anterior tibia

Flexor carpi
radialis

Flexor
retinaculum

Radius

Growth plate

Fig 79.20 Insertion of the intraosseous needle into the anterior tibia.
(From Edwards LR, Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric
vascular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ, Rotta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 14.2, p. 95.)

this vein because dorsiflexion tends to dislodge them. A second large
vein on the lateral side of the foot, running in the horizontal plane,
usually 1-­2 cm dorsal to the lower margin of the foot, is preferable. The
most notable scalp veins are the superficial temporal (just anterior to
the ear) and posterior auricular (just behind the ear).
Deeper and larger central veins can provide more reliable access
for medications, nutritive solutions, and blood sampling than
peripheral venous lines. Placement of central access should be considered in the patient with difficult peripheral access where IVs may
be challenging to obtain or may last for brief periods with increased
risk of infiltration; when a patient is critically ill requiring numerous medications and needs stable access; when a patient requires IV
vasoactive medications for more than a brief period; if long-­term
medications need to be administered in the hospital or at home; or
if administered agents are vascular irritants (IV nutrition, electrolyte infusions, certain antibiotics). Central veins may be reached
by percutaneous cannulation or surgical exposure. In infants and
young children, the femoral vein or internal jugular vein are often
the easiest to access and cannulate, but the subclavian veins may
also be used (Figs. 79.17, 79.18, and 79.19). Peripherally inserted
central catheters (PICCs) can be placed for longer-­term access
through the upper or lower extremity to administer medications or
IV nutrition and can be used at home. With the expansion of bedside ultrasound availability and expertise, central venous catheters
should be placed under ultrasound guidance to improve first-­pass
success and minimize the risk of complications.

Intraosseous Access

IO needles (for intramedullary venous plexus access) are specialized, rigid, large-­
bore needles. IO cannulation is recommended
for patients in whom IV access proves difficult or unattainable in
an emergent setting, even in older children. If venous access is not
available within approximately 1 minute in a child with cardiopulmonary arrest, an IO needle should be placed in the anterior proximal tibia (with care taken to avoid traversing the epiphyseal plate) or
other approved site. The needle should penetrate the anterior layer of
compact bone, and its tip is advanced into the spongy interior of the
bone (Fig. 79.20). Commercially available IO kits frequently include
drills that mitigate the complications of needle placement associated
with manual placement. All medications, blood products, and fluids may be administered through the IO route, including medications required for emergency resuscitation. Laboratory values can
be sampled, although a complete blood count will be unreliable.
Complications are uncommon but may include osteomyelitis with
prolonged infusions, tibial fracture, and infiltration of fluids with
dislodgement.

Abductor
pollicis longus

Radial
artery

Fig. 79.21 Radial artery anatomy and cannulation.

Arterial Access

Arterial access is indicated when care providers need frequent blood
sampling, particularly to assess adequacy of oxygenation, ventilation,
or acid-­base balance, or continuous blood pressure monitoring. The
radial artery, the most commonly cannulated artery, lies on the lateral
side of the anterior wrist, just medial to the styloid process of the radius
(Fig. 79.21). The ulnar artery, just lateral to the tendon of the flexor
carpi ulnaris, is used less often because of its proximity to the ulnar
nerve. Useful sites in the lower extremity, particularly in neonates and
infants, are the dorsalis pedis artery, on the dorsum of the foot between
the tendons of the tibialis anterior and the extensor hallucis longus,
and the posterior tibial artery, posterior to the medial malleolus. Arterial catheters require special care for insertion and subsequent management. Clinicians should monitor for signs of decreased perfusion distal
to catheter placement.

NONVASCULAR EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Thoracentesis and Chest Tube Placement

Thoracentesis is the placement of a needle or catheter into the pleural
space to evacuate fluid, blood, or air. Most insertions are performed
in one of the intercostal spaces between the fourth and sixth ribs in
the plane of the midaxillary line. After appropriate systemic and local
anesthesia/sedation, a needle (and later the chest tube) that enters the
pleural space should penetrate the intercostal space by passing over the
superior edge of the lower rib, because there are larger vessels along the
inferior edge of the rib. Ideally, the chest tube should lie anterior in the
pleural space for air accumulation and posterior for fluid accumulation. A radiograph must be obtained to verify chest tube placement and
evacuation of the pleural space.

Pericardiocentesis

When fluid, blood, or gas accumulates in the pericardial sac, the heart
may become compressed and may be unable to fill/empty with normal
volumes of blood, leading to diminished cardiac output (i.e., pericardial tamponade with obstructive shock). The cardinal signs of such a
restrictive pericardial effusion are tachycardia and hypotension, generally with a narrowed pulse pressure. Pericardiocentesis includes needle
aspiration of the pericardial sac, often followed by the placement of a
catheter for continuous drainage. As with thoracentesis, chest radiography should be done to confirm catheter location and to evaluate for
any complications, such as pneumothorax or hemothorax. Pericardiocentesis may be performed with echocardiography.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80 u Acute Care of Multiple Trauma

Chapter 80

Acute Care of Multiple
Trauma
Courtney W. Mangus, Howard I. Pryor II,
and Bruce L. Klein
EPIDEMIOLOGY

Injury is a leading cause of death and disability in children throughout the world (see Chapter 14). Deaths represent only a small fraction of the total trauma burden. Approximately 140,000 children were
treated in U.S. trauma centers in 2016 for serious injury. Many survivors of trauma have permanent or temporary functional limitations.
Motor vehicle–related injuries and falls rank among the top 15 causes
of disability-­adjusted life years in children worldwide. In childhood,
blunt trauma predominates, accounting for the majority of injuries. In
adolescence, penetrating trauma increases in frequency, accounting for
approximately 13% of injuries, and penetrating trauma secondary to a
firearm is associated with a high case fatality rate of 11%.

REGIONALIZATION AND TRAUMA TEAMS

Morbidity and mortality rates have decreased in geographic regions
with comprehensive, coordinated trauma systems. Treatment at designated trauma centers is associated with decreased mortality. At the
scene of injury, paramedics should administer necessary advanced life
support and perform triage (Fig. 80.1). It is usually preferable to bypass
local hospitals and rapidly transport a seriously injured child directly
to a pediatric trauma center (or a trauma center with pediatric commitment). Children have lower mortality rates, lower complication rates,
and fewer operative interventions after severe blunt trauma when they
are treated in designated pediatric trauma centers or in hospitals with
pediatric intensive care units.
When the receiving emergency department (ED) is notified before
the child’s arrival, the trauma team should be mobilized in advance.
Each member has defined tasks. A senior surgeon (surgical coordinator) or an emergency physician leads the team. Team compositions
vary somewhat from hospital to hospital; Figure 80.2 shows the model
used at the Johns Hopkins Hospital Bloomberg Children’s Center (Baltimore, MD). Consultants, especially neurosurgeons and orthopedic
surgeons, must be promptly available, and the operating room staff
should be alerted.
Physiologic status and mechanism of injury are used for field triage
and to determine whether to activate the trauma team. More importance should be placed on physiologic compromise and less on mechanism of injury. Scoring scales such as the Abbreviated Injury Scale
(AIS), Injury Severity Score (ISS), Pediatric Trauma Score (Table 80.1),
and Revised Trauma Score use these parameters to predict patient
outcome. The AIS and ISS are used together. First, the AIS is used to
numerically score injuries—as 1 minor, 2 moderate, 3 serious, 4 severe,
5 critical, or 6 probably lethal—in each of six ISS body regions: head/
neck, face, thorax, abdomen and pelvic contents, extremities/bony pelvis, and external. The ISS is the sum of the squares of the highest three
AIS region scores.

ATLS: SYSTEMATIC EVALUATION OF THE
INJURED PATIENT

The American College of Surgeons (ACS) endorses a systematic
approach to trauma patients known as Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS). ATLS is accepted as the standard of care for the initial assessment of injured patients and is used internationally. The
approach is centered on a standardized patient evaluation that prioritizes identification and management of injuries in a specific order that
addresses their immediate risk to life. ATLS principles are detailed here

571

and include performance of the primary survey with initial adjuncts
followed by the secondary survey.

PRIMARY SURVEY

During the primary survey, the trauma team quickly assesses and treats
life-­threatening injuries (see also Chapter 79). The principal causes of
death shortly after trauma are airway obstruction, respiratory insufficiency, shock from hemorrhage, and central nervous system (CNS)
injury. The primary survey addresses the ABCDEs: Airway, Breathing,
Circulation, Disability/Neurologic Deficit, and Exposure of the patient
and control of the Environment.

Airway

Optimizing oxygenation and ventilation, while protecting the cervical
spine (C-­spine) from potential further injury, is of paramount importance. Airway obstruction manifests as snoring, gurgling, hoarseness,
stridor, and/or diminished breath sounds even with apparently good
respiratory effort. Children are more likely than adults to have airway
obstruction because of their smaller oral and nasal cavities, proportionately larger tongues, more tonsillar and adenoidal tissue, higher
and more anterior glottic opening, and narrower larynx and trachea.
Obstruction is common in patients with severe head injuries, partly
because of decreased muscle tone, which allows the tongue to fall posteriorly and occlude the airway. With trauma, obstruction can also
result from fractures of the mandible or facial bones, secretions such
as blood or vomit, crush injuries of the larynx or trachea, and foreign
body aspiration.
If it is necessary to open the airway, a jaw thrust without head tilt
is recommended. This procedure minimizes cervical spine motion.
In an unconscious child, an oropharyngeal airway may be inserted to
prevent posterior displacement of the mandibular tissues. A semiconscious child will gag with an oropharyngeal airway but may tolerate
a nasopharyngeal airway. A nasopharyngeal airway is contraindicated
when there is significant nasal trauma or possibility of cribriform plate
fracture. If these maneuvers plus suctioning do not clear the airway,
oral endotracheal intubation is indicated. When endotracheal intubation proves difficult, a laryngeal mask airway can be used as a temporary alternative. A laryngeal mask airway consists of a tube with an
inflatable cuff that rests above the larynx and thus does not require
placement of the tube into the trachea. Other extraglottic devices that
can be blindly inserted in a difficult airway scenario include the Combitube and King laryngeal airway tube; these devices are considered
temporary and should be exchanged for a definitive airway as soon as
possible. Video-­assisted laryngoscopy or the use of a bougie can also be
particularly helpful in the management of a difficult airway. Emergency
cricothyrotomy is needed in <1% of trauma victims.

Breathing

The physician assesses breathing by counting the respiratory rate;
visualizing chest wall motion for symmetry, expansion, and accessory
muscle use; and auscultating breath sounds in both axillae. Pulse oximetry and continuous waveform capnography monitoring should also be
used; however, they may be less reliable in patients with shock. If ventilation is inadequate, bag-­valve-­mask ventilation with 100% oxygen
must be initiated immediately, followed by endotracheal intubation.
End-­expiratory carbon dioxide (CO2) detectors or capnography help
verify accurate tube placement.
Head trauma is the most common cause of respiratory insufficiency.
An unconscious child with severe head injury may have a variety of
breathing abnormalities, including Cheyne-­Stokes respiration, slow
irregular breaths, and apnea. A child with significant neurologic
impairment will require endotracheal intubation and mechanical
ventilation.
Although less common than a pulmonary contusion, tension pneumothorax and massive hemothorax are immediately life threatening
(Tables 80.2 and 80.3). A tension pneumothorax occurs when air
accumulates under pressure in the pleural space. The adjacent lung is
compacted; the mediastinum is pushed toward the opposite hemithorax; and the heart, great vessels, and contralateral lung are compressed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

572 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Measure vital signs and level of consciousness

Step One

≤13
<90 mmHg
<10 or >29 breaths per minute*
(<20 in infant aged <1 year),
or need for ventilatory support

Glasgow Coma Scale
Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)
Respiratory rate

Yes

Transport to a trauma
center.† Steps One and Two
attempt to identify the
most seriously injured
patients. These patients
should be transported
preferentially to the
highest level of care within
the defined trauma system.

Yes

Transport to a trauma
center, which, depending
upon the defined trauma
system, need not be the
highest level trauma
center.§§

Yes

Transport to a trauma
center or hospital capable
of timely and thorough
evaluation and initial
management of potentially
serious injuries. Consider
consultation with medical
control.

No
Assess anatomy
of injury

Step Two§

• All penetrating injuries to head, neck, torso and extremities proximal to elbow or
knee
• Chest wall instability or deformity (e.g., flail chest)
• Two or more proximal long-bone fractures
• Crushed, degloved, mangled, or pulseless extremity
• Amputation proximal to wrist or ankle
• Pelvic fractures
• Open or depressed skull fracture
• Paralysis
No
Assess mechanism of
injury and evidence of
high-energy impact

Step Three§

• Falls
— Adults: >20 feet (one story is equal to 10 feet)
— Children¶: >10 feet or two or three times the height of the child
• High-risk auto crash
— Intrusion,** including roof: >12 inches occupant site; >18 inches any site
— Ejection (partial or complete) from automobile
— Death in same passenger compartment
— Vehicle telemetry data consistent with a high risk of injury
• Auto vs. pedestrian/bicyclist thrown, run over, or with significant (>20 mph) impact††
• Motorcycle crash >20 mph
No
Assess special patient or
system considerations

Step Four

• Older adults¶¶
— Risk of injury/death increases after age 55 years
— SBP <110 might represent shock after age 65 years
— Low impact mechanisms (e.g. ground level falls) might result in severe injury
• Children
— Should be triaged preferentially to pediatric capable trauma centers
• Anticoagulants and bleeding disorders
— Patients with head injury are at high risk for rapid deterioration
• Burns
— Without other trauma mechanism: triage to burn facility***
— With trauma mechanism: triage to trauma center***
• Pregnancy > 20 weeks
• EMS provider judgment

No
Transport according
to protocol†††

When in doubt, transport to a trauma center
* The upper limit of respiratory rate in infants is >29 breaths per minute to maintain a higher level of overtriage for infants.
† Trauma centers are designated Level I-IV. A Level I center has the greatest amount of resources and personnel for care of the injured patient and provides regional
leadership in education, research, and prevention programs. A Level II facility offers similar resources to a Level I facility, possibly differing only in continuous
availability of certain subspecialties or sufficient prevention, education, and research activities for Level I designation; Level II facilities are not required to be
resident or fellow education centers. A Level III center is capable of assessment, resuscitation, and emergency surgery, with severely injured patients being
transferred to a Level I or II facility. A Level IV trauma center is capable of providing 24-hour physician coverage, resuscitation, and stabilization to injured patients
before transfer to a facility that provides a higher level of trauma care.
§ Any injury noted in Step Two or mechanism identified in Step Three triggers a “yes” response.
¶ Age <15 years.
** Intrusion refers to interior compartment intrusion, as opposed to deformation which refers to exterior damage.
†† Includes pedestrians or bicyclists thrown or run over by a motor vehicle or those with estimated impact >20 mph with a motor vehicle.
§§ Local or regional protocols should be used to determine the most appropriate level of trauma center within the defined trauma system; need not be the highest-level
trauma center.
¶¶ Age >55 years.
*** Patients with both burns and concomitant trauma for whom the burn injury poses the greatest risk for morbidity and mortality should be transferred to a burn
center. If the nonburn trauma presents a greater immediate risk, the patient may be stabilized in a trauma center and then transferred to a burn center.
††† Patients who do not meet any of the triage criteria in Steps One through Four should be transported to the most appropriate medical facility as outlined in local
EMS protocols.

Fig. 80.1 Algorithm showing guidelines for field triage of injured patients—United States, 2011. (From Guidelines for Field Triage of Injured
Patients: Recommendations of the National Expert Panel on Field Triage. MMWR. 2012;61:6.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80 u Acute Care of Multiple Trauma

573

Sample Room Diagram
PICU Fellow
With
Emergency Department
Resident
AIRWAY

PICU
Attending

General Pediatric
Surgery
Primary & Secondary
Survey

MDs/NPs

Respiratory
therapy

Nursing
Bedside nurse

General Pediatric
Surgery
Procedures
Clinical technician

PICU nurse

OUTSIDE
ROOM

Pharmacist (s)
L

•
•
•
•

TEAM LEADER
ED Attending/Fellow or
GPS Attending/Fellow
Remains at foot of bed.
Does NOT perform procedures.

•

R

•

Social work
Security
Radiology
Shift
coordinator
Patient
services
coordinator
Pastoral care

Order Entry:
ED Resident
CHILD
LIFE

Documenting nurse

The Johns Hopkins Hospital ©

Fig. 80.2 Staff in the ED trauma bay at Johns Hopkins Hospital Bloomberg Children’s Center. ED, Emergency department; NP, nurse practitioner;
GPS, general pediatric surgery; PICU, pediatric intensive care unit. (Courtesy The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland.)

Table 80.1  Pediatric Trauma Score*
COMPONENT

+2

+1

−1

Size

≥20 kg

10-­20 kg

<10 kg

Airway

Normal

Maintainable

Unmaintainable

Systolic BP

≥90 mm Hg

50-­90 mm Hg

<50 mm Hg

CNS

Awake

Obtunded/
LOC

Coma/
decerebrate

Open wound

None

Minor

Major/penetrating

Skeletal

None

Closed
fracture

Open/multiple
fractures

Sum total
points
*Children with a Pediatric Trauma Score ≤6 are at increased risk of mortality and
morbidity.
BP, Blood pressure; CNS, central nervous system; LOC, loss of consciousness.
From Tepas JJ 3rd, Mollitt DL, Talbert JL, et al. The Pediatric Trauma Score as a
predictor of injury severity in the injured child. J Pediatr Surg. 1987;22:14-­18,
Table 1, p. 15.

(see Chapter 461). Both ventilation and cardiac output are impaired.
Characteristic findings include cyanosis, tachypnea, retractions, asymmetric chest rise, contralateral tracheal deviation, diminished breath
sounds on the ipsilateral (more than contralateral) side, and signs of
shock. When suspected, a tension pneumothorax should be treated
before obtaining chest radiographs. Needle thoracentesis, followed by
thoracostomy tube insertion, is diagnostic and lifesaving. Hemothorax
results from injury to the intercostal vessels, lungs, heart, or great vessels. When ventilation is adequate, volume resuscitation should begin
before evacuation, because a large volume of blood may drain through
the chest tube, resulting in shock.

Circulation

Signs of shock include tachycardia; weak pulse; delayed capillary refill;
altered mental status; and cool, mottled, or pale skin (see Chapter 85).
The most common type of shock in trauma is hypovolemic shock caused
by hemorrhage. Cardiac tamponade, which is a form of obstructive
shock, occurs when blood or fluid accumulates in the pericardium. It
may be suspected clinically with the classic findings of jugular venous
distension, muffled heart sounds, and low blood pressure—collectively
known as Beck’s triad. Cardiac tamponade may be definitively diagnosed by ultrasound during a focused assessment with sonography in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

574 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 80.2  Differential Diagnosis of Immediately Life-­Threatening Cardiopulmonary Injuries
TENSION PNEUMOTHORAX

MASSIVE HEMOTHORAX

CARDIAC TAMPONADE

Breath sounds

Ipsilaterally decreased more than contralaterally

Ipsilaterally decreased

Normal

Percussion note

Hyperresonant

Dull

Normal

Tracheal location

Contralaterally shifted

Midline or shifted

Midline

Neck veins

Distended

Flat

Distended

Heart tones

Normal

Normal

Muffled

Modified from Cooper A, Foltin GL. Thoracic trauma. In: Barkin RM, ed. Pediatric Emergency Medicine, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 1997:325.

Table 80.3  Life-­Threatening Chest Injuries
TENSION PNEUMOTHORAX
One-­way valve leak from the lung parenchyma or tracheobronchial
tree
Lung collapse with mediastinal and tracheal shift to the side
opposite the leak
Compromises venous return and decreases ventilation of the other
lung
Clinically, manifests as respiratory distress, unilateral absence of
breath sounds, tracheal deviation, distended neck veins, tympany
to percussion of the involved side, and cyanosis
Relieve first with needle aspiration, then with chest tube drainage
OPEN PNEUMOTHORAX (SUCKING CHEST WOUND)
Effect on ventilation depends on size
MAJOR FLAIL CHEST
Usually caused by blunt injury resulting in multiple rib fractures
Loss of bone stability of the thoracic cage
Major disruption of synchronous chest wall motion
Mechanical ventilation and positive end-­expiratory pressure required
MASSIVE HEMOTHORAX
Must be drained with a large-­bore tube
Initiate drainage only with concurrent vascular volume replacement
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
Beck’s triad:
1.	Decreased or muffled heart sounds
2.	Jugular venous distention
3.	Hypotension (with narrow pulse pressure)
Must be drained
Modified from Krug SE. The acutely ill or injured child. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM,
eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:97.

trauma (FAST) examination or echocardiography. Cardiac tamponade
is best managed by thoracotomy or pericardial window, although pericardiocentesis may be a necessary temporizing maneuver (see Table
80.3).
Early in shock, blood pressure remains normal because of compensatory increases in heart rate and peripheral vascular resistance (Table
80.4). Some individuals can lose up to 30% of blood volume before
blood pressure declines. Notably, 25% of blood volume equals 20 mL/
kg, which is only 200 mL in a 10-­kg child. Loss of >40% of blood volume
causes severe hypotension that, if prolonged, may be irreversible. Direct
pressure should be applied to control external hemorrhage. When
direct pressure does not control hemorrhage, a tourniquet should be
applied to a proximal pressure point. Blind clamping of bleeding vessels, which risks damaging adjacent structures, is not advisable.
Cannulating a larger vein, such as an antecubital vein, is usually the
quickest way to achieve intravenous (IV) access (see Chapter 79). A
short, large-­bore catheter offers less resistance to flow, allowing for
more rapid fluid administration. Ideally, a second catheter should be

placed within the first few minutes of resuscitation in a severely injured
child. If IV access is not rapidly obtainable, an intraosseous (IO) needle should be inserted; all medications and fluids can be administered
intraosseously (see Chapter 79). Other alternatives are central venous
access using the Seldinger technique (e.g., in the femoral vein) and,
rarely, surgical cutdown (e.g., in the saphenous vein). Ultrasonography
may be employed to safely facilitate both peripheral IV placement and
central venous catheter placement.
Traditionally, fluids are administered aggressively early in hemorrhagic shock to reverse and prevent further clinical deterioration. Isotonic crystalloid solution, such as lactated Ringer’s or normal saline (20
mL/kg), should be infused rapidly. When necessary, repeated crystalloid boluses may be given. Most children are stabilized with administration of crystalloid solution alone; however, if the patient remains in
shock after boluses totaling 40 mL/kg of crystalloid, packed red blood
cells should be transfused. Massive transfusion protocols (including
fresh-­frozen plasma) should be initiated early to prevent coagulopathy, and tranexamic acid (TXA) should be considered. When shock
persists despite these measures, exploratory surgery to stop internal
hemorrhage is usually indicated. Emerging literature suggests modern trauma techniques for adults, including permissive hypotension,
hemostatic resuscitation, and damage control surgery, confer similar
benefits in children.

Disability/Neurologic Deficit

Neurologic status is briefly assessed by determining the level of
consciousness and evaluating pupil size and reactivity. The level of
consciousness can be classified using the mnemonic AVPU: Alert,
responsive to Verbal commands, responsive to Painful stimuli, or
Unresponsive. A Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) or Pediatric GCS
score (see Chapters 79 and 82) should be assigned to every child
with significant head trauma or neurologic impairment. This scale
assesses eye opening and motor and verbal responses. In the Pediatric GCS, the verbal score is modified for age. The GCS helps
categorize neurologic disability, and serial measurements identify
improvement or deterioration over time. Patients with GCS ≤8
should undergo endotracheal intubation and supportive mechanical
ventilation. Importantly, the patient’s pupil size/reactivity and ability to move extremities should be quickly assessed before administration of anticholinergics, sedatives, and paralytics in preparation
for intubation.
The majority of pediatric blunt trauma deaths are accounted for by
head injuries. Primary direct cerebral injury occurs within seconds of
the event and is irreversible. Secondary injury is caused by subsequent
anoxia or ischemia. The goal is to minimize secondary injury by ensuring adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and perfusion and by maintaining normal cerebral perfusion pressure. Focal hemorrhagic lesions (e.g.,
epidural or subdural hematomas) are less common but may require
immediate neurosurgical intervention (Fig. 80.3).
Signs of increased intracranial pressure (ICP), including progressive
neurologic deterioration and evidence of transtentorial herniation,
must be treated immediately (see Chapter 82). Hyperventilation lowers the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Paco2), resulting in
cerebral vasoconstriction, reduced cerebral blood flow, and decreased

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80 u Acute Care of Multiple Trauma

575

Table 80.4  Systemic Responses to Blood Loss in Pediatric Patients
SYSTEM

MILD BLOOD LOSS (<30%)

MODERATE BLOOD LOSS (30–45%)

SEVERE BLOOD LOSS (>45%)

Cardiovascular

Increased heart rate; weak, thready
peripheral pulses; normal systolic
blood pressure; normal pulse
pressure

Markedly increased heart rate; weak,
thready central pulses; peripheral pulses
absent; low normal systolic blood
pressure; narrowed pulse pressure

Tachycardia followed by bradycardia;
central pulses very weak or absent;
peripheral pulses absent; hypotension;
narrowed pulse pressure (or
undetectable diastolic blood pressure)

Central nervous

Anxiety; irritability; confusion

Lethargy; dulled response to pain

Coma

Skin

Cool, mottled; capillary refill
prolonged

Cyanotic; capillary refill markedly
prolonged

Pale and cold

Urine output

Low to very low

Minimal

None

Adapted from American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. Advanced Trauma Life Support: Student Course Manual, 10th ed. Chicago: American College of Surgeons;
2018:196.

with use of radiant heat and heated IV fluids, as necessary. After a thorough physical exam, the patient should be covered with warmed blankets with close monitoring of body temperature.

Initial Adjuncts

While the primary survey is being performed, the patient will simultaneously be placed on a cardiac monitor, vitals obtained, and vascular access
established. Fluid resuscitation can be initiated as soon as access is established. Initial laboratory work generally includes a complete blood count,
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, liver function tests, lipase,
lactate, blood gas, coagulation studies, type and cross match, and urinalysis. Per ATLS, portable (single, anterior-­posterior view) radiographs
of the chest and pelvis should be obtained to screen for life-­threatening
injury and identify potential causes of hemorrhage (e.g., pelvic fracture,
hemothorax, great vessel injury as suggested by a widened mediastinum). Finally, a FAST exam should be performed at the bedside to assess
for the presence of free fluid (blood) and guide resuscitation.

FAST Exam
Fig. 80.3 Epidural hematoma. CT head scan from 7-­mo-­old female

who, according to the history provided, did not wake up for her nightly
feeding and began vomiting in the morning. The mother’s friend
reported that the infant had fallen from a chair the previous day. The CT
scan shows a large epidural hematoma on the right and marked shift of
the midline from right to left. The right lateral ventricle is compressed
as a result of the mass effect, and the left lateral ventricle is slightly
prominent. The infant underwent emergency surgical evacuation of the
epidural hematoma and recovered uneventfully. (From O’Neill JA Jr.
Principles of Pediatric Surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2003:191.)

ICP. Brief hyperventilation, targeting an end-­tidal CO2 goal of 30-­35
mm Hg, remains an immediate option for patients with acute increases
in ICP. Prophylactic hyperventilation, or vigorous or prolonged hyperventilation, is not recommended, because the consequent vasoconstriction may excessively decrease cerebral perfusion and oxygenation.
Mannitol and hypertonic saline lower ICP and may improve survival.
Because mannitol induces an osmotic diuresis, it can exacerbate hypovolemia and must be used cautiously. Hypertonic saline may be a more
useful agent for control of increased ICP in patients with severe head
injury. Neurosurgical consultation is mandatory and will dictate further management, including ICP monitoring and emergent neurosurgical interventions.

Exposure and Environmental Control

Full exposure of the patient occurs during the primary survey. Using
trauma shears, all clothing should be removed to reveal any injuries.
Cutting clothing is fastest and minimizes unnecessary patient movement. Children often arrive in the ED mildly hypothermic because of
their higher body surface area–to–mass ratios. They can be warmed

The FAST exam and extended FAST (eFAST) are other adjuncts to the
initial trauma survey. This bedside ultrasound can be performed by
any trained member of the trauma team to assess for the presence of
blood or free fluid in the intraperitoneal, pericardial, or pleural space.
The exam assesses four windows: the right upper quadrant abdominal
view, the left upper quadrant abdominal view, the suprapubic view, and
the subxiphoid cardiac view. The eFAST adds additional views of bilateral lungs to assess for the absence of lung sliding, which is indicative
of a pneumothorax. In addition to detection of hemoperitoneum, the
eFAST can identify findings that may require emergent management in
an unstable patient—such as a pneumothorax requiring needle decompression or a large pericardial effusion requiring pericardiocentesis.
Although the FAST examination helps detect hemoperitoneum, the
variably low sensitivity of this test in children suggests that it should not
be used alone to exclude intraabdominal injury in patients with a moderate to high pretest probability for injury (e.g., a patient with elevated
serum lipase or transaminases). A positive FAST exam for hemoperitoneum requires further investigation. The FAST exam is most clinically
useful in patients who have blunt trauma and are hemodynamically
unstable or in patients who require immediate operative intervention
for nonabdominal injuries, because in these cases the performance of a
CT scan will delay emergency surgery.

SECONDARY SURVEY

During the secondary survey, the trauma team completes a thorough,
head-­to-­toe physical examination to assess for additional injuries. In critically ill or hemodynamically unstable patients, emergent interventions
may delay the secondary survey until the patient has been stabilized.

Head Trauma

Initial management of traumatic brain injuries is discussed earlier. The
secondary survey of the head should identify and document injuries,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

576 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
including scalp hematomas and lacerations. The skull and face should
be carefully palpated to assess for possible fractures. Findings suggestive of basilar skull fractures include bruising around the eyes (“raccoon eyes”), bruising over the mastoid process (Battle sign), and blood
behind the tympanic membrane (hemotympanum). The eyes should
be assessed for conjunctival hemorrhages, hyphemas, and corneal
injuries. Limitation in extraocular movements may suggest orbital
fractures with muscle entrapment. The nares should be inspected for
bleeding and presence of a nasal septal hematoma, which must be evacuated urgently to prevent permanent disfigurement. The mouth should
be assessed for injuries to the tongue, teeth, gums, palate, and oropharynx; normal jaw mobility should be ensured. Patients with suspected
head or facial injuries will typically undergo CT of the head, orbits,
and/or maxillofacial region.

Spinal Trauma
Spinal Immobilization

Initially, spinal injury should be suspected in any child sustaining multiple blunt trauma. To prevent further spinal injury, paramedics have
traditionally been taught to immobilize the C-­spine in neutral position
with a stiff collar, head blocks, and tape or cloth placed across the forehead. To immobilize the rest of the spine, the child is typically placed
on a rigid backboard, and straps or tape are placed across the torso
and thighs to restrain them. Care should be taken to continue spinal
immobilization during initial evaluation and resuscitation until spinal
injury can be excluded (see Chapter 81).

C-­Spine Trauma

Cervical spine injuries occur in <3% of children with blunt trauma—
with the risk being substantially higher in those with GCS scores ≤8—
but they are associated with significant mortality and morbidity (see
Chapter 81). Bony injuries occur mainly from C1 to C4 in children
younger than 8 years. In older children, they occur equally in the upper
and lower cervical spine. The mortality rate is significantly higher in
patients with upper C-­spine injuries, and ∼30% of all patients with
C-­spine injuries have permanent neurologic deficits.

Evaluation

Evaluation begins with a detailed history and neurologic examination.
Identifying the mechanism of injury helps in estimating the likelihood
of a spinal injury. Both the patient and the paramedic should be asked
whether any neurologic symptoms or signs, such as weakness or abnormal sensation, were present before arrival in the ED. The spine should
then be examined while maintaining immobilization. If no other distracting injuries are present (e.g., a displaced femur fracture), the collar can be carefully removed by one provider while a second provider
manually stabilizes the neck. The C-­spine should be palpated to assess
for tenderness or step-­offs. If the patient has neck pain, has neurologic
symptoms, or is unable to participate in the exam, the collar should be
replaced immediately. To assess the thoracic and lumbar spine, multiple providers are required to log-­roll the patient and maintain spinal immobilization. A third provider will palpate the spine, assess for
cutaneous injuries, and evaluate rectal tone. Before rolling the patient
back to the supine position, the backboard must be removed to prevent
further injury or patient discomfort.
Whenever the history, physical examination, or mechanism of
injury suggests a spinal injury, imaging must be obtained after initial
resuscitation. Depending on clinical suspicion, mechanism of injury,
and the patient’s symptoms and physiologic status, the provider may
elect either radiography, CT, or MRI as the initial imaging modality.
The National Emergency X-­
Radiography Utilization Study
(NEXUS) cervical spine rule helps identify low-­risk patients who
may not require radiographs (Table 80.5). The standard series of plain
radiographs includes lateral, anteroposterior (AP), and odontoid views.
Some centers use C-­spine CT as the primary diagnostic tool, particularly in patients with abnormal GCS scores or significant injury mechanisms, recognizing that CT is more sensitive in detecting bony injury
than plain radiographs. CT is also helpful if an odontoid fracture is
suspected, because young children typically do not cooperate enough

Table 80.5  National Emergency X-­Radiography
Utilization Study (NEXUS) to Rule Out
Cervical Spine Injury After Blunt Trauma
If NONE of the following is present, the patient is at very low risk for
clinically significant cervical spine injury:
Midline cervical tenderness
Evidence of intoxication
Altered level of alertness
Focal neurologic deficit
Distracting painful injury
Data from Hoffman JR, Mower WR, Wolfson AB, et al. Validity of a set of clinical criteria
to rule out injury to the cervical spine in patients with blunt trauma. N Engl J Med.
2000;343:94-­99; and Viccellio P, Simon H, Pressman BD, et al. A prospective multicenter
study of cervical spine injury in children. Pediatrics. 2001;108:e20.

to obtain an open-­mouth (odontoid) radiographic view. Use of cervical
spine CT scan must be balanced with the knowledge that CT exposes
thyroid tissue to 90-­200 times the amount of radiation from plain films.

SCIWORA

In a child with neurologic symptoms and normal findings on C-­spine
plain radiographs and CT scan, spinal cord injury without radiographic abnormalities (SCIWORA) must be considered. MRI of the
spine is indicated in a child with suspected SCIWORA and in the evaluation of children who remain obtunded.

Thoracic Trauma

Pulmonary contusions occur frequently in young children with blunt
chest trauma. A child’s chest wall is relatively pliable; therefore less
force is absorbed by the rib cage and more is transmitted to the lungs.
Respiratory distress may be noted initially or may develop during the
first 24 hours after injury.
Rib fractures result from significant external force. They are noted
in patients with more severe injuries and are associated with a higher
mortality rate. Flail chest, which is caused by multiple rib fractures,
is rare in children. Table 80.6 lists indications for operative management in thoracic trauma. (See Table 80.2 for the differential diagnosis
of immediately life-­threatening cardiopulmonary injuries.) Thoracic
trauma can be investigated via chest radiograph or CT, depending on
the patient’s symptoms, physical exam findings, mechanism of injury,
and index of suspicion for injury.

Abdominal Trauma

Liver and spleen contusions, hematomas, and lacerations account for
the majority of intraabdominal injuries from blunt trauma. The kidneys, pancreas, and duodenum are relatively spared because of their
retroperitoneal location. Pancreatic and duodenal injuries are more
common after a bicycle handlebar impact or a direct blow to the
abdomen.
Although a thorough examination for intraabdominal injuries is
essential, achieving it often proves difficult. Misleading findings can
result from gastric distention after crying or in an uncooperative toddler. Calm reassurance, distraction, and gentle, persistent palpation
help with the examination. Important findings include distention,
bruises, and tenderness. Specific symptoms and signs give insight
into the mechanism of injury and the potential for particular injuries.
Pain in the left shoulder may signify splenic trauma. A lap belt mark
across the abdomen raises concern for bowel or mesentery injury. The
presence of certain other injuries, such as lumbar spinal fractures and
femur fractures, increases the likelihood of intraabdominal injury.
An abdominal (and pelvic) CT scan with IV contrast medium
enhancement rapidly identifies structural abnormalities and is the preferred study in a stable child. A negative abdominal CT scan has been
shown to have a negative predictive value (NPV) of 99.6%. It has excellent sensitivity and specificity for splenic (Fig. 80.4), hepatic (Fig. 80.5),
and renal injuries, but is less sensitive for diaphragmatic, pancreatic,
or intestinal injuries. Small amounts of free fluid or air or a mesenteric

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80 u Acute Care of Multiple Trauma

577

Table 80.6  Indications for Operation in Thoracic Trauma
THORACOTOMY IMMEDIATELY OR SHORTLY AFTER INJURY
Massive continuing pneumothorax or large air leak from
tracheobronchial injury (cannot expand lung and ventilate)
Cardiac tamponade
Open pneumothorax
Esophageal injury
Aortic or other vascular injury
Acute rupture of the diaphragm
DELAYED THORACOTOMY OR THORACOSCOPY
Chronic rupture of the diaphragm
Clotted hemothorax
Persistent chylothorax
Traumatic intracardiac defects
Evacuation of large foreign bodies
Chronic atelectasis from traumatic bronchial stenosis
Modified from O’Neill JA Jr. Principles of Pediatric Surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby;
2003:157.

Fig. 80.4 Splenic rupture. CT scan with intravenous and gastrointes-

tinal contrast enhancement shows an isolated splenic rupture that resulted from blunt trauma. This injury responded to nonoperative management, as do most splenic injuries. (From O’Neill JA Jr. Principles of
Pediatric Surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2003:166.)

Fig. 80.5 Liver injury. CT scan performed after severe blunt injury

of the abdomen shows a bursting injury of the liver. The patient was
stable, and no operative intervention was required. The decision to
perform surgery should be based on the patient’s physiologic stability.
(From O’Neill JA Jr. Principles of Pediatric Surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis:
Mosby; 2003:168.)

forms a ring, and high-­force impacts can lead to disruption of this ring.
When the ring is disrupted in more than one location, such as the symphysis pubis and the sacroiliac joint, the ring can become unstable and
displaced, potentially injuring large pelvic vessels and leading to massive blood loss. Catheter-­directed embolization to control bleeding,
performed by an interventional radiologist, may be required.
The pelvis should be assessed for stability by means of compression-­
distraction maneuvers. If instability is noted, immediate external fixation with a pelvis-­stabilizing device or a sheet should be applied and
orthopedic consultation sought. A trauma patient with a potential
pelvic fracture should receive an AP pelvic radiograph in the trauma
bay followed by a CT scan if there is still suspicion of injury. Children
without a high-­risk clinical finding (e.g., GCS <14; abdominal pain
or tenderness; pelvic tenderness, laceration, ecchymosis, or abrasion;
gross hematuria or >20 red blood cells/high-­power field on urinalysis; or femur fracture) or a high-­risk mechanism of injury (e.g., unrestrained motor vehicle collision, motor vehicle collision with ejection,
motor vehicle collision rollover, auto vs pedestrian, or auto vs bicycle),
however, are unlikely to have pelvic fractures.

hematoma may be the only sign of an intestinal injury. Administration
of an oral contrast agent is not routinely recommended for all abdominal CT scans, but it sometimes aids in identifying an intestinal, especially a duodenal, injury.
Nonoperative treatment has become standard for hemodynamically stable children with splenic, hepatic, and renal injuries from blunt
trauma. The majority of such children can be treated nonsurgically. In
addition to avoiding perioperative complications, nonoperative treatment decreases the need for blood transfusions and shortens hospital stay. When laparotomy is indicated, splenic repair is preferable to
splenectomy.

Genitourinary Trauma

Pelvic Trauma

Extremity Trauma

Pelvic fractures in children are much less common than in adults,
occurring in approximately 4% of children with more severe blunt
trauma. Pelvic fractures are typically caused by high forces (e.g., high-­
speed motor vehicle crashes or pedestrian impacts) and are often associated with intraabdominal and/or vascular injuries. The pelvis itself

The perineum should be inspected and the stability of the bones of the
pelvis assessed. Urethral injuries are more common in males. Findings
suggestive of urethral injury include scrotal or labial ecchymosis, blood
at the urethral meatus, gross hematuria, and a superiorly positioned
prostate on rectal examination (in an adolescent male). Certain pelvic
fractures also increase the risk for potential genitourinary injury. Any
of these findings is a contraindication to urethral catheter insertion
and warrants consultation with a urologist. Retrograde urethrocystogram and CT scan of the pelvis and abdomen are used to determine
the extent of injury.

Thorough examination of the extremities is essential because extremity
fractures are among the most frequently overlooked injuries in children with multiple traumas. All limbs should be inspected for deformity, swelling, and bruises; palpated for tenderness; and assessed for
active and passive range of motion, sensory function, and perfusion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

578 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Before radiographs are obtained, suspected fractures and dislocations should be immobilized and an analgesic administered. Splinting
a femur fracture helps alleviate pain and may decrease blood loss. An
orthopedic surgeon should be consulted immediately to evaluate children with compartment syndrome, neurovascular compromise, open
fracture, or traumatic amputations.
An acute extremity compartment syndrome is a surgical emergency
usually associated with extremity fractures (e.g., tibia, supracondylar
humerus, distal radius) but has also been noted after thermal and electric injuries, rhabdomyolysis, coagulopathies, or nephrotic syndrome.
Manifestations include pain out of proportion to the injury, pain with
passive stretching of the muscles, poor distal pulses, pallor, paresthesia,
and weakness. In children, escalating pain not relieved by pain medications, anxiety, and agitation are additional features. If needed, compartmental pressure should be measured (normal is 8 mm Hg in adults,
10-­15 mm Hg in children). Absolute pressure ≥30 mm Hg is one indication for fasciotomy. Another indication for fasciotomy is a diastolic
blood pressure minus compartment pressure <30 mm Hg.

Advanced Imaging

After completion of the primary survey, diagnostic adjuncts, and
secondary survey, most stable trauma patients will require advanced
imaging with CT or additional plain radiographs. As detailed earlier,
injury mechanism, patient history, and clinical exam findings will help
determine the specific imaging to be obtained. Additionally, clinical
prediction rules have been developed to identify those at low risk of
injury for whom specific imaging studies may not be necessary. The
NEXUS C-­spine rule is a sensitive, easily applicable rule that was validated for adults and children, although there were fewer young patients
studied (see Table 80.5). Several clinical prediction rules have been
developed to identify children at low risk of traumatic brain injury in
whom head CT can be safely avoided (Table 80.7). Another clinical
prediction rule has been developed to identify children at very low
risk of clinically important intraabdominal injuries after blunt trauma
(Table 80.8). Although this rule has an NPV of 99.9%, it needs to be
externally validated before widespread implementation. One benefit
of standardizing the evaluation of patients with major trauma is that
fewer decisions need to be made on an individual basis, possibly expediting ED management.

DISPOSITION

Disposition from the ED trauma bay is determined by several factors. Patients who are critically unstable with suspected internal hemorrhage are emergently transferred to the operating room (OR) for
exploratory surgery before advanced imaging. Up to 30% of children
evaluated for trauma require hospitalization. Of the children admitted
for trauma, 30% have operative injuries identified on the physical exam
or advanced imaging and undergo surgery during that hospitalization.
Of those requiring surgery, 25% will require surgery within 24 hours
of admission, and of that group, 57% require emergent intervention.
Nonoperative patients who are critically injured will ultimately benefit
from continued management in an ICU capable of caring for children
and in a facility with the necessary surgical subspecialists.

PSYCHOLOGIC AND SOCIAL SUPPORT

Serious multisystem trauma may result in significant long-­term psychologic and social difficulties for the child and family, particularly

Table 80.7  Prediction Rule for Identification of Children
at Very Low Risk of Clinically Important Brain
Injuries After Head Trauma
Children <2 yr old are at very low risk of clinically important traumatic
brain injury if they have NONE of the following:
Severe mechanism of injury
History of LOC >5 sec
GCS ≤14 or other signs of altered mental status
Not acting normally per parent
Palpable skull fracture
Occipital/parietal/temporal scalp hematoma
Children 2-­18 yr old are at very low risk of clinically important
traumatic brain injury if they have NONE of the following:
Severe mechanism of injury
History of LOC
History of vomiting
GCS ≤14 or other signs of altered mental status
Severe headache in the ED
Signs of basilar skull fracture
LOC, Loss of consciousness; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale score; ED, emergency
department.
Modified from Kuppermann N, Holmes JF, Dayan PS, et al. Identification of children
at very low risk of clinically-­important brain injuries after head trauma: A prospective
cohort study. Lancet. 2009;374:1160-­1170.

Table 80.8  Prediction Rule for Identification of Children
at Very Low Risk of Clinically Important
Intraabdominal Injuries After Blunt Trauma
If NONE of the following is present, the patient is at very low risk for
clinically significant intraabdominal injury:
Glasgow Coma Scale score <14
Vomiting
Evidence of thoracic wall trauma
Decreased breath sounds
Evidence of abdominal wall trauma or seatbelt sign
Abdominal pain
Abdominal tenderness
Modified from Holmes JF, Lillis K, Monroe D, et al. Identifying children at very low risk of
clinically important blunt abdominal injuries. Ann Emerg Med. 2013;62:107-­116, e2.

when there is a major head injury. Like adults, children are at risk
for depressive symptoms and posttraumatic stress disorder. Caregivers face persistent stress and have been noted to have more psychologic symptoms. Psychologic and social support, during the
resuscitation period and afterward, is extremely important. Parents
often prefer to be offered the choice to be present during resuscitations. A member of the resuscitation team should be made responsible for answering the family’s questions and supporting them in
the trauma room.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 81 u Spinal Cord Injuries in Children

Chapter 81

Spinal Cord Injuries in
Children

Table 81.1  Conditions that Predispose Patients to a
Cervical Spine Injury
CATEGORY

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

One in three patients with significant trauma to the spine and spinal cord will have a concomitant severe head injury, which makes
early diagnosis challenging. For these patients, clinical evaluation
may be difficult. Patients with a potential spine injury need to be
maintained in a protective environment, such as a collar, until the
spine can be cleared by clinical and/or radiographic means. A careful neurologic examination is necessary for infants with suspected
spinal cord injuries. Complete spinal cord injury will lead to spinal
shock with early areflexia (see Chapter 751). Severe C-­spine injuries will usually lead to paradoxical respiration in patients who are
breathing spontaneously. Paradoxical respiration occurs when the

CONDITIONS

Abnormal development of
the cervical spine

Trisomy 21
Larsen syndrome
Mucopolysaccharidosis IV/Morquio
syndrome
Klippel-­Feil syndrome
Achondroplasia
Chiari malformation
Syringomyelia

Abnormal bone and soft
tissue

Marfan syndrome
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Osteogenesis imperfecta

Arthritis

Ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis

Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor
See also Chapter 751.
Compared with adults, spine and spinal cord injuries are rare in
children, particularly young children, because of both anatomic differences and etiologies of injury. The main mechanisms of injury to the
spine are motor vehicle crashes, falls, sports, and violence, which affect
young children less often (see Chapter 80).
Several anatomic differences affect the pediatric spine. The head
of a young child is larger relative to body mass than in adults,
and the neck muscles are still underdeveloped, which places the
fulcrum of movement higher in the spine. Therefore children <9
years old have a higher percentage of injuries in the upper cervical
spine (C-­spine) than do older children and adults. The spine of a
small child also is very mobile, with pliable bones and ligaments, so
fractures of the spine are exceedingly rare. However, this increased
mobility is not always a positive feature. Transfer of energy leading
to spinal distortion may not affect the structural integrity of the
bones and ligaments of the spine but can still lead to significant
injuries of the spinal cord. This phenomenon of spinal cord injury
without radiographic abnormalities (SCIWORA) is more common in children than in adults (see Chapter 80). The term is relatively outdated, because almost all injuries are detectable by MRI,
but is still clinically useful when referring to spinal cord injuries
evaluated by plain radiographs or CT. There seem to be two distinct forms of SCIWORA. The infantile form involves severe injury
of the cervical or thoracic spinal cord; these patients have a poor
chance of complete recovery. In older children and adolescents,
SCIWORA is more likely to be a less severe injury, with a high likelihood of complete recovery over time. The adolescent form, also
called transient neurapraxia, is assumed to be a spinal cord concussion or mild contusion, as opposed to the severe spinal cord injury
related to the mobility of the spine in small children.
Although the mechanisms of spinal cord injury in children include
birth trauma, falls, and child abuse, the major cause of morbidity and
mortality across all ages remains motor vehicle injuries. Adolescents
incur spinal cord injuries with epidemiology similar to that of adults,
including significant male predominance and a high likelihood of fracture dislocations of the lower cervical spine or thoracolumbar region.
In infants and children <5 years old, fractures and mechanical disruption of spinal elements are more likely to occur in the upper cervical
spine between the occiput and C3. Certain conditions predispose to
C-­spine injury (Table 81.1).

579

History of cervical spine
injury or surgery
Modified from McCollum M, Guse S. Neck trauma: Cervical spine, seatbelt sign and
penetrating palate injuries. Emerg Med Clin N Am. 2021;39:573-­588, Table 1, p. 574.

diaphragm, which is innervated by the phrenic nerves with contributions from C3, C4, and C5, is functioning normally, but the
intercostal musculature innervated by the thoracic spinal cord is
paralyzed. In this situation, inspiration fails to expand the chest
wall but distends the abdomen. Other complications during the
acute (2-­48 hours) phase include autonomic dysfunction (bradyarrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias, orthostatic hypotension, hypertension), temperature instability, thromboembolism, dysphagia,
and bowel/bladder dysfunction.
The mildest injury to the spinal cord is transient quadriparesis
evident for seconds or minutes with complete recovery in 24 hours.
This injury follows a concussion of the cord and is most frequently
seen in adolescent athletes. If their imaging is normal, these children can generally return to normal activities after a period of rest
from days to weeks, depending on the initial severity, similar to
cerebral concussion management.
Significant spinal cord injury in the cervical region is characterized by flaccid quadriparesis, loss of sphincter function, and a
sensory level corresponding to the level of injury. An injury at the
high cervical level (C1-­C2) can cause respiratory arrest and death
in the absence of ventilatory support. Injuries in the thoracic region
are generally the result of fracture dislocations. They may produce
paraplegia when at T10 or above or the conus medullaris syndrome
if at the T12-­L1 level. This includes a loss of urinary and rectal
sphincter control, flaccid weakness, and sensory disturbances of the
legs. A central cord lesion may result from contusion and hemorrhage in the center of the spinal cord (Fig. 81.1). It typically involves
the upper extremities to a greater degree than the legs because the
motor fibers to the cervical and thoracic region are more centrally
located in the spinal cord. There are lower motor neuron signs in the
upper extremities and upper motor neuron signs in the legs, bladder dysfunction, and loss of sensation caudal to the lesion. There
may be considerable recovery, particularly in the lower extremities,
although sequelae are common (see Chapter 751).

CLEARING THE CERVICAL SPINE IN CHILDREN

The management of children after major trauma is challenging.
For older children, the clearance is similar to a lucid adult, and the
National Emergency X-­R adiography Utilization Study (NEXUS)
criteria are appropriate (see Chapter 80, Table 80.5). Clearing the
cervical spine in younger and uncooperative children involves
similar issues as in adults with an altered level of consciousness

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

580 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Paraplegia

A

Quadriplegia

B

Central Cord
Syndrome

C

Brown-Séquard
Syndrome

D

Fig 81.1 Patterns of spinal cord injury. Note the contrast between these syndromes and peripheral nerve/radicular injuries based on the distribu-

tion of motor and/or sensory loss beyond the affected extremity. Paraplegia (A) and quadriplegia (B): Complete loss of motor and sensory function
below the level of injury resulting in loss of function of the legs only or arms and legs, respectively. Central cord syndrome (C): Injury of the central
spinal cord resulting in functional greater impact of arm motor function than legs. Sensory deficits in this injury are variable. Brown-­Séquard syndrome (D): Injury to one-­half of the spinal cord resulting in ipsilateral motor weakness with contralateral sensory loss below the level of the lesion.
(From Jea A, Belal A, Zaazoue MA, Martin J. Cervical spine injury in children and adolescents. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2021;68:875-­894: Fig. 11, p. 886.)

Table 81.2  Risk Factors that Preclude Clinical Clearance
of the C-­Spine
HISTORY

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Child or parent reports
persistent neck pain,
abnormal head posture,
or difficulty with neck
movement

Visible known substantial injury to
chest, abdomen, or pelvis (injury
that is life-­threatening, warrants
surgical intervention or inpatient
admission)

History of focal sensory
GCS of <14
abnormality or motor deficit
High-­risk injury*

Torticollis/abnormal head position
Posterior midline neck tenderness
Limited cervical range of motion
Inability to maintain focus due to
other injuries

*Diving, high speed motor vehicle crash, bike crash, motorized all-­terrain vehicle.
GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale.
Modified from McCollum M, Guse S. Neck trauma: Cervical spine, seatbelt sign and
penetrating palate injuries. Emerg Med Clin N Am. 2021;39:573-­588, Table 2, p. 575.

(Table 81.2). Small children generally have a difficult-­to-­assess
physical examination, and it is difficult to determine if they have
cervical pain. Plain radiography remains a mainstay for assessing
the spine because it is easy to obtain. There has been increasing
emphasis on MRI for evaluation of potential C-­spine instability,
but in small children MRI requires sedation and in most centers
the presence of an anesthesiologist (Fig. 81.2). CT scan is another
important study with high sensitivity and specificity, but the risk of
radiation exposure must be considered.
In addition to C-­spine injury, neck trauma may also produce a radiculopathy or neuropathy (Table 81.3).

TREATMENT

The cervical spine should be immobilized in the field by the emergency medical technicians. In cases of acute spinal cord injury, weak
data suggest acute infusion of a bolus of high-­dose (30 mg/kg) methylprednisolone, followed by a 23-­hour infusion (5.4 mg/kg/hr). The
data for this treatment are controversial; the current neurosurgical
guidelines for management of adult spine trauma do not recommend methylprednisolone; corticosteroids have not been specifically
tested in children. As such, many centers no longer use them routinely.

Fig. 81.2 T2-­weighted MRI performed the day after the accident

showed cervical spinal cord swelling combined with high signal intensity (C1-­C3) (arrow) and dislocation of C5-­C6 (arrowhead). (From Inoue
K, Kumada T, Fujii T, Kimura N. Progressive cervical spinal cord atrophy
after a traffic accident. J Pediatr. 2017;180:287: Fig. 1, p. 287.)

Maintenance of euvolemia and normotension is important, and vasopressors might be needed if the sympathetic nervous system has been
compromised.
Surgical management of spinal injuries must be tailored to the
patient’s age but can be a crucial step in management. Any compression
of the spinal cord must be surgically relieved to afford the best chance
of a favorable outcome. In addition, spinal cord injury can be worsened
by instability, so surgical stabilization can prevent further injury (Fig.
81.3). In general, younger children have a higher healing capacity for
bones and ligaments, and external immobilization might be considered
for injuries that require surgery in older children and adults. However,
some injuries are highly unstable and always require surgery. Occipitocervical dislocation is one such highly unstable injury, and early
surgery with fusion from the occiput to C2 or C3 should be performed,
even in very young children. Fixation of the subaxial spine must be
tailored to the size of the pedicles and other osseous structures of the
developing axial skeleton.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82 u Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization

581

Table 81.3  History and Examination Features Allowing for Discrimination of Myelopathy, Radiculopathy, and Peripheral
Neuropathy
FINDING

PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY

RADICULOPATHY

MYELOPATHY

Pain
• Quality
• Location

“Electric”
Radiates either proximally or distally
from injury site

Sharp, aching
Radiates distally from the neck

Typically painless

Weakness

Variable, usually present

Variable, usually present

Variable, may be present

Sensory loss

Sharply demarcated borders

Indistinct borders

Indistinct borders, typically extends
beyond single extremity

Tone/reflexes

Decreased

Decreased

Increased

From Jea A, Belal A, Zaazoue MA, Martin J. Cervical spine injury in children and adolescents. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2021;68:875-­894, Table 4, p. 883.

A

B

C

Fig. 81.3 A 15-­year-­old hockey player suffered acute paraplegia after his head struck the boards during a hockey game. A, CT scan shows com-

pression fractures of C4 and C5. B, MRI shows severe spinal cord contusion. C, Because of the need to decompress the spinal cord and stabilize the
spine, anterior and posterior surgery was performed. No meaningful recovery was obtained.

PREVENTION

The most important aspect of the care of spinal cord injuries in children
is injury prevention. Use of appropriate child restraints in automobiles
is the most important precaution. In older children and adolescents,
rules against “spear tackling” in American football and the Feet First,
First Time aimed at adolescents diving into swimming pools and natural water areas are important ways to help prevent severe cervical spinal
cord injuries. Safe driving practices, such as using safety belts, avoiding
distracted driving, and following the speed limit, can have substantial
beneficial effects on injury rates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 82

Neurologic Emergencies
and Stabilization
Patrick M. Kochanek and Michael J. Bell
NEUROCRITICAL CARE PRINCIPLES

The brain has high metabolic demands, which are further increased
during growth and development. Preservation of nutrient supply to
the brain is the mainstay of care for children with evolving brain injuries. Intracranial dynamics describes the physics of the interactions of

the contents—brain parenchyma, blood (arterial, venous, capillary),
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)—within the cranium. Normally, brain
parenchyma accounts for up to 85% of the contents of the cranial vault,
and the remaining portion is divided between CSF and blood. The
brain resides in a relatively rigid cranial vault, and cranial compliance
decreases with age as the skull ossification centers gradually replace
cartilage with bone. The intracranial pressure (ICP) is derived from
the volume of its components and the bony compliance. The perfusion pressure of the brain (cerebral perfusion pressure [CPP]) is equal
to the pressure of blood entering the cranium (mean arterial pressure
[MAP]) minus the ICP, in most cases.
Increases in intracranial volume can result from swelling, masses,
or increases in blood and CSF volumes. As these volumes increase,
compensatory mechanisms prevent increases in ICP by (1) decreasing CSF volume (CSF is displaced into the spinal canal or absorbed
by arachnoid villi), (2) decreasing cerebral blood volume (venous
blood return to the thorax is augmented), and/or (3) increasing cranial
volume (sutures pathologically expand or bone is remodeled). Once
compensatory mechanisms are exhausted (the increase in cranial volume is too large), small increases in volume lead to clinically meaningful increases in ICP or intracranial hypertension (Fig. 82.1). As ICP
continues to increase, brain ischemia can occur as CPP falls. Further
increases in ICP can ultimately displace the brain downward into the
foramen magnum—a process called cerebral herniation, which can
become irreversible in minutes and may lead to severe disability or
death; Figure 82.2 notes other sites of brain herniation.
Oxygen and glucose are required by brain cells for normal functioning, and these nutrients must be constantly supplied by cerebral blood
flow (CBF). Normally, CBF is constant over a wide range of blood pressures (blood pressure autoregulation of CBF) via actions mainly within

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

582 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Arterial
blood

MASS/
EDEMA

MASS/
EDEMA

50

30

Arterial
blood

Arterial
blood

Brain

Brain

Brain

Normal

Compensated

Uncompensated

CBF

Venous
blood

CSF

Venous blood

CSF

ICP (mm Hg)

Lower limit

Upper limit

CPP
10

Fig. 82.1 The Munro-­Kellie doctrine describes intracranial dynamics

in the setting of an expanding mass lesion (i.e., hemorrhage, tumor) or
brain edema. In the normal state, the brain parenchyma, arterial blood,
CSF, and venous blood occupy the cranial vault at a low pressure, generally <10 mm Hg. With an expanding mass lesion or brain edema,
initially there is a compensated state as a result of reduced CSF and
venous blood volumes, and ICP remains low. Further expansion of the
lesion, however, leads to an uncompensated state when compensatory
mechanisms are exhausted and intracranial hypertension results.

5

1

2

3
4

Fig. 82.2 Different forms of brain herniation. 1, Cingulate. 2, Uncal. 3,
Cerebellar tonsillar. 4, Upward cerebellar. 5, Transcalvarial. (From Fishman RA. Cerebrospinal Fluid in Diseases of the Nervous System. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1980.)

the cerebral arterioles. Cerebral arterioles are maximally dilated at
lower blood pressures and maximally constricted at higher pressures so
that CBF does not vary during normal fluctuations (Fig. 82.3). Above
the upper limit of autoregulation, breakthrough dilation occurs that, if
severe, can produce hypertensive encephalopathy. Acid-­base balance of
the CSF (often reflected by acute changes in arterial partial pressure of
carbon dioxide [Paco2]), body/brain temperature, glucose utilization,

Fig. 82.3 Schematic of the relationship between CBF and CPP. The

diameter of a representative cerebral arteriole is also shown across the
center of the y axis to facilitate understanding of the vascular response
across CPP that underlies blood pressure autoregulation of CBF. CPP
is generally defined as the mean arterial pressure (MAP) minus the ICP.
At normal values for ICP, this generally represents MAP. Thus, normally,
CBF is kept constant between the lower limit and upper limit of autoregulation; in normal adults, these values are ≈50 mm Hg and 150
mm Hg, respectively. In children, the upper limit of autoregulation is
likely proportionally lower than the adult value relative to normal MAP
for age. However, according to the work of Vavilala et al. (2003), lower
limit values are surprisingly similar in infants and older children. Thus
infants and young children may have less reserve for adequate CPP.
See text for details.

blood viscosity, and other vasoactive mediators (i.e., adenosine, nitric
oxide, prostanoids) can also affect the cerebral vasculature.
Knowledge of these concepts is instrumental to preventing secondary brain injury. Increases in CSF pH that occur because of inadvertent
hyperventilation (decreased Paco2) can produce cerebral ischemia.
Hyperthermia-­
mediated increases in cerebral metabolic demands
may damage vulnerable brain regions after injury. Hypoglycemia can
produce neuronal death when CBF fails to compensate. Prolonged seizures can lead to permanent injuries if hypoxemia occurs from loss of
airway control.
Attention to detail and constant reassessment are paramount in
managing children with critical neurologic insults. Among the most
valuable tools for serial, objective assessments of neurologic condition
is the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (Table 82.1 and see Table 79.3).
Originally developed to assess level of consciousness after traumatic
brain injury (TBI) in adults, the GCS is also valuable in pediatrics.
Modifications to the GCS have been made for nonverbal children and
are available for infants and toddlers (see Table 79.3 in Chapter 79).
Serial assessments of the GCS score along with a focused neurologic
examination are invaluable to detect injuries before permanent damage occurs in the vulnerable brain. The FOUR (full outline of unresponsiveness) score (see Table 82.1) is a modification of the GCS,
which eliminates the patient’s verbal response but adds functional
assessments of the brainstem (pupil, corneal, and cough reflexes) and
respiratory pattern.
The most-­studied monitoring device in clinical practice is the ICP
monitor. Monitoring is accomplished by a catheter inserted either
into the cerebral ventricle (externalized ventricular drain) or into
brain parenchyma (parenchymal transducer). ICP-­directed therapies
are standard of care in TBI and are used in other conditions, such as
intracranial hemorrhage, Reye syndrome, and some cases of encephalopathy, meningitis, and encephalitis. Other devices being used include
catheters that measure brain tissue oxygen concentration, external
probes that noninvasively assess brain oxygenation by absorbance of
near-­infrared light (near-­infrared spectroscopy [NIRS]), monitors of
brain electrical activity (continuous electroencephalography [EEG]
or somatosensory, visual, or auditory evoked potentials), and CBF
monitors (transcranial Doppler, xenon CT, perfusion MRI, or tissue
probes). In the severe TBI guidelines, brain tissue oxygen concentration monitoring received level III support and thus may be considered
as an adjunct to ICP-­directed therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82 u Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization
Table 82.1  Commonly Used Coma Scores
GLASGOW COMA SCALE
Eye Opening
1 = does not open eyes
2 = opens eyes in response to noxious stimuli
3 = opens eyes in response to voice
4 = opens eyes spontaneously
Verbal Output
1 = makes no sounds
2 = makes incomprehensible sounds
3 = utters inappropriate words
4 = confused and disoriented
5 = speaks normally and oriented
Motor Response (Best)
1 = makes no movements
2 = extension to painful stimuli
3 = abnormal flexion to painful stimuli
4 = flexion/withdrawal to painful stimuli
5 = localized to painful stimuli
6 = obeys commands
FULL OUTLINE OF UNRESPONSIVENESS (FOUR) SCORE
Eye Response
4 = eyelids open or opened, tracking, or blinking to command
3 = eyelids open but not tracking
2 = eyelids closed but open to loud voice
1 = eyelids closed but open to pain
0 = eyelids remain closed with pain
Motor Response
4 = thumbs-­up, fist, or peace sign
3 = localizing to pain
2 = flexion response to pain
1 = extension response to pain
0 = no response to pain or generalized myoclonus status
Brainstem Reflexes
4 = pupil and corneal reflexes present
3 = one pupil wide and fixed
2 = pupil or corneal reflexes absent
1 = pupil and corneal reflexes absent
0 = absent pupil, corneal, and cough reflex
Respiration
4 = not intubated, regular breathing pattern
3 = not intubated, Cheyne-­Stokes breathing pattern
2 = not intubated, irregular breathing
1 = breathes above ventilatory rate
0 = breathes at ventilator rate or apnea
From Edlow JA, Rabinstein A, Traub SJ, Wijdicks EFM. Diagnosis of reversible causes of
coma. Lancet. 2014;384:2064-­2076.

TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Etiology

Mechanisms of TBI include motor vehicle crashes, falls, assaults, and
abusive head trauma. Most TBIs in children are from closed-­head
injuries.

Epidemiology

TBI is an important pediatric public health problem, with over 800,000
emergency department visits, 23,000 hospitalizations, and over 2,500
deaths in children annually in the United States. It is also 1 of the top
10 causes of years lost to disability throughout infancy, childhood, and
adolescence.

Pathology

Epidural, subdural, and parenchymal intracranial hemorrhages can
result. Injury to gray or white matter is also commonly seen and
includes focal cerebral contusions, diffuse cerebral swelling, axonal
injury, and injury to the cerebellum or brainstem. Patients with severe

583

TBI often have multiple findings; diffuse and potentially delayed cerebral swelling is common.

Pathogenesis

TBI results in primary and secondary injury. Primary injury from the
impact produces irreversible tissue disruption. In contrast, two types of
secondary injury are targets of neurointensive care. First, some of the
ultimate damage seen in the injured brain evolves over hours or days,
and the underlying mechanisms involved (including edema, apoptosis,
programmed necrosis, and secondary axotomy) are therapeutic targets.
Second, the injured brain is vulnerable to additional insults because
injury disrupts normal autoregulatory defense mechanisms; disruption
of autoregulation of CBF can lead to ischemia from hypotension that
would otherwise be tolerated by the uninjured brain.

Clinical Manifestations

The hallmark of severe TBI is coma (GCS score 3-­8). Coma is often
seen immediately after the injury and is sustained. In some cases, such
as with an epidural hematoma, a child may be initially alert on presentation but may deteriorate after a period of hours. A similar picture
can be seen in children with diffuse swelling in whom a talk-­and-­die
scenario has been described. Clinicians should also not be lulled into
underappreciating the potential for deterioration of a child with moderate TBI (GCS score 9-­12) with a significant contusion, because progressive swelling can potentially lead to devastating complications. In
the comatose child with severe TBI, the second key clinical manifestation is the development of intracranial hypertension. The development of increased ICP with impending herniation may be heralded by
new-­onset or worsening headache, depressed level of consciousness,
vital sign changes (hypertension, bradycardia, irregular respirations),
and signs of sixth (lateral rectus palsy) or third (anisocoria [dilated
pupil], ptosis, down-­and-­out position of globe as a result of rectus
muscle palsies) cranial nerve compression. Increased ICP is managed
with continuous ICP monitoring, as well as monitoring for clinical
signs of increased ICP or impending herniation. The development of
brain swelling is progressive. Significantly raised ICP (>20 mm Hg)
can occur early after severe TBI, but peak ICP generally is seen at 48-­
72 hours. Need for ICP-­directed therapy may persist for longer than a
week. A few children have coma without increased ICP resulting from
axonal injury or brainstem injury. In addition to head trauma, it is critical to identify potential cervical spine injury (see Chapter 81).

Laboratory Findings

Cranial CT should be obtained immediately after resuscitation and cardiopulmonary stabilization (Figs. 82.4-­82.10). In some cases, MRI can be diagnostic (Fig. 82.11). An approach to CT scanning is noted in Figure 82.12.
Generally, other laboratory findings are normal in isolated TBI, although
occasionally coagulopathy or the development of the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion or cerebral salt wasting
(CSW) is seen. In the setting of TBI with polytrauma, other injuries can
result in laboratory and/or radiographic abnormalities, and a full trauma
survey is important in all patients with severe TBI (see Chapter 80).

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

In severe TBI, the diagnosis is generally obvious from the history and
clinical presentation. Occasionally, TBI severity can be overestimated
because of concurrent alcohol or drug intoxication. The diagnosis of
TBI can be problematic in cases of abusive head trauma or after an
anoxic event such as drowning or smoke inhalation.

Treatment

Infants and children with severe or moderate TBI (GCS score 3-­8
or 9-­12, respectively) receive intensive care unit (ICU) monitoring.
Evidence-­based guidelines for the management of severe TBI have
been published (Fig. 82.13 and Fig. 82.14). This approach to ICP-­
directed therapy is also reasonable for other conditions in which
ICP is monitored. Care involves a multidisciplinary team comprising
pediatric caregivers from neurologic surgery, critical care medicine,
surgery, and rehabilitation, among other services, and is directed at

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

584 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Fig. 82.6 Subdural hematoma. Left subdural hematoma observed on
Fig. 82.4 Skull fracture. Mildly displaced skull fracture seen on CT im-

aging (bone window view) in a 4-­year-­old who fell and hit her head on
a curb.

CT imaging in a 10-­year-­old child after a motor vehicle accident. Note
effacement of the left lateral ventricle and midline shift (see dashed line
for midline reference).

Fig. 82.7 Subdural hematoma. Hyperacute right frontal subdural he-

Fig. 82.5 Epidural hematoma. Left frontal epidural hematoma ob-

matoma observed on CT imaging in a 5-­year-­old after a motor vehicle
accident. Note that the hyperacute aspect of the subdural hematoma is
dark on CT imaging in the early stage after injury. Also, note that there
is marked midline shift of intracranial contents, as both lateral ventricles
are displaced into the left side of the skull.

preventing secondary insults and managing raised ICP. Initial stabilization of infants and children with severe TBI includes rapid sequence
tracheal intubation with spine precautions along with maintenance of
normal extracerebral hemodynamics, including blood gas values (Pao2
and Paco2), MAP, and temperature. Intravenous fluid boluses may be
required to treat hypotension. Euvolemia is the target, and hypotonic
fluids must be rigorously avoided; normal saline is the fluid of choice.
Pressors may be needed as guided by monitoring of central venous
pressure, with avoidance of both fluid overload and exacerbation of
brain edema. A trauma survey should be performed. Once stabilized,
the patient should be taken for CT scanning to rule out the need for

emergency neurosurgical intervention. If surgery is not required, an
ICP monitor should be inserted to guide the treatment of intracranial
hypertension. Repeat CT scan may help determine whether a new
lesion requiring surgical intervention has developed; this should be
obtained if there is a change in examination or for refractory intracranial hypertension.
During stabilization or at any time during the treatment course,
patients can present with signs and symptoms of cerebral herniation
(pupillary dilation, systemic hypertension, bradycardia, extensor
posturing). Because herniation and its devastating consequences can
sometimes be reversed if promptly addressed, it should be treated as
a medical emergency, with use of hyperventilation with a fraction of
inspired oxygen of 1.0 titrated to reversal of pupillary dilation and

served on CT imaging in a 12-­year-­old child who fell off his bike onto a
concrete surface.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82 u Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization

A

585

B

Fig. 82.8 Subdural hematoma. In a 3-­month-­old child who suffered from abusive head trauma, initial CT imaging (A) demonstrates chronic subdural hematoma bilaterally. Three days after hospitalization (B), the subdural hematomas are slightly larger but infarctions are noted in the posterior
areas of brain parenchyma (arrows).

Fig. 82.9 Hemorrhage and edema. In a 16-­year-­old who fell from his
dirt bike, CT imaging demonstrates intraparenchymal hemorrhage and
significant surrounding edema (arrow).

administration of either hypertonic saline (3% solution, 5-­10 mL/kg
IV) or mannitol (0.25-­1.0 g/kg IV). If an external ventricular drain is
in place, it should be opened to continuous drainage. Pentobarbital
administration can also be considered if a prompt clinical response has
not been observed.
ICP should be maintained at <20 mm Hg; age-­dependent CPP targets
are approximately 50 mm Hg for children 2-­6 years of age, 55 mm Hg for
those 7-­10 years of age, and 65 mm Hg for those 11-­16 years of age. First-­
tier therapy includes elevation of the head of the bed, ensuring midline positioning of the head, controlled mechanical ventilation, and

Fig. 82.10 Skull fractures and hemorrhage. An 11-­year-­old child was
hit in the head by a horse, and CT imaging demonstrates multiple comminuted skull fractures with fragments of bone within the brain parenchyma, multifocal areas of intraparenchymal hemorrhage, and obliteration of the left lateral ventricle.

analgesia and sedation (i.e., narcotics and benzodiazepines). If neuromuscular blockade is needed, it may be desirable to monitor EEG continuously because status epilepticus can occur; this complication will
not be recognized in a paralyzed patient and is associated with raised
ICP and unfavorable outcome. If a ventricular rather than parenchymal catheter is used to monitor ICP, therapeutic CSF drainage is available and can be provided either continuously (often targeting an ICP
>5 mm Hg) or intermittently in response to ICP spikes, generally >20

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

586 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

A

B

Fig. 82.11 Hemorrhages and axonal injury. In a 6-­year-­old child who was hit by a car while riding his bike, initial CT imaging demonstrates no

obvious abnormality (A). However, immediate MRI demonstrates multiple areas of punctate hemorrhages (lucencies) consistent with diffuse axonal
injury (B, arrows).

≥2 yrs

<2 yrs
GCS ≤ 14
or
Signs of altered mental status
or
Palpable skull fracture

Yes

CT
recommended

Yes

CT
recommended

Yes

Observation
vs. CT**

No

No
Scalp hematoma
or
Loss of consciousness ≥5 sec
or
Severe mechanism of injury
or
Not acting normal per parent

GCS ≤ 14
or
Signs of altered mental status
or
Signs of basilar skull fracture

Yes

Observation
vs. CT*

No
CT not recommended
* Observation vs. CT based on:
• Physician experience
• Multiple vs. isolated findings
• Worsening symptoms in emergency department
• Age <3 months
• Parental preference

History of LOC
or
History of vomiting
or
Severe mechanism of injury
or
Severe headache
No
CT not recommended

** Observation vs. CT based on:
• Physician experience
• Multiple vs. isolated findings
• Worsening symptoms in emergency department
• Parental preference

Fig. 82.12 Algorithm for head computed tomography (CT) scan using predictive rules. GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; LOC, level of consciousness.
(Modified from Kupperman N, Holmes JF, Dayan PS, et al. Identification of children at very low risk of clinically important brain injuries after head
trauma: A prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2009;374:1160-­1170.)

mm Hg. Other first-­tier therapies include the osmolar agents hypertonic saline or mannitol. Bolus administration of 3% hypertonic saline
(between 2 and 5 mL/kg over 10-­20 minutes) has guideline-­based level
II evidence supporting its use to treat ICP spikes >20 mm Hg or using
a fixed (q4-­q6h) dosing interval. It can also be given as a continuous infusion of 3% saline at 0.1-­1.0 mL/kg/hr. Mannitol (0.25-­1.0 g/
kg IV over 20 minutes) represents an alternative. These agents can be
used concurrently. It is recommended to avoid serum osmolality >320

mOsm/L. A Foley urinary catheter should be placed to monitor urine
output.
If increased ICP remains refractory to treatment, careful reassessment of the patient is needed to rule out unrecognized hypercarbia,
hypoxemia, fever, hypotension, hypoglycemia, pain, and seizures.
Repeat imaging should be considered to rule out a surgical lesion.
Guideline-­based second-­tier therapies for refractory raised ICP are
available, but evidence favoring a given second-­tier therapy is limited.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82 u Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization
TBI (GCS ≤ 8)

Cranial CT
Surgery as
Indicated
Insert ICP Monitor

587

δ Based on CVP, urine output, BUN, serum creatinine, fluid balance, and exam
Ψ The timing of instituting first tier therapies depends on many factors such as the level of ICP and the
tempo of disease progression; interventions may need to be bypassed, repeated or initiated concurrently.
* ICP 20-25 for >5 min; more rapidly for ICP >25 mmHg
** Mannitol could be substituted
# Monitor EEG
Herniation Pathway

Baseline Care

CPP Pathway

Maintain appropriate analgesia/sedation
Continue mechanical ventilation; maintain adequate arterial oxygenation; PaCO2 ~35 mmHg
Maintain normothermia (<38°C)
Ensure appropriate intravascular volume status (CVP)δ
Maintain Hgb >7 g/dL (minimum); higher levels may be optimal based on advanced monitoring
Treat coagulopathy
Elevate HOB 30°
Phenytoin or Levetiracetam/Consider continuous EEG monitoring throughout the management course
Begin nutrition as early as feasible and treat hypoglycemia
Maintain CPP
Appropriate for age
Minim 40 mmHg

PbrO2 Pathway

If signs and symptoms of herniation
• Pupillary dilation
• Hypertension/bradycardia
• Extensor posturing
Emergent Treatment:
Hyperventilation titrate to reverse pupillary dilation
FiO2 = 1.0
Bolus mannitol or hypertonic saline
Open EVD to continuous drainage
Emergency CT

ICP Pathway
↑ ICP Ψ*
Yes

Maintain CPP
Appropriate for age
Min 40 mmHg

CSF drainage if ventriculostomy present
↓ CPP
Confirm appropriate
intravascular volume
status (CVP) δ
Vasopressor infusion
Bolus of hypertonic
saline

↓PbrO2

No

Raise FiO2

↑ ICP Ψ*
Yes

No

Bolus and/or infusion of hypertonic saline**
Carefully wean
or withdraw
ICP, CPP and/or
PbrO2 directed therapy

↑ ICP Ψ*
Yes

No

Neurological
examination may
help guide weaning or
withdrawal of
therapy and/or
extent of monitoring

Additional analgesia/sedation

↑ ICP Ψ*
Yes

To Surgery if
Indicated

No

↓PbrO2
Neuromuscular blockade #
Vasopressor infusion
Adjust PaCO2
Optimize Hgb

↓ CPP

↑ ICP Ψ*
Yes

↓PbrO2

No

Additional hypertonic saline/hyperosmolar therapy
ϕ Note: When ICP-directed care is deemed to be
refractory to first tier therapies depends on many
factors such as the level of ICP, the tempo of
disease progression and others.

↑ ICP Ψ*
Yes

No

ϕSecond Tier Therapy

Fig. 82.13 Algorithm for use at the bedside to guide first-­tier therapies to treat severe pediatric traumatic brain injury (TBI). This evidence-­and

consensus-­based document that accompanied the third edition of the guidelines includes baseline care (gray), an intracranial pressure (ICP) pathway (yellow), a herniation pathway (green), a cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) pathway (orange), a brain tissue partial pressure of oxygen (PbrO2)
pathway (purple), and surgical intervention (red). The caregiver should integrate all the available information and implement the evidence in the
guidelines in the context of each patient’s unique response to therapies to craft the most optimal treatment regimen. Although a linear approach
in each pathway is provided, variations in tempo and timing during which therapies are implemented will vary from case to case. In some cases, a
single intervention for raised ICP may suffice, whereas in others, multiple simultaneous interventions may be required. The blue box indicates the
need for second-­tier therapy (see Fig. 82.14). BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; CVP, central venous
pressure; EEG, electroencephalogram; EVD, external ventricular drain; Fi 2, fraction of inspired oxygen concentration; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale;
Hgb, hemoglobin; HOB, head of bed; Paco2, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide; Pa 2, partial pressure of arterial oxygen. (From Kochanek
PM, Bell MJ, Simon DW, et al. Traumatic brain injury. In: Zimmerman JJ, Totta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 118.11, p. 1391.)
o

o

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

588 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
↑ ICP
Refractory to first
tier therapies

Repeat CT scan (if surgical option is being considered)

Surgery as
indicated

YES

New or expanding
surgical lesion

Consider additional
advanced neuro-monitoring
• EEG
• TCD
• PRx
• CBF

NO

Surgical intervention:
Remove mass lesion and/or
decompressive
craniectomy1

Barbiturate
infusion2

Moderate
hypothermia3
32-34°C

Hyperventilation4
28-34 mmHg

Higher levels of
osmolar therapy5

1Salvageable patient and evidence of expanding mass lesion or swelling on CT
2Active EEG and no medical contraindications
3No contraindications
4Strongly consider advanced neuro-monitoring for ischemia
5Advance dose of 3% saline or mannitol, or use bolus 23.4% saline. If possible, avoid

serum sodium concentrations of >160 mEq/L and serum osmolarity of >360 mOsm/L

Fig. 82.14 Bedside algorithm to guide second-­tier therapies to treat refractory intracranial hypertension in severe pediatric traumatic brain injury

(TBI). This evidence-­and consensus-­based document that accompanied the third edition of the guidelines represents the treatment options when
tier 1 approaches are inadequate. These therapies may be applied singly, serially, or in combination. In addition, as shown, management of refractory
intracranial hypertension in the second-­tier phase may be aided by advanced monitoring. CBF, Cerebral blood flow; CT, computed tomography;
EEG, electroencephalogram; ICP, intracranial pressure; PRx, pressure reactivity index; TCD, transcranial Doppler ultrasonography. (From Kochanek
PM, Bell MJ, Simon DW, et al. Traumatic brain injury. In: Zimmerman JJ, Totta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 118.12, p. 1394.)

In some centers, decompressive craniectomy is used. Others use a
pentobarbital infusion, with a loading dose of 5-­10 mg/kg over 30
minutes followed by 5 mg/kg every hour for 3 doses and then maintenance with an infusion of 1 mg/kg/hr. Careful blood pressure monitoring is required because of the possibility of drug-­induced hypotension
and the frequent need for support with fluids and/or pressors. Mild
hypothermia (32–34°C [89.6–93.2°F]) to control refractory ICP is
controversial but can be induced and maintained by means of surface
cooling. Sedation and neuromuscular blockade are used to prevent
shivering, and rewarming should be slow. Hypotension should be prevented during rewarming. Refractory raised ICP can also be treated
with hyperventilation (Paco2 = 25-­30 mm Hg). Combinations of these
second-­tier therapies are often required.

Supportive Care

Euvolemia should be maintained, and isotonic fluids are recommended
throughout the ICU stay. Either SIADH or CSW can develop and are
important to differentiate, because management of SIADH is fluid
restriction and that of CSW is sodium replacement. Severe hyperglycemia (blood glucose level >200 mg/dL) should be avoided and treated.
The blood glucose level should be monitored frequently. Early nutrition with enteral feedings is advocated. Corticosteroids should generally not be used unless adrenal insufficiency is documented. Tracheal
suctioning can exacerbate raised ICP. Timing of the use of analgesics
or sedatives around suctioning events and/or use of tracheal or IV

lidocaine can be helpful. Seizures are common after severe acute TBI.
Early posttraumatic seizures (within 1 week) will complicate management of TBI and are often difficult to treat. Anticonvulsant prophylaxis
with fosphenytoin or levetiracetam is recommended. Late posttraumatic seizures (≥7 days after TBI) and, if recurrent, late posttraumatic
epilepsy are not prevented by prophylactic anticonvulsants, whereas
early posttraumatic seizures are prevented by initiating anticonvulsants
soon after TBI. Antifibrinolytic agents (tranexamic acid) reduce hemorrhage size, as well as the development of new focal ischemic cerebral
lesions and improve survival in adults with severe TBI.

Prognosis

Mortality rates for children with severe TBI who reach the pediatric
ICU range between 10% and 30%. Ability to control ICP is related to
patient survival, and the extent of cranial and systemic injuries correlates with quality of life. Motor and cognitive sequelae resulting from
severe TBI generally benefit from rehabilitation to minimize long-­term
disabilities. Recovery from TBI may take months or years to achieve.
Physical therapy, and in some centers methylphenidate or amantadine,
helps with motor and behavioral recovery. Pituitary insufficiency may
be an uncommon but significant complication of severe TBI.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 83 u Brain Death: Death by Neurologic Criteria

Chapter 83

Brain Death: Death by
Neurologic Criteria
Matthew P. Kirschen and Wynne Morrison
Brain death, also known as death by neurologic criteria, is legally
and culturally accepted as death in most of the world. In the United
States, the Uniform Determination of Death Act (UDDA) defines
brain death as the irreversible (some use “permanent”) cessation of all
functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem. The UDDA or
a similar statute has been adopted in all states. Guidelines for the declaration of brain death in infants and children were published jointly
by the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM), American Academy
of Pediatrics (AAP), and Child Neurology Society (CNS) in 2011. In
2020, the World Brain Death Project published a consensus statement
with recommendations for the minimum clinical standards for determination of brain death in adults and children.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Brain death by definition must occur as a result of catastrophic permanent
global brain injury. Approximately 20% of children who die in pediatric
intensive care units (PICUs) are declared brain dead. The most common
etiologies of brain injury leading to brain death are hypoxic-­ischemic
injury from cardiac arrest, shock and/or respiratory failure without cardiac
arrest, traumatic brain injury, intracranial infections, toxic ingestions, and
causes of malignant cerebral edema. Mimics of brain death include botulism, Guillain-Barré syndrome, and high cervical cord injuries.

CLINICAL EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS

Brain death is determined by a careful, thorough clinical evaluation. The
fundamental components of brain death are coma, absence of brainstem reflexes, and apnea. The first step in the brain death evaluation is
to confirm that the catastrophic brain injury occurred because of an etiology known to lead to brain death. The next step is to ensure that there
are no confounding conditions that could mimic or falsely suggest brain
death. This is done by meticulously ensuring the patient is not hypotensive or hypothermic; does not have severe metabolic abnormalities like
hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, or acidosis; and that sufficient time has
passed to allow for clearance of all sedating medication or other toxins
that could confound the examination. This involves review of the medical history, neuroimaging, electroencephalography (EEG), and laboratory data to rule out reversible causes of coma. Additionally, the patient
should be observed for a sufficient amount of time (typically at least 24
hours after CPR or from their severe acute brain injury) to ensure there is
no recovery of neurologic function. Checklists are very helpful in ensuring no prerequisites are missed (Fig. 83.1). Confounding factors must be
corrected, if feasible, before initiation of the brain death evaluation. If all
confounders are unable to be adequately corrected, ancillary testing is
required to diagnose brain death. Brain death evaluation should not be
performed in infants <37 weeks corrected gestational age.

Brain Death Neurologic Examination

The clinical examination evaluates for coma; absence of motor responses
of the head, neck, and extremities; and brainstem areflexia including
apnea in a setting of an adequate respiratory stimulus. The patient must
be unresponsive to tactile, auditory, and visual stimulation other than
spinally mediated reflexes. If it is unclear if motor movements are spinally mediated, ancillary testing may be necessary before brain death
can be diagnosed. Brainstem reflexes must be absent. Table 83.1 lists the
components of the neurologic examination, including brainstem reflexes
to be tested, the brainstem location of each reflex, and the exam finding
that is consistent with brain death. Several injuries and conditions can

589

preclude completion or interpretation of the clinical examination. These
include spinal cord injury, orbital/facial trauma, and severe neuromuscular disorders. In these situations, an ancillary test must be performed
before declaring brain death. It is still necessary to perform all examination components that can be completed, and every component assessed
must be consistent with brain death to allow declaration.

Apnea Test

Apnea is the absence of respiratory effort. The purpose of the required
apnea test is to evaluate whether the chemoreceptors in the brainstem’s
medulla, which stimulate respiration when exposed to hypercarbia and
acidosis, are functional. The patient should be euvolemic, normotensive,
and euthermic before beginning the apnea test. The apnea test can result
in cardiopulmonary decompensation and should only be performed in
a PICU by clinicians with skills to stabilize or resuscitate the patient if
needed. Before the apnea test, the patient is preoxygenated with 100% oxygen for approximately 10 minutes, and ventilation is adjusted to achieve a
Paco2 of approximately 40 mm Hg. A baseline arterial blood gas (ABG)
documents the starting Paco2 value. The patient is then removed from
intermittent mechanical ventilation and provided apneic oxygenation by
delivering 100% oxygen via continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
on the ventilator or via flow-­inflating resuscitation bag with a functioning
peak end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) valve. The patient’s hemodynamics
and pulse oximetry oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation (Spo2) are monitored
continuously while the physician observes for respiratory effort. An ABG
sample is obtained approximately 5-­10 minutes into the test and every 2
minutes thereafter until the target Paco2 is surpassed; ventilatory support
is resumed at that time. Absence of respiratory effort with a Paco2 ≥60
mm Hg and >20 mm Hg above baseline is consistent with brain death. If
at any point during the test the patient becomes hypoxic (Spo2 <85%) or
hypotensive, the test is aborted and ventilatory support resumed.

OBSERVATION PERIODS

To determine brain death in the United States, current guidelines recommend the neurologic examination and apnea test be performed by
different attending physicians separated by an observation period. The
examination determines that the child has met criteria for brain death.
An observation period before the examination is based on the patient’s
age: For infants (≥37 weeks corrected gestational age) and children <24
months, observe for at least 48 hours. For patients >2 years, observe for
at least 24 hours. Before testing, core body temperature should be maintained ≥36° C. In addition in adults, systolic blood pressure (SBP) should
be ≥100 mm Hg and mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) should be ≥75
mm Hg; in children SBP and MAP should be ≥5th percentile for age.
Similar MAPs are recommended for patients on venoarterial ECMO.
Furthermore, before treating metabolic disorders, intoxication and
effects of therapeutic medications that depress the CNS and peripheral nervous system (paralytics) must be excluded. In children, two
different clinicians must perform independent neurological and apnea
examinations separated by a minimal interval of 12 hours.

ANCILLARY STUDIES

Ancillary studies are not required for the diagnosis of brain death and
should only be used to assist the clinician in declaring brain death (1) when
components of the neurologic examination or apnea test cannot be completed safely because of the underlying medical condition of the patient;
(2) if there is uncertainty about the results of the neurologic examination;
(3) if a medication effect may be present; or (4) to reduce the observation
period between examinations. If an ancillary test is used to shorten the
observation period, the physician is still required to complete two clinical
examinations and apnea tests, along with the ancillary study.
The most common ancillary tests are EEG and radionuclide perfusion scintigraphy (or cerebral blood flow) studies. Other tests are
available (Table 83.2); however, these have not been incorporated into
clinical practice in the United States, although they are used outside of
the United States in some practice settings. A valid electroencephalogram to support a diagnosis of brain death must be performed according to the American EEG Society standards and technical requirements.
Confounders should be excluded, and the EEG must demonstrate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

590 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Checklist for Documentation of Brain Death

Age of Patient
Term newborn 37 weeks gestational
age and up to 30 days old

31 days to
18 years old

Brain Death Examination for Infants and Childrena
Timing of First Examination
 First examination may be performed 24 hours after birth OR following
cardiopulmonary resuscitation or other severe brain injury

Interexamination Interval
 At least 24 hours
 Interval shortened because ancillary study
(Section 4) is consistent with brain death
 At least 12 hours OR

 First examination may be performed 24 hours following
cardiopulmonary resuscitation or other severe brain injury

 Interval shortened because ancillary study
(Section 4) is consistent with brain death
Section 1. Prerequisites for Brain Death Examination and Apnea Test
A. Irreversible and Identifiable Cause of Coma (please check)
 Traumatic brain injury
 Anoxic brain injury
 Known metabolic disorder
 Other (specify) ____________________
B. Correction of Contributing Factors That Can Interfere with the Neurologic Examination
Examination 1
Examination 2
a. Core body temperature is 95°F (35°C)
 Yes
 No
 Yes
b. Systolic blood pressure or MAP in acceptable range (Systolic BP not less than
 Yes
 No
 Yes
2 standard deviations below age-appropriate norm) based on age
c. Sedative/analgesic drug effect excluded as a contributing factor
 Yes
 No
 Yes
d. Metabolic intoxication excluded as a contributing factor
 Yes
 No
 Yes
e. Neuromuscular blockade excluded as a contributing factor
 Yes
 No
 Yes
 If ALL prerequisites are marked YES, then proceed to section 2, OR
 ____________________ confounding variable was present. Ancillary study was therefore performed to document brain death (Section 4).

 No
 No
 No
 No
 No

Section 2. Physical Examination (please check); Note: Spinal Cord Reflexes Are Acceptable
Examination 1,
Examination 2,
Date/Time: __________
Date/Time: __________
a. Flaccid tone, patient unresponsive to deep painful stimuli
 Yes
 No
b. Pupils are midposition or fully dilated and light reflexes are absent
 Yes
 No
c. Corneal, cough, gag reflexes are absent
 Yes
 No
d. Sucking and rooting reflexes are absent (in neonates and infants)
 Yes
 No
e. Oculovestibular reflexes are absent
 Yes
 No
f. Spontaneous respiratory effort while on mechanical ventilation is absent
 Yes
 No
 The __________ (specify) element of the examination could not be performed because ______________________________.
Ancillary study (EEG or radionuclide CBF) was therefore performed to document brain death (Section 4).
Section 3. Apnea Test
Examination 1,
Date/Time: __________

 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes

 No
 No
 No
 No
 No
 No

Examination 2,
Date/Time: __________

No spontaneous respiratory efforts were observed despite final PaCO2 60mmHg and a 20mmHg Pretest PaCO2: _______
Pretest PaCO2: _______
increase above baseline (Examination 1). No spontaneous respiratory efforts were observed despite Apnea duration: _______ min Apnea duration: _______ min
final PaCO2 60mmHg and a 20mmHg increase above baseline (Examination 2).
Post-test PaCO2: _______
Post-test PaCO2: _______
Apnea test is contraindicated or could not be performed to completion because ___________________________.
Ancillary study (EEG or radionuclide CBF) was therefore performed to document brain death (Section 4).
Section 4. Ancillary Testing
Ancillary testing is required (1) when any components of the examination or apnea testing cannot be completed; (2) if there is
uncertainty about the results of the neurologic examination; or (3) if a medication effect may be present. Ancillary testing can be
performed to reduce the interexamination period; however, a second neurologic examination is required. Components of the
neurologic examination that can be performed safely should be completed in close proximity to the ancillary test.
 EEG report documents electrocerebral silence OR
 CBF study report documents no cerebral perfusion
Section 5. Signatures

Date/Time:__________

 Yes
 Yes

 No
 No

Examiner 1
I certify that my examination is consistent with cessation of function of the brain and brainstem. Confirmatory examination to follow.
Printed name ____________________
Signature ____________________
Specialty ____________________
Pager #/license # ____________________
Date mm/dd/yyyy ____________________
Time ____________________
Examiner 2
I certify that my examination  and/or ancillary test report  confirms unchanged and irreversible cessation of function of the brain and brainstem. The patient is
declared brain dead at this time.
Date/time of death ____________________
Printed name ____________________
Signature ____________________
Specialty ____________________
Pager #/license # ____________________
Date mm/dd/yyyy ____________________
Time ____________________
a

Two physicians must perform independent examinations separated by specified intervals.
BP = blood pressure; CBF = cerebral blood flow; EEG = electroencephalography; MAP = mean arterial pressure.

Fig. 83.1 Checklist for documentation of brain death. (From Nakagawa TA, Ashwal S, Mathur M, et al. Guidelines for the determination of brain
death in infants and children: An update of the 1987 Task Force recommendations—executive summary. Ann Neurol. 2012;71:573-­585, Table 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 83.1

Neurologic Examination to Evaluate a Patient for Brain Death

EXAM COMPONENT

HOW TO PERFORM

RESPONSE CONSISTENT WITH BRAIN DEATH

Coma

Visual response: blink to visual threat
Auditory response: clapping and yelling the child’s name loudly
Tactile response: apply deep pressure to the condyles at the level of
the temporomandibular joints, the supraorbital notch bilaterally,
the sternum, and all four extremities proximally and distally

No response to visual or auditory stimuli; noxious
stimuli do not produce grimacing, facial or body
muscle movement, or any motor response other
than spinally mediated reflexes

Pupillary light reflex
(CNs II and III)

Shine a bright light into each eye while closely observing
pupillary size and reactivity

Absence of ipsilateral and contralateral
pupillary response, with pupils fixed in a
midsize or dilated position (4-­6 mm) in both eyes

Corneal reflex
(CNs III, V, VII)

Touch the cornea of each eye with a cotton swab at the external
border of the iris, applying light pressure and observing for any
eyelid movement

Absence of eyelid movement

Oculocephalic reflex
(CNs III, VI, and VIII)

Confirm integrity of the cervical spine. Secure the endotracheal
tube to prevent dislodgement; briskly rotate the head
horizontally to both sides and observe for movement of the eyes

Absence of movement of the eyes relative to
head movement; eyes follow the head
movement, staying in mid-­position

Oculovestibular reflex
(CNs III, IV, VI, and VIII)

Irrigate the ear canal with 50-­60 mL of ice water for at least 60 sec
while observing for eye movement; test each side separately
and with a 5-­min interval in between

Absence of eye movement

Gag and cough reflex
(CNs IX and X)

Touch the posterior pharynx with a tongue depressor or a rigid
suction catheter to stimulate a gag; touch the tracheobronchial
wall at the level of the carina with placement of a suction
catheter through the endotracheal tube to stimulate a cough

Absence of both cough and gag

Sucking and rooting
reflexes

Place a gloved finger inside the baby’s mouth to stimulate
sucking; stroke the external surface of both cheeks and
corners of the mouth to stimulate rooting

Absence of sucking and rooting

CN, Cranial nerve.

Table 83.2    Ancillary Tests for Determining Brain Death
TEST
BRAIN BLOOD FLOW
Computed tomography
angiography

CONFOUNDER/LIMITATION*

SENSITIVITY/
SPECIFICITY

Requires transport to the scanner
Image variability based on injection technique
Potential to miss a slow flow state
Risk of nephrotoxicity
Not recommended by AAN 2023 Guidelines#

52–97% / 100%

Digital subtraction
angiography†

Requires transport to angiography suite
Risk of nephrotoxicity
Image variability based on injection technique

100% / 100%

Magnetic resonance
angiography

Requires transport to the scanner
Image variability based on injection technique

93–100% / 100%

Radionuclide angiography†

Limited evaluation of brainstem

99% / 56%

Radionuclide scintigraphy†

Requires transport to the scanner
Planar imaging may have limited evaluation of brainstem

Planar: 78% / 100%
SPECT: 88% / 100%

Transcranial Doppler
ultrasonography†

Potential for technical difficulties in performance
Potential for lack of windows

90% / 98%

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC FUNCTION
Electroencephalography

Risk of environmental artifact
Confounded by sedation, hypothermia and toxic-metabolic derangements
Predominantly provides information about cortical function

53–80% / 97%

Evoked potentials-auditory

Can be absent in comatose patients with other intact brainstem reflexes
Confounded by sedation, hypothermia, isolated eighth nerve and brainstem lesions
Only evaluates auditory pathways
Performance/interpretation may be limited by experience

NA / NA

Evoked potentialssomatosensory

Can be absent in comatose patients with ongoing brain function
Confounded by cervical spine injury, isolated brainstem lesions, sedation, and hypothermia
Only evaluates somatosensory pathways
Performance/interpretation may be limited by experience

100% / 78%

Evoked potentials-visual

Can be absent in comatose patients with ongoing brain function
Confounded by sedation, retinal or optic nerve lesions
Only evaluates visual pathways
Performance/interpretation may be limited by experience

NA / NA

*Performance/interpretation of all ancillary tests may be limited by experience
†Accepted by the World Brain Death Project (WBDP).
#Report of the AAN Guidelines Subcommittee, AAP, CNS, SCCM. Pediatric and adult brain death/death by neurologic criteria consensus guideline. Neurology 2023;101:1-21.

NA, Not available.
From Lewis A, Kirschen MP, Badenes R. Quality improvement in the determination of death by neurologic criteria around the world. Crit Care. 2023;27(1):96.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

592 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
electrocerebral silence. A radionuclide cerebral blood flow study consists of intravenous injection of a radiopharmaceutical agent followed
by imaging of the brain by planar or single-­photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) imaging. A study that demonstrates absence of
intracranial blood flow and cerebral perfusion is supportive of brain
death. CT and MR angiography are not recommended.
Interpretation of both EEG and cerebral blood flow studies should
only be performed by trained and qualified individuals. If the study
shows any evidence of electrical activity or cerebral blood flow, brain
death cannot be declared. A 24-­hour waiting period is recommended
before repeating the brain death evaluation.

DOCUMENTATION

Documentation is an important aspect of the brain death evaluation
and determination and should follow a checklist, including the following points:
1. Etiology of brain injury
2.	Absence of confounding factors, including hypothermia, hypotension, metabolic abnormalities, and recent doses of sedative or neuromuscular blocking agents
3.	
Absence of motor response to tactile, auditory, and visual
stimuli
4.	Absence of brainstem reflexes, including pupillary light reflex, oculocephalic/oculovestibular reflex, corneal reflex, cough reflex, and gag reflex
5.	ABG values during the apnea test and statement about respiratory
effort
6.	Results of ancillary testing (if indicated)

AFTER DECLARATION OF BRAIN DEATH

After brain death has been declared, the child is legally dead. The time
of death is the time the final required component of the evaluation
is completed: either ABG results or ancillary test. Families may be
approached by representatives of organ procurement organizations
to discuss options for organ donation after brain death. For families
that choose not to donate organs, the next appropriate step in the care
of the child is removal of technologic supports, including mechanical
ventilation, after which the child’s heart will become asystolic. It is
important for care providers to be supportive of the family dealing
with this difficult situation. Child life and palliative care specialists
can be helpful in guiding families during this time. Technologic support is typically stopped within a few hours of declaring brain death,
although in some situations it can be delayed at the discretion of the
physician and in accordance with hospital protocols.

OBJECTIONS TO THE CONCEPT OF BRAIN DEATH

The concept of brain death may not be accepted by families for
personal, religious, or cultural reasons. Some families have difficulty comprehending the fact that their child meets criteria for legal
death despite having a heartbeat, blood pressure, and being warm
to the touch. Other families maintain hope for recovery, and some
have religious views that death can only be declared after cessation
of cardiorespiratory function. Some individuals have challenged the
brain death guidelines claiming that they do not sufficiently evaluate “all functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem,” as
mandated by the UDDA, particularly as some patients who meet
brain death criteria continue to show evidence of integrative functioning, such as control over free water homeostasis (absence of
diabetes insipidus), control of temperature regulation, and capacity
for growth and wound healing. Others argue that the intent of the
UDDA is met by the current clinical evaluation. Objections to performing the brain death evaluation or declaration of death should
be handled by a multidisciplinary team with experience in these situations. These teams often include physicians, social workers, ethicists, chaplains, hospital administrators, and lawyers as appropriate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 84

Syncope
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Syncope is defined as a sudden transient loss of consciousness with
inability to maintain postural tone. The most common cause of syncope
in the normal pediatric population is neurocardiogenic syncope (vasovagal syncope, fainting). Vasovagal syncope is classically associated with
a prodrome that includes diaphoresis, warmth, pallor, or feeling lightheaded and is often triggered by acute position changes or by a specific
situation or event such as pain, medical procedures, or emotional distress
(Table 84.1). This type of syncope is characterized by hypotension and
bradycardia. Approximately 30–50% of children will have had a fainting
episode before 18 years of age. The symptoms of vasovagal syncope can
overlap with those of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS),
a constellation of symptoms characterized by symptoms of rapid heart
rate and supported by a positional increase in heart rate by 40 beats per
minute with normal blood pressure (see Chapter 84.1).
Most patients with a vasovagal syncope episode will have prodromal
features followed by loss of motor tone. Once in a horizontal position,
consciousness returns rapidly, usually in 1-­2 minutes; some patients
may have a brief period of stiffening or jerking, which should not be
confused with a seizure (Table 84.2). Syncope must also be distinguished from vertigo and ataxia (Table 84.3).
Although this type of syncope is very common in adolescence and
has an excellent prognosis, other causes for loss of consciousness are
more dangerous; thus syncope may be the first sign of more serious
conditions (Table 84.4). Indeed, the occurrence of syncope may well
be the pediatrician’s best opportunity to diagnose a life-­threatening
condition before the patient subsequently succumbs. The task of the
clinician therefore is not only to counsel the family and the patient concerning the common form but also to rule out a number of important
life-­threatening cardiac problems.

MECHANISMS

Syncope by whatever mechanism is caused by a lack of adequate cerebral
blood flow with loss of consciousness and inability to remain upright.
Primary cardiac causes of syncope (see Table 84.4) include conditions
that predispose a patient to arrhythmias or conditions such as congenital or acquired structural heart disease. Arrhythmic causes of syncope
include Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome (particularly with atrial fibrillation), ventricular tachycardia (VT), and occasionally supraventricular
tachycardia (see Chapter 484). VT may be associated with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM), arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, repaired congenital heart disease, or an inherited arrhythmia syndrome such as catecholaminergic polymorphous ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) or long
QT syndrome (LQTS) (Table 84.5). Other arrhythmias that may lead to
syncope are bradyarrhythmias such as sinus node dysfunction and high-­
grade second-­or third-­degree atrioventricular (AV) block. Syncope may
also be caused by cardiac obstructive lesions, such as critical aortic stenosis, or coronary artery anomalies, such as an aberrant left coronary artery
arising from the right sinus of Valsalva. Patients with primary pulmonary
hypertension or Eisenmenger syndrome may also experience syncope. In
all the obstructive forms of syncope, exercise increases the likelihood of
an episode because the obstruction interferes with the ability of the heart
to increase cardiac output in response to exercise.
Noncardiac causes of loss of consciousness include epilepsy, basilar artery migraine, hysterical syncope, and psychogenic nonepileptic
seizures (see Table 84.1). Occasionally, patients with narcolepsy may
present with syncope. Hypoglycemia and hyperventilation may also
present as syncope.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84 u Syncope

593

Table 84.1  Noncardiac Causes of Syncope
REFLEX VASODEPRESSOR SYNCOPE
Neurocardiogenic (vasovagal)
Emotion (seeing blood)
Pain (needle phobia)
Reflex asystolic syncope (pallid breath-­holding)

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Seizure (atonic, absence, myoclonic-­astatic)
Hyperekplexia
Stroke, transient ischemic attack
Friedreich ataxia
Subarachnoid hemorrhage

MISCELLANEOUS SITUATIONAL REFLEX
Tussive
Sneeze
Exercise, after exercise
Swallowing
Stretching
Defecation
Micturition
Hair grooming
Valsalva (increased intrathoracic pressure)
Trumpet playing
Weightlifting
Breath-­holding spells (cyanotic)

OTHER NEUROLOGIC
Dysautonomia
Myotonic dystrophy
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome
Congenital myasthenia gravis
Basilar artery migraine
Arnold Chiari malformation
DRUG EFFECTS
β-­Blocking agents
Vasodilating agents
Opiates
Sedatives
Diuretics
Anticonvulsant agents
Antihistamines
Antidepressant agents
Anxiolytic agents
Drugs of abuse
Insulin, oral hypoglycemic agents
Carbon monoxide

SYSTEMIC ILLNESS
Hypoglycemia
Anemia
Infection
Hypovolemia, dehydration
Adrenal insufficiency
Narcolepsy, cataplexy
Pulmonary embolism
Pheochromocytoma
Mastocytosis
Ruptured ectopic pregnancy

OTHER ETIOLOGIES
Carotid sinus sensitivity
Subclavian steal
Panic attack, anxiety
Conversion disorder

Table 84.2  Comparison of Clinical Features of Syncope and Seizures
FEATURES

SYNCOPE

SEIZURES

FEATURES

SYNCOPE

SEIZURES

Relation to posture

Common

No

Urinary incontinence

Rare

Common

Time of day

Diurnal

Diurnal or nocturnal

Tongue biting

No

Precipitating factors

Emotion, injury, pain,
Sleep loss, drug/
crowds, heat, exercise,
alcohol withdrawal,
fear, dehydration,
illness, medication
coughing, micturition,
nonadherence
venipuncture,
prolonged standing

Common with
convulsive seizures

Postictal confusion

Rare

Common

Postictal headache

No

Common

Focal neurologic
signs

No

Occasional

Cardiovascular signs

Common to have low
blood pressure and
heart rate during
event; cardiovascular
exam may be
completely normal
after event unless
there is an underlying
cardiac disorder

Rare

Abnormal findings
on EEG

Rare (generalized
slowing may occur
during the event)

Common

Skin color

Pallor

Cyanosis or normal

Diaphoresis

Common

Rare

Aura or premonitory
symptoms

Often minutes or
longer, but can be
very brief

Brief

Convulsion

Rare

Common

Other abnormal
movements

Minor irregular
twitching

Rhythmic jerks

Injury

Rare

Common (with
convulsive seizures)

From Winkel D, Cassimatis D. Episodic impairment of consciousness. In: Jankovic JM, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley and Daroff’s Neurology in Clinical
Practice, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

594 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 84.3  Syncope and Dizziness
VERTIGO

PRESYNCOPE

DISEQUILIBRIUM

LIGHTHEADEDNESS

Patient complaint

“My head is spinning.”
“The room is whirling.”

“I feel I might pass out.”
“I feel faint.”
“I feel like blacking out.”

“I feel unsteady.”
“My balance is off.”

“I feel dizzy.”
“I feel disconnected,
drugged.”

Associated
features

Motion, swaying, spinning,
nystagmus

Syncope: loss of postural tone,
brief loss of consciousness
Situational

Poor balance
No vertigo or ataxia

Anxiety, hyperventilation,
paresthesias, respiratory
alkalosis, panic attacks

Usual cause

Vestibular disorders

Impaired cerebral perfusion

Sensory and/or central
neurologic dysfunction

Decreased venous return

Key differential
diagnoses

Peripheral (labyrinthine-­cochlear)
vs central neurologic disorder

Neurocardiogenic (vagal) vs
cardiac syncope vs
neuropsychiatric syncope

Sensory deficit vs central
neurologic disease

Anxiety/depression vs
hyperventilation vs
medication effects

Adapted from Cohen G. Syncope and dizziness. In: Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis; 2018: Table 6.1, p. 84.

Table 84.4  Causes of Cardiovascular Syncope: Potentially Fatal If Unrecognized
ARRHYTHMIAS
Bradyarrhythmias
1.	Sinus node dysfunction (especially in patients with congenital heart
defects)
2.	Atrioventricular block (congenital or acquired; Lyme, Fabry, Chagas
diseases)
3.	Kearns-­Sayre syndrome
4.	Pacemaker malfunction
Tachyarrhythmias
1.	Supraventricular
a.	Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome
b.	Supraventricular tachycardia/atrial arrhythmias (especially in
patients with congenital heart defects)
2.	Ventricular: ventricular tachycardia/torsades/ventricular fibrillation
a.	Channelopathies
•
•
•
•

Long QT syndromes
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Brugada syndrome
Short QT syndrome

b.	Drug induced
c.	Idiopathic

• Ventricular fibrillation
• Ventricular tachycardia from outflow tract

STRUCTURAL/FUNCTIONAL HEART DISEASE
Cardiomyopathy
1.	Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
2.	Dilated cardiomyopathy
3.	Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
4.	Left ventricular noncompaction
Coronary Anomalies
1.	Anomalous origin
2.	Kawasaki disease
3.	Multisystemic inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) secondary
to SARS-CoV-2
Valvar Aortic Mitral or Pulmonary Stenosis
Takotsubo Disease
Acute Myocarditis
Congenital Heart Disease (Repaired and Unrepaired)
Pulmonary Hypertension, Pulmonary Embolus
Aortic Dissection (Marfan Syndrome)
Cardiac Masses (Myxoma, Rhabdomyoma, Thrombus)
Eisenmenger Syndrome

From MacNeill E, Vashist S. Approach to syncope and altered mental status. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2013;60:1083-­1106.

EVALUATION

The most important goal in the evaluation of the new patient with syncope is to diagnose life-­threatening causes of syncope so that these causes
can be managed and more severe outcomes avoided. Many patients presenting with sudden cardiac arrest caused by conditions such as LQTS
will have previously experienced an episode of syncope, so the presentation with syncope is an opportunity to prevent sudden death.
The most important tool in evaluation of syncope is a careful personal
and family history. The characteristics of cardiac syncope differ significantly from benign causes of syncope such as neurocardiogenic syncope
(Table 84.6). Several red flags can be identified that should lead the clinician to suspect that the mechanism is a life-­threatening cardiac cause
rather than simple fainting (Table 84.7). The occurrence during exercise
suggests an arrhythmia or an outflow tract or coronary artery obstruction. Noncardiac (postexercise) syncope is seen in athletes after a strenuous workout or competition and has no associated cardiac features. The
occurrence of syncope resulting in injury also suggests an arrhythmia, as
it indicates a sudden onset with a lack of adequate prodromal symptoms.
The occurrence of syncope while recumbent would be quite unusual in a
patient with neurocardiogenic syncope and therefore suggests a cardiac
or neurologic cause. Occasionally, a patient with syncope caused by a
tachyarrhythmia will report the sensation of a racing heart before the
event, but this is often not present.

A careful family history is essential in evaluation of syncope. Specifically, if there are first-­degree relatives with inherited syndromes, such
as LQTS, CPVT, or HCM, this should lead to more specific evaluation
of the patient. If relatives died suddenly at a young age without a clear
and convincing cause, inherited cardiac arrhythmias or cardiomyopathies should also be suspected. Other questions that may increase suspicion for an inherited arrhythmia include family history of congenital
deafness, unexplained recurrent syncope, poorly controlled seizures,
single-­vehicle car accidents, or drowning events.
Patients with a history of heart disease requiring surgical repair
may have causes of syncope that are specific to their repair. Sinus node
dysfunction is common after the Senning or Mustard procedure for
transposition of the great vessels or after the Fontan procedure for
single-­ventricle palliation. VT may be seen after repair of tetralogy of
Fallot. A patient with a history of repair of a ventricular septal defect or
an AV canal defect should be evaluated for the late occurrence of AV
block. Patients with an implanted pacemaker should be evaluated for
pacemaker lead failure.
The physical examination may also offer clues (see Table 84.7)
that point toward cardiac syncope. Patients with HCM or aortic
stenosis may have a prominent cardiac impulse and/or an ejection murmur. A patient with primary pulmonary hypertension
will have a displaced apical impulse, with a loud and single second

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84 u Syncope

595

Table 84.5  Primary Electrical Abnormalities: Features, ECG, and Treatment
PRIMARY ELECTRICAL
ABNORMALITIES

FEATURES

ECG

LQTS: Romano-­Ward,
Jervell–Lange-­Nielsen,
acquired

• Familial genetic or acquired
disorders
• Ion channel pathologic gene
variant (~17 genes)*
• Presents in torsades de pointes
• Romano-­Ward is most common
inherited
• LQTS Jervell–Lange-­Nielsen has
congenital deafness

• Prolonged QT measured from the
onset of the Q wave to the end of
the T wave in lead II
• Varies with HR but >0.44 in men,
>0.46 in children and women for HR
50-­90 beats/min is prolonged
• Torsades de pointes can occur
• Can deteriorate from polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia to ventricular
fibrillation

• β-­Blocker therapy
• Recommendations on
exercise intensity by a
cardiologist
• ICD if β blockers fail

TREATMENT

Brugada syndrome

• Inherited autosomal dominant
arrhythmogenic syndrome
characterized by life-­threatening
ventricular arrhythmias
• Pathologic gene variant in SCN5A
and 13 other genes

• ECG abnormalities are from
repolarization and depolarization
abnormalities
• Coved-­type ST-­segment elevations
in the right precordial leads
• J wave amplitude ≥2 mm followed
by a negative T wave

• Placement of ICD

Wolff-­Parkinson-­White

• Owing to one or more reentrant
pathways inducing SVT or atrial
fibrillation
• Up to 14% associated with
malignant tachycardias
• Malignant arrhythmias from short
reentrant pathway repolarization
or multiple pathways

• Short PR interval
• Delta waves present

• Undergo EPS and ablation

Dilated cardiomyopathy:
ventricular tachycardia/
fibrillation

• Cardiac dilation and systolic
dysfunction
• Inherited or acquired
• Lamin AC pathologic gene variant
a common cause of DCM and SCD

• Marked LVH
• Poor R-­wave progression
• Left atrial enlargement
• Right axis deviation

• Permanent pacemaker and
ICD placement

Catecholamine-­exercise:
ventricular tachycardia

• Ventricular ectopy induced by
exercise or emotional stress
• Variant in gene that encodes
Ca-­mediated sarcoplasmic fibers
• Lethal in 30–50% if left untreated

• Preexercise ECG is usually normal,
stress testing recommended
• ECG with exercise
• Nonsustained wide ventricular
tachycardia

• β-­Blocker therapy
• Recommendations on exercise
intensity by a cardiologist
• ICD if β blockers fail

DCM, Dilated cardiomyopathy; EPS, electrophysiology study; HR, heart rate; ICD, implantable cardioverter defibrillator; LQTS, long QT syndrome; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy;
SCD, sudden cardiac death; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.
*Major genes: KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A in ~75% cases.
Modified from Ellison S. Sudden cardiac death in adolescents. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2015;42:57-­76.

Table 84.6  Differentiating Features for Causes of Syncope
NEUROCARDIOGENIC
Symptoms after prolonged motionless standing, sudden unexpected pain, fear, or unpleasant sight, sound, or smell; pallor
Syncope in a well-­trained athlete after exertion (without heart disease)
Situational syncope during or immediately after micturition, cough, swallowing, or defecation
Syncope with throat or facial pain (glossopharyngeal or trigeminal neuralgia)
ORGANIC HEART DISEASE (PRIMARY ARRHYTHMIA, OBSTRUCTIVE HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY, PULMONARY HYPERTENSION)
Brief sudden loss of consciousness, no prodrome, history of heart disease
Syncope while sitting or supine
Syncope with exertion
History of palpitations
Family history of sudden death
NEUROLOGIC
Seizures: preceding aura, postevent symptoms lasting >5 min (includes postictal state of decreased level of consciousness, confusion, headache,
or paralysis)
Migraine: syncope associated with antecedent headaches with or without aura
OTHER VASCULAR
Carotid sinus: syncope with head rotation or pressure on the carotid sinus (as in tumors, shaving, tight collars)
Orthostatic hypotension: syncope immediately on standing, especially after prolonged bed rest
DRUG INDUCED
Patient is taking a medication that may lead to long QT syndrome, orthostasis, or bradycardia
PSYCHIATRIC ILLNESS
Frequent syncope, somatic complaints, no heart disease
From Cohen G. Syncope and dizziness. In: Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 6.4.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

596 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 84.7  Red Flags in Evaluation of Patients with
Syncope

Table 84.8  Treatment of Neurocardiogenic
Syncope/Vasovagal Syncope (V-­VS)

Syncope with activity or exercise or supine
Syncope not associated with prolonged standing
Syncope precipitated by loud noise or extreme emotion
Absence of presyncope or lightheadedness
Family history of syncope, drowning, sudden death, familial
ventricular arrhythmia syndromes,* cardiomyopathy
Syncope requiring CPR
Injury with syncope
Anemia
Other cardiac symptoms
Chest pain
Dyspnea
Palpitations
History of cardiac surgery
History of Kawasaki disease
Implanted pacemaker
Abnormal physical examination
Murmur
Gallop rhythm
Loud and single second heart sound
Systolic click
Increased apical impulse (tachycardia)
Irregular rhythm
Hypotension or hypertension
Digital clubbing
Cyanosis

Patient education on the diagnosis and prognosis of V-­VS is
recommended.
In all patents with the common faint or V-­VS, an explanation of
the diagnosis, education targeting awareness of and possible
avoidance of triggers (prolonged standing, warm environments,
coping with dental and medical settings), and reassurance about
the benign nature of the condition should be provided.

*Long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, catecholamine polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

heart sound, with an ejection click or murmur of pulmonary insufficiency. Patients with repaired congenital heart disease will have
obvious scars on their chest and abdomen from prior cardiac surgery or device implantation.
All patients presenting with syncope should have an electrocardiogram, looking primarily for QT interval prolongation, preexcitation,
ventricular hypertrophy, T-­wave abnormalities, and conduction abnormalities. Additional tests that may be needed include echocardiography, exercise testing, cardiac MRI, or 24-­hour Holter monitoring. In
patients for whom there is a strong suspicion of a paroxysmal arrhythmia, an insertable cardiac monitor (loop recorder) may offer the most
effective means of diagnosis. Additional tests may be useful to look for
anemia, hypoglycemia, drugs of abuse, and other etiologies noted in
Table 84.1 as determined by the history and physical examination.

TREATMENT

Therapy for vasovagal syncope includes avoiding triggering events
(if possible), fluid and salt supplementation, and if needed, specific
therapies targeting the orthostatic hypotension (i.e., midodrine) (Table
84.8). Immediately after the event, the patient should remain supine
until symptoms abate to avoid recurrence.
Treatment for cardiac causes of syncope will be determined by
the diagnosis. If supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is found, then a
catheter ablation may be indicated. If bradycardia from sinus node dysfunction or AV block is the cause of the syncope, a pacemaker may be
warranted. Patients with syncope from medically refractory malignant
arrhythmias, as may be seen in HCM, LQTS, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, or CPVT, require an implantable cardioverter-­defibrillator.
Patients with structural heart disease (valvular disease or coronary
artery anomalies) should be referred for surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Physical counterpressure maneuvers can be useful in patients with
V-­VS who have a sufficiently long prodromal period.
Patients with a syncope prodrome should be instructed to assume
a supine position to prevent a faint and minimize possible
injury. In patients with a sufficiently long prodrome, physical
counter-­maneuvers (leg crossing, limb and/or abdominal
contraction, squatting, isometric handgrip, arm tensing) are a core
management strategy.
Midodrine is reasonable in patients with recurrent V-­VS with no
history of hypertension, heart failure, or urinary retention.
Midodrine is a prodrug that is metabolized to desglymidodrine,
which is a peripherally active α-­agonist used to ameliorate the
reduction in peripheral sympathetic neural outflow responsible for
venous pooling and vasodepression in V-­VS.
The usefulness of orthostatic training is uncertain in patients with
frequent V-­VS.
There are 2 main methods of orthostatic training. Patients undergo
repetitive tilt-­table tests in a monitored setting until a negative
tilt-­table test occurs and then are encouraged to stand quietly
against a wall for 30-­60 min daily, or patients simply stand quietly
against a wall at home for a prolonged period daily.
Fludrocortisone might be reasonable for patients with recurrent
V-­VS and inadequate response to salt and fluid intake, unless
contraindicated.
Fludrocortisone has mineralocorticoid activity resulting in sodium and
water retention and potassium excretion, which results in increased
blood volume. Serum potassium level should be monitored because
of potential drug-­induced hypokalemia. POST II (Prevention of
Syncope Trial II) reported a marginally insignificant 31% risk of
reduction in adults with moderately frequent V-­VS, which was
significant in patients after a 2-­wk dose stabilization period.
Encouraging increases in salt and fluid intake may be reasonable in
selected patients with V-­VS, unless contraindicated.
Evidence for the effectiveness of salt and fluid intake for patients
with V-­VS is limited. Nonetheless, in patients with recurrent V-­VS
and no clear contraindication, such as a history of hypertension,
renal disease, heart failure, or cardiac dysfunction, it may be
reasonable to encourage ingestion of 2-­3 L of fluid per day and a
total of 6-­9 g (100-­150 mmol) of salt per day, or about 1-­2 heaping
teaspoonfuls. The long-­term balance of risks and benefits of a
strategy of increasing salt and water intake is unknown.
In selected patients with V-­VS, it may be reasonable to reduce or
withdraw medications that cause hypotension when appropriate.
A careful examination of the patient’s history for medications that
may lower blood pressure (hypotensive agents) should be performed.
Care should be taken to withdraw or reduce medications only
when safe to do so and in conjunction with the prescribing
healthcare provider.
In patients with recurrent V-­VS, a selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor might be considered.
Serotonin has central neurophysiologic effects on blood pressure
and heart rate and acutely induces syncope during tilt-­table
testing.
Modified from Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline
for the evaluation and management of patients with syncope: A report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society [published correction appears in Circulation.
2017 Oct 17;136(16):e271-­e272]. Circulation. 2017;136(5):e60-­e122.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84 u Syncope

84.1 Postural Tachycardia Syndrome
Gisela G. Chelimsky and Thomas Chelimsky
Several complex and interrelated mechanisms allow humans to
stand despite the pull of gravity on the cerebral circulation. In the
supine posture, most blood sits in the thoracic cavity, with 25–30%
of total volume in the splanchnic vasculature. When an adult stands
up, about 500 mL of blood shifts to the lower extremities and to the
splanchnic vasculature. The decrease in hydrostatic pressure in the
carotid sinuses produces vasoconstriction in the peripheral vessels
mediated by sympathetic outflow and in the splanchnic vasculature.
This action is mediated by norepinephrine, adenosine triphosphate
(ATP), and neuropeptide Y. The muscles in the legs and gluteal area
work as a pump when the individual is upright and during exercise to
help return the blood to the heart.
Understanding postural tachycardia syndrome, or postural
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), requires an understanding of other orthostatic conditions. Many adolescents have lightheadedness or tunnel vision in the first few seconds of assuming
the upright posture. This phenomenon, termed initial orthostatic
hypotension (IOH), can lead to syncope, but usually is very short,
perhaps 30-­60 seconds, and occurs primarily with active standing.
Blood pressure (BP) may drop 30% of baseline at 10-­20 seconds
of standing and may be associated with tachycardia. BP returns to
baseline in 30-­60 seconds, whereas heart rate (HR) typically returns
to a new, higher value above the baseline when supine. Because
of its transient rapidity, IOH escapes detection with standard BP
machines and requires beat-­to-­beat monitoring of BP and HR. The
clinical diagnosis requires a careful history. The symptoms usually happen after prolonged recumbence and when the individual
stands. The person complains of lightheadedness and “blacking
out” or tunnel vision 5-­10 seconds after standing.
In contrast to IOH, orthostatic hypotension (OH) is defined as a
sustained decrease in the systolic BP of >20 mm Hg or diastolic BP
>10 mm Hg in the first 3 minutes of upright tilt. OH rarely occurs
in children. The patient often has no orthostatic symptoms while
upright despite very low pressures (Fig. 84.1). This distinguishes
OH from POTS, which requires symptoms while upright. A third
orthostatic disorder, reflex syncope (i.e., vasovagal or neurally
mediated), is defined as relatively sudden change in autonomic

175

nervous system activity that leads to a sudden decrease in BP, HR,
and cerebral perfusion (Fig. 84.2).
In children, POTS is defined as a syndrome characterized by HR
increase of >40 beats/min during the first 10 minutes of upright tilt
test without associated hypotension, (>30 beats/min if >19 years old)
while replicating orthostatic symptoms that occur when upright (Fig.
84.3). Improvement of symptoms in the supine position is expected.
The diagnosis of POTS also requires daily orthostatic symptoms. In
patients with POTS, the larger decline in cardiac stroke volume appears
to be the primary trigger for the tachycardia, which may result from
various pathophysiologic mechanisms, such as the following:

130

Blood pressure (mm Hg)

100
80
60
40
0.5 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 20.022.024.026.0 29.0
120

Heart rate (bpm)

100
80
60
0.5 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 20.022.024.026.0 29.0
Tilt angle (deg)
90
70 degree upright tilt
60
30

Supine
Supine
5
0.5 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 20.022.024.026.0 29.0

Fig. 84.2 Example of neurally mediated syncope.

140

Blood pressure (mm Hg)

597

Blood pressure (mm Hg)

120

150

100

125

80

100

60

75
45
0.5
5.0
10.0
Heart rate (bpm)
160

15.0

20.0

25.0

30.0

35.0

40.0

40
0.5 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 35.0 40.0 45.0 50.0 55.0 60.0
145

140

120

120

100

100

80

Heart rate (bpm)

80
60
0.5
5.0
10.0
Tilt angle (deg)
90
60
30
5
0.5

15.0

20.0

25.0

10.0

35.0

40.0

70 degree upright tilt

Supine
5.0

30.0

15.0

90

25.0

30.0

35.0

Fig. 84.1 Example of orthostatic hypotension.

Tilt angle (deg)
70 degree upright tilt

60
30

Supine
20.0

50
0.5 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 35.0 40.0 45.0 50.0 55.0 60.0

40.0

Supine
Supine
5
0.5 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 35.0 40.0 45.0 50.0 55.0 60.0

Fig. 84.3 Example of postural tachycardia syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

598 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
• Neuropathic POTS, an autonomic neuropathy impairing sympathetic venoconstriction in the lower extremities or splanchnic circulation, decreasing stroke volume and consequently resulting in
tachycardia.
• Hypovolemic POTS, a common contributor, often related to decreased aldosterone with reduced renin activity, resulting in tachycardia caused by decreased blood volume.
• Hyperadrenergic POTS, with norepinephrine levels rising threefold
to fourfold in the standing position (norepinephrine normally doubles on standing), which may occur in norepinephrine transporter
deficiency or strong stimulation of central baroreflex responses.
• Autoimmune POTS, typically assumed based on a postviral chronology, but seldom proven; such a form may or may not exist. The antiganglionic antibody is almost never elevated in these patients. Nonetheless, a group of patients report that intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) is helpful to them. Whether they benefit from the increase in
intravascular volume or an actual immune effect is unknown.
Some patients have orthostatic symptoms while upright but do not
meet criteria for syncope, OH, or POTS. This group has orthostatic
intolerance not otherwise specified (OI-­NOS).

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

The symptoms that intrinsically relate to POTS are those that are replicated during upright tilt testing or standing. Many other symptoms
also occur in patients with POTS, fitting the description of comorbid
conditions, but not reproduced while upright. A patient may have nausea while upright associated with lightheadedness and have a diagnosis
of POTS. Another patient may complain of nausea on awakening and
have POTS, but have no nausea while upright. In the former patient
the nausea is a symptom of POTS itself, whereas in the latter nausea
is an associated condition. The symptoms that often directly relate to
POTS include lightheadedness, orthostatic nausea, orthostatic headaches, fatigue, tunnel vision, and brain fog. About 20–30% of pediatric
patients with POTS will also have syncope (Fig. 84.4). Other comorbid conditions frequently occur in these patients but are not caused
by POTS (i.e., not an orthostatic phenomenon). These comorbidities
include (1) sleep issues, usually delayed onset of sleep, frequent awakening, and not feeling refreshed in the morning; (2) joint hypermobility and aches in different parts of the body; (3) abdominal pain; (4)
headaches and migraines; (5) nausea and vomiting; (6) depression and

150

Blood pressure (mm Hg)

120
100
80
60
45
0.5
145

5.0

10.0

15.0

20.0

25.0

30.0

35.0 37.0

15.0

20.0

25.0

30.0

35.0 37.0

Heart rate (bpm)

120
100
80
60
0.5
90

5.0

10.0

Tilt angle (deg)
70 degree upright tilt

60
30
5
0.5

Supine
5.0

10.0

15.0

Supine
20.0

25.0

30.0

35.0 37.0

Fig. 84.4 Example of postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) followed
by a neurally mediated syncope.

anxiety; and (7) Raynaud-­like symptoms and other, less frequent problems (e.g., urinary symptoms).
The association between upper gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms
and POTS is well described. Nausea, early satiety, and bloating are
described in association with POTS. Such GI symptoms relate mechanistically to POTS only when they occur in the upright position.
Many patients with POTS have comorbid GI symptoms that are not
a consequence of the orthostatic challenge. Therefore only the GI
symptoms replicated during tilt testing will improve with treatment
aimed at orthostasis. Patients with POTS have changes in the electrical activity of the stomach while upright, which may explain the
upright GI symptoms; they usually do not have delayed gastric emptying. The emptying is either normal or accelerated, implying that the
cause of nausea is not gastroparesis.
Patients with hypermobility Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (h-­EDS)
may have POTS. Typically, such individuals have more migraines and
syncope. Joint hypermobility itself in adults is associated with more
autonomic complaints such as syncope, presyncope, palpitations,
chest discomfort, fatigue, and heat intolerance. Those with hypermobility have more frequent positive tilt tests than healthy controls.
Interestingly, in children, joint hypermobility does not influence the
number of comorbidities or autonomic disorders. Similarly, those
with pediatric chronic overlapping pain conditions with or without
POTS have the same comorbidities, suggesting that neither POTS
nor hypermobility are drivers of the comorbidities or the chronic
overlapping pain condition, but rather another associated disorder
(see Chapter 212).

DIAGNOSIS

Orthostatic intolerance is clinically diagnosed by detailed history
attending specifically to symptoms as they relate to body position.
Dizziness that begins in the supine position cannot be a manifestation of orthostatic intolerance. Furthermore, those symptoms that
do develop while upright should improve or resolve when supine.
Importantly, the history should include a detailed description of
current physical exercise habits, with frequency, type, and endurance. One should also assess sleep, diet (mainly evaluating intake of
salt), fluid intake, and other comorbidities. The physical examination is also important and should include a cardiac and neurologic
evaluation with supine and standing BP and HR. Examination of the
extremities may provide information about venous pooling, such as
mild edema or reddish-­purple discoloration when sitting or standing. Cold, clammy hands can signify excess sympathetic activity.
To diagnose POTS the patient needs to undergo a head-­up tilt test
for at least 10 minutes. It is important to have the patient supine for
at least 20 minutes before the tilt test. POTS can also be assessed
by a standing test, measuring BP and HR at 1, 3, 5, and 10 minutes
standing, but to have a reliable test similar to the tilt test, the patient
needs to be supine for 1 hour before standing. The HR increase with
active standing is typically less than with tilt, because the lower-­
extremity muscle pump is less active in tilt. The diagnosis of POTS
requires replication of the day-­to-­day symptoms while upright, not
just the increased HR while upright. A small but significant proportion of healthy teenagers in school will have an increased HR
that may be diagnosed as POTS but will not have associated
symptoms.
Other tests may include electrocardiogram, echocardiogram,
and Holter monitor when there is concern of a primary cardiac
cause of tachycardia or if there is a need to determine if symptoms
correlate with tachycardia (see Chapter 84). Supine and standing
plasma catecholamines help confirm the diagnosis of POTS, as one
expects to see either the normal doubling of norepinephrine levels
from supine to standing or a tripling with hyperadrenergic POTS.
Beyond tilt table testing, autonomic testing will also include cardiac response to deep breathing (checking cardiac parasympathetic
function), Valsalva maneuver (checking cardiac sympathetic and
parasympathetic functions and vasomotor sympathetic function),
and quantitative axon reflex sudomotor test (to assess for an autonomic neuropathy and vasomotor sympathetic dysfunction).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84 u Syncope

599

Table 84.9  First-­Line Medications in Treatment of Postural Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS)
DRUG

MECHANISM OF ACTION

SIDE EFFECTS

TREATMENT GUIDELINES

Fludrocortisone

Low dose: sensitizes α-­receptors
Higher doses: mineralocorticoid effect

Peripheral edema, headache, irritability,
hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, acne

Monitor basic metabolic panel
and magnesium

Midodrine

α1-­Agonist; produces vasoconstriction

Scalp tingling, urinary retention,
goosebumps, headache, supine
hypertension

Monitor supine blood pressure
30-­60 min after dose

Metoprolol succinate/
tartrate

β Blocker

Worsening of asthma, dizziness, fatigue

Use with caution in asthma
If fatigue is severe, use at bedtime

Propranolol

Nonselective β blocker

Bradycardia, gastrointestinal symptoms,
lightheadedness, sleepiness,
hypotension, syncope

Use with caution in diabetes and
asthma

Pyridostigmine

Peripheral acetylcholinesterase
inhibitor that increases synaptic
acetylcholine in autonomic ganglia
and at peripheral muscarinic
receptors

Symptoms of excessive cholinergic activity
(diarrhea, urinary incontinence, salivation)

Very useful if patient has POTS
and constipation
Use with caution in asthma
Contraindicated in urinary or
bowel obstruction

Additional studies depend on the clinical symptoms and include
morning cortisol (to rule out Addison disease) and thyroid studies if the patient has unusually severe fatigue or is not responsive
to usual treatment. Serum tryptase and urine methylhistamine are
tested if mast cell activation disorder is suspected, based on a history of flushing during the spells. If an autoimmune cause for the
POTS is a concern, antibodies such as voltage-­gated potassium
channel and acetylcholine receptor antibodies could be checked,
but this etiology for POTS is being questioned. Patients rarely (<5 in
1,000) benefit from IVIG; if this mechanism is really causing POTS,
such patients should experience peak benefit at about 10 days after
the infusion rather than immediately (which may simply reflect
increasing intravascular volume). If the patient has hypertension,
plasma and urine metanephrines should be measured to test for a
pheochromocytoma. In addition, if symptoms are associated with
perimenstrual timing, an assessment of sex hormone axis is helpful,
with occult polycystic ovarian syndrome or low testosterone levels
sometimes present.

MANAGEMENT

The core of POTS management is nonpharmacologic. Medications
will be of little benefit without these measures being undertaken first.
The best measure for treating POTS is a regular aerobic exercise program. Given the combination of orthostatic symptoms and severe
deconditioning found in most patients, the exercise program must be
introduced in a slow, progressive manner. Patients with POTS typically
have moderate to severe exercise intolerance, and compared with sedentary healthy controls, have decreased peak oxygen uptake. After 3
months of exercise, POTS patients have an increase in cardiac mass
and size, blood volume, and peak oxygen uptake, as reflected in a better
exercise performance. The tachycardia in POTS is caused by a decrease
in stroke volume and not an intrinsic circulatory problem. An exercise
program should start with water exercises combined with recumbent
aerobic activities (recumbent bike or rowing machine), slowly increasing the exercise time to 45 minutes at least 5 times per week. When

tolerance increases, patients can advance to more upright aerobic
activities. These aerobic activities need to be combined with light core-­
and limb-­strengthening exercises.
Exercise usually cannot be performed without simultaneous
expansion of the intravascular volume. To this end, encourage
teenagers to drink >80 oz of fluids daily and to add 2 g of salt to
their usual diet in both the morning and the early afternoon. Salt
supplementation increases plasma and blood volume, improves
orthostatic tolerance, and decreases baroreflex sensitivity. Salt also
reduces nitric oxide production, resulting in less vasodilation. Trial
and error of different salt formulations can help to identify the best
method for each individual patient. Salt tablets are simple and inexpensive but may make some people nauseous. An alternative is simply to obtain empty capsules on the internet and fill them with table
salt. A “0” size capsule contains about 400 mg of salt.
The content of sodium in the body determines the extracellular fluid volume that in turn dictates orthostatic tolerance. Patients
with POTS who have lower urinary sodium excretion have more
symptoms than those with higher urinary sodium (>123 mmol/24
hours), and they often respond less well to salt supplementation.
Those with severe orthostatic symptoms either in the morning or
before sports should drink 16 oz of plain water, which is known to
increase sympathetic response mainly in individuals with baroreflex dysregulation. The effect starts soon after drinking the water
and lasts for about 1 hour. Compression garments may also be useful. These can be thigh or waist high; the waist-­high compression
garments may not be tolerated.
Medications can be added when the nonpharmacologic interventions are not sufficient. Different centers use different strategies,
and there is no single correct evidence-­based approach. Table 84.9
addresses first-­line medications that primary care physicians could use;
only the most common side effects are included.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

600 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Chapter 85

Shock
Scott L. Weiss, Pierre Tissières, and
Mark J. Peters
Shock is an acute, life-­threatening process of cardiovascular insufficiency characterized by inadequate delivery of oxygen and nutrients
(e.g., glucose) by the circulatory system to meet the metabolic demands
of vital organs that results in cellular dysfunction and injury. The initial
imbalance between oxygen/nutrient delivery through the circulation
and oxygen/nutrient consumption within organ systems can be compensated for by increasing tissue oxygen extraction. However, with further limitations in delivery of oxygen and nutrients as the shock state
progresses, energy production gradually shifts from aerobic metabolism to less efficient anaerobic metabolic pathways, and a cellular bioenergetic crisis can ensue. If this process is not corrected, numerous
adverse vascular, inflammatory, metabolic, cellular, and endocrine
responses contribute to a state of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS), cardiovascular collapse, and death.
It is important to recognize that the shock state can be present before
the onset of hypotension, especially in children, and that inadequate
cellular metabolism of oxygen and nutrients (not just impaired delivery) contributes to the clinical manifestations and outcomes observed
in patients with shock. Therefore it is necessary to recognize early symptoms and signs of impaired circulation, including tachycardia, altered
mental status (e.g., irritability, confusion, lethargy), tachypnea (often
secondary to acidemia), abnormal capillary refill time, diminished
peripheral pulses, and oliguria, in combination with metabolic markers such as acidemia, hyperlactatemia, and low central venous oxygen
saturation. Hypotension, when present, is also important to recognize,
but children—especially infants and preschool-­age children—with
compensated shock may be able to maintain a normal blood pressure
(BP) for age until the later phases of shock. When hypotension is present, the child has reached a state of uncompensated shock and is at risk
of irreversible organ damage and death without immediate treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Shock occurs in approximately 2% of all hospitalized infants, children,
and adults in developed countries, and the mortality rate varies substantially depending on the etiology and clinical circumstances. Of
patients who do not survive, many do not die in the initial acute phase
of shock, but rather because of associated complications and MODS.
MODS is defined as dysfunction in two or more organ systems; the
presence of MODS in patients with shock substantially increases the
probability of death. In 2017, there were an estimated 20.3 million cases
of sepsis, with 2.9 million deaths, worldwide among children younger
than 5 years and 4.9 million cases of sepsis, with 454,000 deaths, among
older children and adolescents. In the United States, over 70,000 children are hospitalized with sepsis each year at an annual healthcare cost
of $7.31 billion. In pediatrics, educational efforts and the use of standardized management guidelines that emphasize early recognition and
intervention, along with the rapid transfer of critically ill patients to
a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), have decreased mortality from
shock.

TYPES OF SHOCK

Shock classification systems generally define five major types of shock:
hypovolemic, cardiogenic, obstructive, distributive, and dissociative
(Table 85.1 and Fig. 85.1). Hypovolemic shock, the most common cause
of shock in children worldwide, is most frequently caused by acute fluid
losses resulting from diarrhea, vomiting, or hemorrhage. A special cause
of hypovolemic shock is hemorrhagic shock, which may be caused by
traumatic injury or gastrointestinal (GI), peritoneal, vaginal, soft tissue, or

other sources of severe bleeding. Cardiogenic shock is seen in patients
with congenital heart disease (before or after surgery, including heart
transplantation) or those with congenital or acquired cardiomyopathies,
including acute myocarditis and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children (MIS-­C). Obstructive shock stems from any lesion that creates
a mechanical impediment to ventricular blood outflow, which includes
pericardial tamponade, tension pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism,
and ductal-­dependent left-­sided heart lesions (hypertrophic left heart syndrome, aortic coarctation, interrupted aortic arch, and critical aortic valve
stenosis). Distributive shock is caused by inappropriate vasodilation,
pooling of blood in the peripheral vasculature, leakage of blood plasma
into the interstitium through a compromised endothelial barrier, and
microvascular shunting. Common causes of distributive shock in children
include sepsis, anaphylaxis, and accidental or intentional drug overdose
(e.g., calcium channel blockers, atypical antipsychotics). Neurogenic shock
is a type of distributive shock caused by a sudden disruption of sympathetic nerve stimulation to the vascular smooth muscle leading to a profound decrease in vasomotor tone, typically with severe traumatic brain
or cervical spine injury. Unlike other types of shock, the unopposed vagal
activity classically results in bradycardia, or at least absence of the usual
tachycardic response to hypotension. Dissociative shock is a special category of shock in which cellular oxygen delivery or utilization is severely
impaired despite sustained or supranormal tissue perfusion and is typically
caused by exposure to a toxic metabolite or drug, such as severe anemia,
methemoglobinemia, carbon monoxide poisoning, or thiamine deficiency
(beriberi).
Septic shock is life-threatening cardiovascular dysfunction in patients
with suspected or confirmed infection and confers a high risk for mortality in children compared to those with uncomplicated infections or
sepsis without shock. Sepsis in children is operationalized as a Phoenix
Sepsis Score of at least 2 points from a composite four-organ system model
that includes criteria for respiratory, neurologic, coagulation, and cardiovascular dysfunction, with septic shock requiring at least 1 point in the
cardiovascular subscore (Table 85.2). Many children with septic shock also
have MODS, including respiratory, kidney, hematologic (disseminated
intravascular coagulation [DIC]), hepatobiliary, and neurologic dysfunction. Septic shock classically presents as a type of distributive shock with
high cardiac output and low systemic vascular resistance (SVR). However,
most children with sepsis also have features of hypovolemic shock from
poor oral intake, GI fluid losses, and vascular leak as well as cardiogenic
shock due to decreased myocardial contractility. In younger children,
septic shock often presents with low cardiac output and high SVR in which
features of cardiogenic and hypovolemic shock predominate.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

An initial insult triggers shock, leading to a decrease in effective cardiac
output with inadequate oxygen delivery to organs and tissues. Compensatory mechanisms attempt to maintain BP by increasing cardiac output
and SVR. The body also attempts to optimize oxygen delivery to the tissues by increasing oxygen extraction and redistributing blood flow to the
brain, heart, and kidneys at the expense of the skin, skeletal muscles, and
GI tract. These responses lead to an initial state of compensated shock in
which BP is often maintained near normal levels for age. If resuscitative
treatment is not initiated or is inadequate during this period, uncompensated shock develops, with hypotension and tissue damage that may
lead to irreversible organ damage, MODS, and, ultimately, death.
In the early phases of shock, multiple compensatory physiologic
mechanisms act to maintain BP and preserve tissue perfusion and
oxygen delivery. Cardiovascular effects include increases in heart rate
(HR), stroke volume, and vascular smooth muscle tone, which are regulated through sympathetic nervous system activation and neurohormonal responses. Respiratory compensation involves greater carbon
dioxide (CO2) elimination in response to the metabolic acidosis and
increased CO2 production from poor tissue perfusion. Renal excretion of hydrogen ions (H+) and retention of bicarbonate (HCO3−) also
increase in an effort to maintain normal body pH (see Chapter 73.7).
Maintenance of intravascular volume is facilitated via renal sodium
retention mediated by activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone
and atrial natriuretic factor axes, cortisol and catecholamine synthesis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85 u Shock
Table 85.1
TYPES OF
SHOCK

601

Types of Shock
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

APPEARANCE

EXAMPLES

TREATMENTS

Hypovolemic* Decreased cardiac output
due to volume depletion
→ decreased preload

Tachycardia and vasoconstriction
maintain adequate circulation
up to 30% of circulating volume
Narrowed pulse pressure, delayed
capillary refill, orthostatic
changes, late hypotension,
AMS, and decreased UOP

Nonhemorrhagic (vomiting
and diarrhea)
Hemorrhagic (trauma)

IV fluid bolus
Vasopressors
Blood replacement

Cardiogenic

Decreased cardiac output
due to myocardial
dysfunction, increased
afterload, and/or lack of
ventricular filling

Tachycardia, vasoconstriction,
cool extremities, narrow pulse
pressure, delayed capillary refill,
respiratory distress, rales or
gallop rhythm, enlarged liver,
JVD, cardiomegaly on chest
radiograph
Significant gradient between
upper and lower extremity
blood pressures

Cardiomyopathies, infectious
myocarditis, and systemic
inflammatory process,
autoimmune disease,
impaired coronary
perfusion, cardiopulmonary
bypass, acidosis, HIE, and
dysrhythmias
Infants: ductal-­dependent
lesions, tachydysrhythmias

Judicious IV fluid resuscitation,
ionotropic agents to
improve contractility,
vasodilators to reduce
afterload, and management
of tachyarrhythmias
PGE for infants <2 mo

Distributive

Decreased cardiac output
and systemic vascular
resistance due to peripheral
vasodilation → decreased
afterload and preload,
redistribution of blood flow
away from vital organs, and
loss of sympathetic outflow

Tachycardic, vasodilated, flushed,
warm extremities, wide pulse
pressure, bounding pulses, flash
capillary refill
Anaphylaxis: rash; facial swelling;
lip, tongue, or airway swelling;
bronchospasm; hypotension
Spinal shock: unable to raise HR,
hypotension
Neurogenic: Control ↑ ICP

Septic shock
Toxic ingestions
Anaphylaxis

Spinal cord injuries

IV fluids, vasopressors,
antibiotics
Specific antidotes
Remove triggers, IV fluids, IM
epinephrine, antihistamines,
vasopressors
IV fluids, vasoconstrictors

Obstructive

Decreased cardiac output
due to increased afterload
of the right ventricle from
an obstructive process

Tachycardia, delayed capillary
refill, cool extremities, narrow
pulse pressure, distended neck
veins, distant heart tones,
asymmetric breath sounds

Tension pneumothorax
Pulmonary embolism
Cardiac tamponade

Anticoagulants
Drain pericardial effusion
Evacuate pneumothorax

Dissociative

High cardiac output failure
due to inadequate
oxygen-­releasing capacity

Tachycardia ± delayed capillary
refill, cool extremities,
weakened pulse, pallor or
flushed cheeks

Anemia
Carbon monoxide
Methemoglobinemia
Cyanide

Gradual fluid replacement and
blood replacement 5 mL/dL
Oxygen, hyperbaric chamber
Methylene blue
Hydroxocobalamin and
cyanide antidote kit (sodium
thiosulfate, sodium nitrate,
amyl nitrite) plus oxygen

*Most common.
AMS, Altered mental status; HIE, hypoxic ischemic encephalopathies; HR, heart rate; IM, intramuscular; ICP, intracranial pressure; IV, intravenous; JVD, jugular venous distention; PGE,
prostaglandin; UOP, urine output.
Modified from Baumer-­Mouradian SH, Drendel AL. Shock. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier;2023: Table 10.4.

and release, and antidiuretic hormone secretion. Despite these compensatory mechanisms, the underlying shock and host response lead
to vascular endothelial cell injury and loss of endothelial adhesion proteins that allow significant leakage of intravascular fluid into the interstitial extracellular space.
Another important aspect of the initial pathophysiology of shock is
the impact on cardiac output. All forms of shock affect cardiac output
through several mechanisms, with changes in HR, preload, afterload,
and myocardial contractility occurring separately or in combination
(see Fig. 85.1). Hypovolemic shock is characterized primarily by fluid
loss and decreased preload. Tachycardia and an increase in SVR are the
initial compensatory responses that seek to maintain cardiac output,
systemic BP, and tissue perfusion. Without adequate volume replacement, hypotension inevitably develops, followed by tissue ischemia and
further clinical deterioration. When there is preexisting low plasma
oncotic pressure (caused by nephrotic syndrome, malnutrition, hepatic
dysfunction, acute severe burns, etc.), further volume loss and exacerbation of shock may result from worsening vascular leak.
In contrast, the underlying pathophysiologic mechanism leading to
distributive shock is a state of abnormal vasodilation and decreased

SVR. In sepsis, loss of normal regulation of vasomotor tone is due to
a combination of factors, including excessive nitric oxide (NO) produced from an increase in inducible NO synthase, altered sympathetic
and parasympathetic tone, and diminished circulating levels and/or
reduced responsiveness to vasopressin, endogenous catecholamines,
and cortisol. In anaphylaxis, vasodilation is caused by an acute release
of histamine and other mediators from mast cells. Irrespective of the
inciting event, the sudden fall in SVR is accompanied initially by a maldistribution of blood flow away from vital organs and a compensatory
increase in cardiac output caused by an increase in HR and, potentially, left ventricular stroke volume. This process leads to significant
decreases in both preload and afterload. Therapies for distributive
shock must address both these problems simultaneously.
Cardiogenic shock may be seen in patients with myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, and congenital heart disease (generally
after cardiac surgery) (see Chapter 483). In these patients, myocardial
contractility is directly impaired, leading to systolic and/or diastolic
dysfunction. The later phases of all forms of shock frequently have a
negative impact on the myocardium, leading to development of a cardiogenic component to the initial shock state.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Type
Etiology

Hypovolemic

Cardiogenic

Obstructive

Major trauma
Gastrointestinal bleed
Dehydration

Myocardial infarction
Myocarditis
Arrhythmia

Pulmonary embolus
Cardiac tamponade
Tension pneumothorax
Status asthmaticus

Distributive
Sepsis
Spinal cord injury
Anaphylaxis
Ingestion
Neurogenic

Dissociative
Anemia, carbon
monoxide or cyanide
poisoning,
methemoglobinemia*

Cardiovascular findings
Preload (filling pressures)
Cardiac contractility
Cardiac output
Afterload (peripheral tone)
Hemodynamic support
Relieve obstruction
Volume expansion
Inotropes
Vasopressors

Fig. 85.1 The causes, cardiovascular findings, and hemodynamic support for different types of shock. Under cardiovascular findings, bidirectional arrows indicate variation in findings among

patients with the particular type. Under hemodynamic support, the number of + signs indicates the importance of therapy. A combined + and − indicates that the intervention could help some
patients but must be used with caution. *Treat specific etiology transfusion or specific antidotes. (Modified from Angus DC. Approach to the patient with shock. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:642, Fig. 98-­1.)

602 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Shock

Chapter 85 u Shock

603

Table 85.2   The Phoenix Sepsis Scorea
VARIABLES
RESPIRATORY, 0–3 POINTS

0 POINTS

1 POINT

2 POINTS

3 POINTS

PaO2:FIO2 ≥400 or
SpO2:FIO2 ≥292b

PaO2:FIO2 <400 on any
respiratory support or
SpO2:FIO2 <292 on any
respiratory supportb,c

PaO2:FIO2 100–200 and
IMV or SpO2:FIO2
148–220 and IMVb

PaO2:FIO2<100 and IMV
or SpO2:FIO2 <148 and
IMVb

1 point each (up to 3)

2 points each (up to 6)

No vasoactive
medicationsd

1 Vasoactive medicationd

≥2 Vasoactive medicationsd

Lactate <5 mmol/Le

Lactate 5–10.9 mmol/Le

Lactate ≥11 mmol/Le

CARDIOVASCULAR, 0–6 POINTS

AGE BASEDf
Mean Arterial Pressure, mm Hgg
<1 mo

>30

17–30

<17

1 to 11 mo

>38

25–38

<25

1 to <2 yr

>43

31–43

<31

2 to <5 yr

>44

32–44

<32

5 to <12 yr

>48

36–48

<36

12 to 17 yr

>51

38–51

<38

COAGULATION, 0–2 POINTSH
1 point each (maximum
2 points)
Platelets ≥100 × 103/μL

Platelets <100 × 103/μL

International normalized
ratio ≤1.3

International normalized
ratio >1.3

D-dimer ≤2 mg/L FEU

D-dimer >2 mg/L FEU

Fibrinogen ≥100 mg/dL

Fibrinogen <100 mg/dL

Glasgow Coma Scale score
>10; pupils reactivej

Glasgow Coma Scale score
≤10j

NEUROLOGIC, 0–2 POINTSi
Fixed pupils bilaterally

PHOENIX SEPSIS CRITERIA
Sepsis
Suspected infection and
Phoenix Sepsis Score ≥2
points
Septic shock

Sepsis with ≥1
cardiovascular point(s)

aThe score may be calculated in the absence of some variables (eg, even if lactate level is not measured and vasoactive medications are not used, a cardiovascular score can

still be ascertained using blood pressure). It is expected that laboratory tests and other measurements will be obtained at the discretion of the medical team based on clinical
judgment. Unmeasured variables contribute no points to the score. Ages are not adjusted for prematurity, and the criteria do not apply to birth hospitalizations, neonates whose
postconceptional age is younger than 37 weeks, or those 18 years of age or older.
bSpO :FIO ratio is only calculated if SpO is 97% or less.
2
2
2
cThe respiratory dysfunction of 1 point can be assessed in any patient receiving oxygen, high-flow, noninvasive positive pressure, or IMV respiratory support, and includes a PaO :FIO
2
2
ratio of less than 200 and a SpO2:FIO2 ratio of less than 220 in children who are not receiving IMV. For children receiving IMV with a PaO2:FIO2 less than 200 and SpO2:FIO2 less than
220, see criteria for 2 and 3 points.
dVasoactive medications include any dose of epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, dobutamine, milrinone, and/or vasopressin (for shock).
eLactate reference range is 0.5 to 2.2 mmol/L. Lactate can be arterial or venous.
fAge is not adjusted for prematurity, and the criteria do not apply to birth hospitalizations, children whose postconceptional age is younger than 37 weeks, or those 18 years or older.
gUse measured MAP preferentially (invasive arterial if available or noninvasive oscillometric), and if measured MAP is not available, a calculated MAP (1/3 × systolic + 2/3 × diastolic)
may be used as an alternative.
hCoagulation variable reference ranges: platelets, 150 to 450 × 103/μL; D-dimer, <0.5mg/L FEU; fibrinogen, 180 to 410mg/dL. The INR reference range is based on the local reference
prothrombin time.
iThe neurological dysfunction subscore was pragmatically validated in both sedated and nonsedated patients, and those receiving or not receiving IMV support.
jThe Glasgow Coma Scale score measures level of consciousness based on verbal, eye, and motor response (range, 3–15, with a higher score indicating better neurological function).
FEU, fibrinogen equivalent units; IMV, invasive mechanical ventilation; INR, international normalized ratio of prothrombin time; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PaO2:FIO2, arterial partial
pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio; SpO2, oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry (only SpO2 of ≤97%).
SI conversion factor: To convert lactate from mmol/L tomg/dL, divide by 0.111.
From Schlapbach LJ, Watson RS, Sorce LR, et al. International Consensus Criteria for Pediatric Sepsis and Septic Shock. JAMA. Published online January 21, 2024. https://doi.org/10.
1001/jama.2024.0179.

Obstructive shock manifests as an acute increase in SVR typically in response to a sudden decrease in cardiac output that resembles a state of functional hypovolemia. A compensatory increase in
HR and afterload provides temporary support, but compensation
will soon fail without relief of the mechanical obstruction.

Dissociative shock is caused by the inability to deliver oxygen due
to severe anemia or a congenital or acquired hemoglobinopathy, such
as carbon monoxide intoxication. Alternatively, oxygen delivery may
be preserved, but consumption can be impaired by a metabolic disorder or acquired state of mitochondrial dysfunction, such as cyanide

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

604 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 85.3  Differential Diagnosis of Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS)
INFECTION
Bacteremia or meningitis (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influenzae type b, Neisseria meningitidis, group A Streptococcus,
Staphylococcus aureus)
Viral illness (influenza, enteroviruses, hemorrhagic fever group,
herpes simplex virus, respiratory syncytial virus, cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-­Barr virus, COVID-­19)
Encephalitis (arboviruses, enteroviruses, herpes simplex virus)
Rickettsiae (Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Ehrlichia, Q fever)
Syphilis
Vaccine reaction (pertussis, influenza, measles)
Toxin-­mediated reaction (toxic shock, staphylococcal scalded skin
syndrome)
CARDIOPULMONARY
Pneumonia (bacteria, virus, mycobacteria, fungi, allergic reaction)
Pulmonary emboli
Heart failure
Arrhythmia
Pericarditis
Myocarditis
METABOLIC-­ENDOCRINE
Adrenal insufficiency (adrenogenital syndrome, Addison disease,
corticosteroid withdrawal)
Electrolyte disturbances (hyponatremia or hypernatremia,
hypocalcemia or hypercalcemia)
Diabetes insipidus
Diabetes mellitus
Inborn errors of metabolism (organic acidosis, urea cycle, carnitine
deficiency, mitochondrial disorders)
Hypoglycemia

HEMATOLOGIC/IMMUNE
Anemia (sickle cell disease, blood loss, nutritional)
Methemoglobinemia
Splenic sequestration crisis
Leukemia or lymphoma
Hemophagocytic syndromes
Cytokine release syndrome s/p CAR-­T therapy
Immune reconstitution syndrome
Graft-­versus-­host disease
NEUROLOGIC
Intoxication (drugs, carbon monoxide, intentional or unintentional
overdose)
Intracranial hemorrhage
Infant botulism
Trauma (child abuse, accidental)
Guillain-­Barre syndrome
Myasthenia gravis
OTHER
Anaphylaxis (food, drug, insect sting, idiopathic)
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Kawasaki disease
Erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis
MIS-­C
Poisoning, iron, cyanide
Toxic envenomation
Systemic JIA
Macrophage activation syndrome
Idiopathic systemic capillary leak (Clarkson) syndrome

GASTROINTESTINAL
Gastroenteritis with dehydration
Volvulus
Intussusception
Appendicitis
Peritonitis (spontaneous, associated with perforation or peritoneal
dialysis)
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Hepatitis
Hemorrhage
Pancreatitis
CAR-­T, Chimeric antigen receptor T-­cell; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children; S/P, status post.
From Baumer-­Mouradian SH, Drendel AL. Shock. In: Kliegman RM, Bordini BJ, Toth H, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022:
Table 10.6.

toxicity. Notably, varying degrees of dissociative shock may also be
present in other shock types, especially sepsis, in which acquired pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency or mitochondrial dysfunction have
been increasingly recognized.
Septic shock is generally a unique combination of distributive, hypovolemic, and cardiogenic shock, as well as dissociative shock. Hypovolemia
from insufficient fluid intake, GI losses, and/or vascular leak is common.
Cardiogenic shock results from the myocardial-­depressant effects of sepsis, and distributive shock is the result of decreased SVR. The degree to
which a patient exhibits each of these responses varies, but there are frequently alterations in preload, afterload, and myocardial contractility.
In septic shock, it is important to distinguish between the inciting
infection and the host inflammatory response. Normally, host immunity prevents the development of sepsis through activation of the reticular endothelial system along with the cellular and humoral immune
systems. This host immune response produces an inflammatory cascade mediated by hormones, cytokines, and chemokines. If this inflammatory cascade is uncontrolled, derangement of the microcirculatory
system leads to subsequent organ and cellular dysfunction.
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) is an inflammatory cascade that is initiated by the host response to an infectious or noninfectious trigger (Table 85.3). This inflammatory cascade is triggered when
the host defense system does not adequately recognize and/or eliminate
the triggering event. The inflammatory cascade initiated by shock can lead

to hypovolemia, cardiac and vascular failure, acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS), insulin resistance, decreased cytochrome P450 activity
(decreased steroid synthesis), coagulopathy, and unresolved or secondary
infection. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and other inflammatory mediators
increase vascular permeability, causing diffuse vascular leak, decreased
vascular tone, and an imbalance between perfusion and metabolic
demands of the tissues. Early increases in TNF, interleukin (IL)-­1, and
IL-­6 stimulate the release of both proinflammatory and antiinflammatory
mediators, causing fever, vasodilation, and myocardial dysfunction. Simultaneous upregulation of antiinflammatory mediators (such as circulating
levels of IL-­4, IL-­10, and transforming growth factor-­β), downregulation
of hematopoietic growth factors (such as IL-­7), and increased expression
of immune cell surface checkpoint proteins (such as programmed death
[PD]-­1 and its PD ligand [PD-­L1/2]), as well as production of immature
immune cells through emergency myelopoiesis contribute to a state of
immune dysregulation that can impair pathogen clearance and allow for
secondary infections.
The inflammatory cascade is initiated by toxins or superantigens
through macrophage binding or lymphocyte activation. The vascular
endothelium is both a target of tissue injury and a source of mediators that may cause further injury. Biochemical responses include the
production of arachidonic acid metabolites, release of myocardial-­
depressant factors and endogenous opiates, activation of the complement system, and production and release of other mediators, which

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85 u Shock
Table 85.4

605

Signs of Decreased Perfusion
↓ PERFUSION

ORGAN SYSTEM

↓↓ PERFUSION

↓↓↓ PERFUSION

Central nervous system

—

Restless, apathetic, anxious

Agitated/confused, stuporous, coma

Respiratory

—

↑ Ventilation

↑↑ Ventilation

Metabolic

—

Compensated metabolic acidemia

Uncompensated metabolic acidemia

Gastrointestinal

—

↓ Motility

Ileus

Kidney

↓ Urine volume
↑ Urinary specific gravity

Oliguria (<0.5 mL/kg/hr)

Oliguria/anuria

Skin

Delayed capillary refill

Cool extremities

Mottled, cyanotic, cold extremities

Cardiovascular system

↑ Heart rate

↑↑ Heart rate
↓ Peripheral pulses

↑↑ Heart rate
↓ Blood pressure, central pulses only

may be proinflammatory or antiinflammatory. The balance among
these mediator groups for an individual patient contributes to the progression (and resolution) of disease and affects the prognosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Table 85.1 and Figure 85.1 show a classification system for shock. Categorization is important, but there may be significant overlap among
these groups, especially in septic shock. The clinical presentation of
shock depends in part on the underlying etiology, but if unrecognized
and untreated, all forms of shock follow a common progression of
clinical signs and pathophysiologic changes that may ultimately lead
to irreversible organ injury and death. Among the first physiologic
responses is sympathetic adrenergic system activation and its related
signs and symptoms.
Shock may initially manifest as only tachycardia, with or without
tachypnea. Progression leads to decreased urine output, poor peripheral perfusion, respiratory distress or failure, alteration of mental status, and low BP (Table 85.4). A significant misconception is that shock
occurs only with low BP. Hypotension is often a late finding, especially
in infants and young children, and is not a criterion for the diagnosis
of shock because of a complex set of compensatory mechanisms that
attempt to preserve BP and peripheral perfusion. Hypotension reflects
an advanced state of uncompensated shock and is associated with
increased morbidity and mortality.
Hypovolemic shock often manifests initially as tachycardia and
orthostatic hypotension and is associated with dry mucous membranes,
dry axillae, poor skin turgor, and decreased urine output. Depending
on the degree of dehydration, the patient with hypovolemic shock
may present with either normal or slightly cool distal extremities, and
peripheral pulses may be normal, decreased, or absent depending on
disease severity.
The presenting signs of cardiogenic shock are often tachypnea, cool
extremities, delayed capillary filling time, poor peripheral and/or central
pulses, reduced pulse pressure, declining mental status, and decreased
urine output caused by the combination of decreased cardiac output and
compensatory peripheral vasoconstriction (see Chapter 491.1).
Obstructive shock often also manifests as inadequate cardiac
output because of a physical restriction of forward blood flow with
tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, cool extremities, diminished
peripheral pulses, and decreased pulse pressure (difference between
systolic and diastolic BP) or presence of pulsus paradoxus. The acute
presentation may quickly progress to cardiac arrest. Obstructive
shock due to tension pneumothorax typically includes signs of respiratory distress, hypoxia, and diminished breath sounds. Pericardial
tamponade includes Beck’s triad of hypotension, jugular vein distention, and muffled heart sounds. A saddle pulmonary embolism often
presents with a sudden cardiac arrest. Left-­heart obstructive lesions
may present in newborns with discrepant perfusion of the upper and
lower extremities.
Distributive shock includes signs of vasodilation, including tachycardia, flash capillary refill, warm extremities, bounding peripheral

pulses, and increased pulse pressure, often with diastolic hypotension.
In neurogenic shock, tachycardia may be absent or frank bradycardia
may be present. Similar to distributive shock, signs of vasodilation may
be present, although in the immediate phase, the patient can feel cool
peripherally with delayed capillary refill.
Septic shock can be difficult to diagnose because of the wide spectrum of presenting signs and symptoms. A key historical clue is the
presence of fever (or hypothermia) along with evidence for either a
systemic (e.g., bacteremia, rickettsial disease, fungemia, viremia) or
localized (e.g., meningitis, pneumonia, pyelonephritis, peritonitis, necrotizing fasciitis) infection. Infants and young children most commonly
present with “cold shock,” with features of hypovolemic and cardiogenic shock predominating, including tachycardia, delayed capillary
refill, cool extremities, diminished peripheral pulses, and decreased
pulse pressure. Older children and adolescents, especially those with
sepsis from indwelling central venous catheters, more commonly present with “warm shock” that resembles distributive shock, including
tachycardia, flash capillary refill, warm extremities, bounding peripheral pulses, and increased pulse pressure. However, the pathobiology of
sepsis can evolve over time and with treatment in children, such that
“warm shock” may shift to “cold shock” or vice versa.
In addition to the traditional description of septic shock, a subgroup
immunophenotype presents with hyperferritinemia. Ferritin levels >3,000
mg/mL often predict a poor prognosis and the need for intensive care unit
(ICU) admission. Hyperferritinemic septic shock may be due to familial
primary genetic hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) (usually age
<2 years; see Chapter 556.2) or, more often, secondary HLH initiated by an
infectious agent or macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) (see Chapter
207) associated with autoimmune diseases (Table 85.6).
Regardless of etiology, uncompensated shock, with hypotension, high
SVR, decreased cardiac output, respiratory failure, obtundation, and oliguria, occurs late in the progression of disease. Table 85.1 lists the hemodynamic findings in various shock states. Additional clinical findings
in shock include cutaneous lesions such as petechiae, diffuse erythema,
ecchymoses, ecthyma gangrenosum, and peripheral gangrene. Jaundice
can be present either as a sign of infection or as a result of MODS.

DIAGNOSIS

Shock is a clinical diagnosis that should be primarily based on a thorough history and physical examination (see Tables 85.1, 85.4, and
85.6). Important clues to consider in the history are recent trauma or
bleeding, exposure to new medications or substances, preceding or
concurrent symptoms of infection or fluid losses, the patient’s comorbid conditions, and a brief review of systems. The physical examination
should include rapid assessment of vital signs (including pulse oximetry), mental status/level of consciousness, extremity temperature,
peripheral and central pulses, capillary refill, and presence of rashes
or skin changes.
Increasingly, point-­of-­care ultrasound (POCUS) is being incorporated
into the initial assessment of children with shock to assess intravascular
volume status, likelihood of a positive hemodynamic response to fluid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

606 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 85.5  Considerations in Management of
Hyperferritinemic Sepsis Beyond Usual
Diagnostic and Therapeutic Measures Used in
Sepsis Patients Without Hyperferritinemia
WHAT OCCULT INFECTION IS PRIMING AND WHAT
CO-­INFECTION IS PRESENT FOR THE HYPERFERRITINEMIC
PROCESS?
Perform diagnostic workup for viruses (e.g., herpes simplex virus 1,
HHV-­6, HHV-­8, Epstein-­Barr virus, adenovirus, cytomegalovirus,
parvovirus, Ebola, COVID-­19, Dengue, hepatitis A, HIV, severe
fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus, influenza,
hemorrhagic fevers), parasites (e.g., toxoplasmosis, leishmaniasis,
malaria, scrub typhus, babesiosis), intracellular bacteria (e.g.,
tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria, mycoplasma, fusobacteria,
babesiosis, ehrlichiosis), rickettsia, and fungi (e.g., histoplasmosis).
Begin empiric therapy and specific therapies according to context.
Give IVIG if no specific therapy is available to neutralize infection.
IS HEMOLYSIS AND FREE HEMOGLOBIN DRIVING THE
HYPERFERRITINEMIC PROCESS?
Measure free hemoglobin and ferritin sequentially.
Minimize blood transfusions.
If unable to reverse hemolysis or hyperferritinemia, consider 5 days
of plasma exchange to remove free hemoglobin and ferritin and to
resolve inflammation.
IS AN ANTIINFLAMMATORY STRATEGY NEEDED TO SAFELY
CONTROL INFLAMMASOME ACTIVATION?
If ferritin is >3,000 ng/mL in the high-­resource PICU setting, or >500
ng/mL in the resource-­poor PICU setting, then mortality risk is
increased.
Methylprednisone, IVIG, and interleukin 1 receptor antagonist
(anakinra) can be safely given to reduce mortality risk in these
children.
HHV, human herpes virus; PICU; pediatric intensive care unit; IVIG, IV immunoglobulin.
Modified from Carcillo JA, Kernan KK, Horvat CM, et al. Why and how is
hyperferritinemic sepsis different from sepsis without hyperferritinemia? Pediatr Crit
Care Med. 21(5):509-­512, Table 1, p. 511.

therapy, and myocardial function. Cardiac and lung POCUS may also provide important diagnostic information about the etiology of shock, such
as the presence of pericardial fluid to support tamponade, pneumothorax, or dilated right ventricle to support pulmonary embolus. The focused
assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) is commonly performed
to screen for pericardial effusion and hemoperitoneum.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Although the initial diagnosis of shock can and should be based on
clinical data from the history and physical examination, the overall
evaluation of shock should also include early laboratory testing to
screen for hyperlactatemia (as a sign of increased anaerobic metabolism), acidemia, and electrolyte disturbances, including hypoglycemia
and hypocalcemia. In children with septic shock, elevations in both
venous and arterial blood lactate levels in the emergency department
(ED) are associated with risk of organ dysfunction when measured in
the ED and are associated with higher risk of death if elevated at the
time of PICU admission. Although the optimal cutoff remains to be
defined, arterial lactate ≥2 mmol/L is worrisome and associated with
worse outcome. Laboratory evidence of concurrent MODS should
also be sought, including a complete blood count, renal function tests,
liver function tests, and coagulation profile (including fibrinogen and
d-­dimer or fibrin split products). Elevated neutrophil counts with
increased immature forms (i.e., bands, myelocytes, promyelocytes)
and elevated CRP and procalcitonin levels may be seen with infection.
A blood gas analysis may be helpful to assess the degree of respiratory
dysfunction, and an elevated venous to arterial Pco2 gap ≥5 mm Hg
(≥0.67 KPa) may signify an early shock state. For septic shock, at least
one blood culture should be collected along with other cultures as supported by the history and physical. Ferritin levels should be determined
in all patients with septic shock. In the presence of hyperferritinemia,

laboratory studies for HLH and MAS should be obtained, including
fibrinogen, triglycerides, CBC, soluble IL-­2 receptor, natural killer
(NK) cells, and specific genetic testing.
The hallmark of uncompensated shock is an imbalance between oxygen
delivery (Do2) and oxygen consumption (Vo2). Oxygen delivery normally
exceeds oxygen consumption by threefold. The oxygen extraction ratio is
approximately 25%, thus producing a normal central venous oxygen saturation (Svo2) of approximately 75%, most commonly measured from a
catheter at the junction of the superior vena cava and right atrium. Svo2
values <70% reflect an increased oxygen extraction ratio and document a
decrease in oxygen delivery relative to consumption. This increase in tissue
oxygen extraction is an attempt to maintain adequate oxygen delivery at
the cellular level. This state is manifested clinically by increased lactic acid
production (e.g., high anion gap, metabolic acidemia) caused by anaerobic metabolism and a compensatory increase in tissue oxygen extraction.
Notably, in dissociative shock, hyperlactatemia is often accompanied by
an elevated Svo2 >80–85%, which reflects a state of impaired oxygen use
despite adequate tissue perfusion. Elevated blood lactate levels reflect poor
tissue oxygen delivery noted in all forms of shock.

TREATMENT

Almost all healthcare professionals that care for ill children will be
faced with managing the clinical syndrome of shock, given that many
childhood illnesses, such as gastroenteritis, infection, trauma, and toxic
ingestions, can precipitate shock. Without timely medical intervention,
the child in shock will inevitably follow a common pathway to MODS
and death. Early recognition and resuscitation are therefore critical to
limit morbidity and mortality associated with shock.

General Principles of Shock Management

Initial management begins with early recognition of the compensated or
uncompensated shock state based on the history, physical examination,
and laboratory assessments outlined earlier. Once recognized, immediate efforts to restore oxygen (and other nutrient) delivery by supporting
the circulation and identifying and reversing the underlying etiology of
shock are necessary (Fig. 85.2). Restoration of oxygen delivery includes
ensuring airway patency and adequacy of breathing, providing supplemental oxygen if hypoxemia (Spo2 <92–94%) is present, establishing
vascular access, expanding the circulating blood volume, supporting the
cardiac and vascular system with appropriate vasoactive agents when
necessary, and frequently reassessing the patient’s response to initial
therapy. The management strategies discussed in the following sections
apply to all shock types, with additional discussion at the end of the section for type-­specific management recommendations.
Vascular access should be established within the first few minutes
of shock recognition, ideally with at least two large-­bore peripheral
intravenous (IV) catheters. If peripheral IV access is not successful
within 5 minutes, intraosseous (IO) access should be established until
more definitive access is secured. Central venous access should be considered for patients with unstable peripheral IV access, persistence of
shock despite 40-­60 mL/kg fluid bolus therapy (fluid-­refractory shock),
or need for vasoactive medications or concentrated dextrose/electrolyte administration. In addition to optimizing safe administration of
certain medications, central venous access will also enable measurement of Svo2. Placement of an arterial catheter should be considered
for patients with fluid-­refractory shock who require active titration of
vasoactive medications and/or those who may need serial laboratory
tests, including frequent reassessment of blood lactate or electrolyte
derangements. Notably, placement of a central venous or arterial catheter requires specialized skills that may not be immediately available, in
which case continued resuscitation through peripheral IV or IO access,
including initiation of vasoactive medications, is safe and appropriate.
Volume resuscitation with fluid bolus therapy in aliquots of 10-­20
mL/kg pushed over 5-­10 minutes is currently recommended for most
types of shock and in most settings in children (see special considerations in septic shock later and Fig. 85.3). Several observational studies
have demonstrated improved outcomes in children with shock with
initial volume resuscitation titrated to improvements in hemodynamic
targets, including decrease in HR; increase in BP; normalization of
capillary refill, peripheral pulse strength, and extremity temperature;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85 u Shock
Table 85.6

607

Physical Examination and Selected Laboratory Signs in Shock

Central nervous system

Acute delirium, restlessness, disorientation, confusion, and coma, which may be secondary to decreased cerebral
perfusion pressure (mean arterial pressure minus intracranial pressure). Patients with chronic hypertension or
increased intracranial pressure may be symptomatic at normal blood pressures. Cheyne-­Stokes respirations may be
seen with severe decompensated heart failure. Blindness can be a presenting complaint or complication.

Temperature

Hyperthermia results in excess tissue respiration and greater systemic oxygen delivery requirements. Hypothermia
can occur when decreased systemic oxygen delivery or impaired cellular respiration decreases heat generation.

Skin

Cool distal extremities (combined low serum bicarbonate and high arterial lactate levels) aid in identifying patients
with hypoperfusion. Pallor, cyanosis, sweating, and decreased capillary refill and pale, dusky, clammy, or mottled
extremities indicate systemic hypoperfusion. Dry mucous membranes and decreased skin turgor indicate low
vascular volume. Low toe temperature correlates with the severity of shock.

General cardiovascular

Neck vein distention (e.g., heart failure, pulmonary embolus, pericardial tamponade) or flattening (e.g., hypovolemia),
tachycardia, and arrhythmias. Decreased coronary perfusion pressures can lead to ischemia, decreased ventricular
compliance, and increased left ventricular diastolic pressure. A “mill wheel” heart murmur may be heard with an air
embolus.

Heart rate

Usually elevated. However, paradoxical bradycardia can be seen in patients with preexisting cardiac disease and
severe hemorrhage. Heart rate variability is associated with poor outcomes.

Systolic blood pressure

May actually increase slightly when cardiac contractility increases in early shock and then fall as shock advances.

Diastolic blood pressure

Correlates with arteriolar vasoconstriction and may rise early in shock and then fall when cardiovascular compensation
fails.

Pulse pressure

Defined as systolic minus diastolic pressure and related to stroke volume and the rigidity of the aorta. Increases early
in shock and decreases before systolic pressure decreases.

Pulsus paradoxus

An exaggerated change in systolic blood pressure with respiration (systolic blood pressure declines >10 mm Hg with
inspiration) seen in asthma, cardiac tamponade, and air embolus.

Mean arterial blood
pressure

Diastolic blood pressure + [pulse pressure/3]

Shock index

Heart rate/systolic blood pressure. Normal = 0.5-­0.7. A persistent elevation of the shock index (>1.0) indicates
impaired left ventricular function (as a result of blood loss or cardiac depression) and is associated with increased
mortality.

Respiratory

Tachypnea, increased minute ventilation, increased dead space, bronchospasm, hypocapnia with progression to
respiratory failure, acute lung injury, and adult respiratory distress syndrome.

Abdomen

Low-­flow states may result in abdominal pain, ileus, gastrointestinal bleeding, pancreatitis, acalculous cholecystitis,
mesenteric ischemia, and shock liver.

Renal

Because the kidney receives 20% of cardiac output, low cardiac output reduces the glomerular filtration rate
and redistributes renal blood flow from the renal cortex toward the renal medulla, thereby leading to oliguria.
Paradoxical polyuria in early sepsis may be confused with adequate hydration.

Metabolic

Respiratory alkalosis is the first acid-­base abnormality, but metabolic acidosis rapidly occurs as shock progresses.
Hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, and hyperkalemia may develop. Hyperferritinemia suggests a poor prognosis.

From Angus DC. Approach to the patient with shock. In Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:643, Table 98-­1.

improved urine output; and fall in blood lactate by ≥10–20%. Fluid
boluses totaling up to 60 mL/kg may be needed in the first hour of
resuscitation, with volumes exceeding 200 mL/kg over several hours.
Fluid should be administered via IV push or a rapid infuser system.
IV push delivery may be facilitated by attaching a large syringe with
a three-­way stopcock to the IV tubing from the fluid bag, creating a
“push-­pull system” that allows the user to rapidly draw up fluid into the
syringe and then administer to the patient without repeatedly disconnecting and reconnecting the syringe to the patient’s IV. In patients >50
kg, a pressure bag or rapid infuser may be used to rapidly administer
fluid through a large-­gauge peripheral IV. Notably, in neonates, additional caution should be paid to fluid resuscitation, as tolerance may
be limited by reduced myocardial ventricular compliance at baseline.
Importantly, not all children with shock will continue to improve
with repeated volume resuscitation, particularly those with cardiogenic and dissociative shock, severe anemia, or malnutrition. Before
repeating a fluid bolus, the clinician should determine if the patient
responded in a hemodynamically desirable way after the prior fluid
bolus and ensure that signs of fluid overload, such as rales, gallop
rhythm, or hepatomegaly, have not developed. POCUS may also be
helpful to identify ongoing hypovolemia and predict response to ongoing volume resuscitation. For children with evidence of fluid overload,
adequate intravascular volume, or lack of hemodynamic improvement

with prior fluid boluses, resuscitation should shift from volume resuscitation to vasoactive medications. Trials of earlier initiation of vasoactive support are ongoing to further clarify the optimal role of volume
resuscitation in pediatric shock.
The optimal fluid type for initial shock resuscitation remains a matter
of debate. Most studies have not demonstrated a clear benefit for use of
colloids, such as 4–5% albumin, over crystalloids, though there may be a
small clinical benefit for resuscitation with colloids in septic shock. There is
also evidence supporting a risk of kidney injury and coagulopathy with the
use of synthetic colloids, such as hydroxyethyl starch and gelatin, and their
use is currently not recommended. Because crystalloids are inexpensive,
easy to administer, and readily available, current guidelines generally recommend initial resuscitation begin with these fluids. Exceptions include
children with hemorrhagic shock and dissociative shock resulting from
severe anemia for whom early blood product transfusion is preferred.
Crystalloid volume resuscitation may include 0.9% normal saline or
balanced/buffered fluids, such as lactated Ringer solution, Hartmann
solution, and Plasma-­Lyte. Saline consists of only sodium and chloride in
a 1:1 ratio with a supraphysiologic chloride concentration, whereas balanced fluids have an anion buffer and electrolyte composition closer to
human blood plasma, though formulations vary. As a result, high-­volume
resuscitation with 0.9% saline often induces a hyperchloremic metabolic
acidemia. Although 0.9% remains the most commonly used crystalloid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

608 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Initial Resuscitation
Algorithm for Children

!

Within 1
hour of initial
recognition of
septic shock

Systematic Screening for
Sepsis in Children

SEPTIC
SHOCK

!

SEPSIS
SUSPECTED
Expedited
diagnostic
evaluation

Shock
develops

Within 3
hours of initial
suspicion of
sepsis

Diagnostic evaluation supports
sepsis-associated organ dysfunction

1

2

3

4

5

6

Obtain
IV/IO
access.

Collect
blood
culture.

Start empiric
broad-spectrum
antibiotics.

Measure
lactate.

Administer fluid
bolus(es) if shock
is present.*

Start vasoactive
agents if shock
persists.*

Respiratory support
Assess for Pediatric Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Infectious source control

Continuous
reassessment

Fluid and vasoactive titration*

Advanced hemodynamic monitoring if shock persists
• +/- hydrocortisone
for refractory shock**
• Nutritional support

• Avoid hypoglycemia
• Antimicrobial
stewardship

VA or VV ECLS for refractory shock or
oxygenation/ventilation failure (after addressing
other causes of shock and respiratory failure)

*See fluid and vasoactive algorithm. Note: Fluid bolus should be omitted from bundle if a) fluid overload
is present or b) it is a low-resource setting without hypotension. Fluid in mL/kg should be dosed as ideal
body weight.
**Hydrocortisone may produce benefit or harm.

www.sccm.org/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric-Patients
© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. All Rights Reserved.

Fig. 85.2 Surviving Sepsis Campaign 2020 Initial Resuscitation Algorithm for Children. For children with clinical signs of shock, the following six

key management steps should be completed within 1 hour of initial recognition of shock: (1) obtain intravenous/intraosseous access, (2) collect
blood culture, (3) start empiric broad-­spectrum antibiotics, (4) measure blood lactate, (5) administer crystalloid fluid therapy with volume and rate
reflecting healthcare setting and titrated to patient response, and (6) initiate vasoactive medications if shock persists despite fluid and other therapy.
VA, venoarterial; VV, venovenous; ECLS, extracorporeal life support. (© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of
Intensive Care Medicine. All Rights Reserved. https://www.sccm.org/getattachment/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric-­Patients/Initial-­
Resuscitation-­Algorithm-­for-­Children.pdf.aspx?lang=en-­US.)

for pediatric volume resuscitation, increasing data suggest that balanced/
buffered fluids are associated with less acute kidney injury, inflammation,
coagulopathy, endotheliopathy, and death. However, pediatric studies
comparing balanced/buffered fluids with 0.9% saline have reported conflicting results, and adult interventional trials have not shown a consistent
benefit for either crystalloid fluid type. Consequently, pending further data
from ongoing studies, either 0.9% saline or balanced/buffered crystalloids
are appropriate for initial volume resuscitation.
Resuscitation with blood products should be prioritized for children
with hemorrhagic shock. The Advanced Trauma Life Support guidelines
recommend resuscitation with red blood cells, plasma, and platelets in a
ratio of 1:1:1 to limit coagulopathy and other risks associated with large-­
scale transfusion. For children with other forms of shock, the criteria to
transfuse red blood cells are not clear, though it is reasonable to target

hemoglobin levels >9 g/dL for children who remain hemodynamically
unstable with low Svo2 and/or high blood lactate despite other interventions. Notably, transfusion of plasma or platelets should be reserved to treat
active bleeding or reduce risk of bleeding before an invasive procedure
rather than used solely to correct laboratory abnormalities or as volume
expanders.
Vasoactive medications should be initiated for children with fluid-­
refractory shock, with early consideration for inotropes, such as epinephrine, when myocardial dysfunction is present and vasopressors,
such as norepinephrine, when vasoplegia is present (Table 85.7). For
children with septic shock, two randomized trials have demonstrated
that epinephrine as first-­line vasoactive therapy is more effective at
reducing mortality than dopamine. As such, epinephrine is the preferred first-­line vasoactive therapy for fluid-­refractory septic shock.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85 u Shock

609

Fluid and Vasoactive-Inotrope
Management Algorithm For Children
Healthcare Systems
WITH Intensive Care

!

Healthcare Systems
WITHOUT Intensive Care

Abnormal perfusion
WITHOUT
hypotension

Abnormal perfusion
WITH hypotension*

SEPTIC
SHOCK

Abnormal Perfusion with
or without Hypotension
• If signs of fluid overload
are absent, administer
fluid bolus, 10-20 mL/kg.

• Do NOT give fluid
bolus unless
there are signs of
dehydration with
ongoing fluid losses
(eg, diarrhea).

• Repeat assessment of
hemodynamic response
to fluid and consider fluid
boluses, 10-20 mL/kg, until
shock resolves or signs of
fluid overload develop.

• Start maintenance
fluids.

• Assess cardiac function.

• Assess hemodynamic
response to fluid and
repeat fluid boluses, 10-20
mL/kg, until hypotension
resolves or signs of
fluid overload develop.
• Assess cardiac
function (if available).

• Monitor
hemodynamics
closely.

• Consider epinephrine
if there is myocardial
dysfunction or epinephrine/
norepinephrine if shock
persists after 40-60 mL/
kg (or sooner if signs of
fluid overload develop).

• If signs of fluid overload
are absent, administer
fluid bolus, 10-20 mL/kg.

• Consider vasoactiveinotropic support
(if available).

• Consider epinephrine/
norepinephrine if
hypotension persists
after 40 mL/kg or
sooner if signs of fluid
overload develop.

Fluid in mL/kg should be dosed as ideal body weight.

Shock resolved, perfusion improved
• Do not give more
fluid boluses.
*Hypotension
in healthcare
systems WITHOUT
intensive care is
defined as either:

• Consider
maintenance fluids.

SBP
< 50 mm Hg
in children
age < 12
months

SBP
< 60 mm Hg
in children
age 1 to 5
years

• Monitor for signs/symptoms
of recurrent shock.

SBP
< 70 mm Hg
in children
age > 5
years

OR

Presence of all 3 World
Health Organization criteria:
cold extremities, prolonged
capillary refill > 3 seconds,
weak/fast pulse

www.sccm.org/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric-Patients
© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. All Rights Reserved.

Fig. 85.3 Surviving Sepsis Campaign 2020 Fluid and Vasoactive-­Inotrope Management Algorithm for Children. For children with septic shock

treated in healthcare systems in which intensive care is accessible (either locally or via transport), fluid bolus therapy up to 40-­60 mL/kg is recommended in the first hour of therapy until shock resolves or signs of fluid overload develop. For children with septic shock treated in healthcare
systems in which intensive care is not available locally or via transport, fluid bolus therapy is not recommended unless hypotension is present. For
all children, early assessment of cardiac function is recommended with consideration for initiation of epinephrine (or alternative inotrope) if myocardial dysfunction is evident. SBP, systolic blood pressure. (© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of Intensive Care
Medicine. All Rights Reserved. https://www.sccm.org/getattachment/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric-­Patients/Initial-­Resuscitation-­
Algorithm-­for-­Children.pdf.aspx?lang=en-­US.)

Epinephrine is also a potent inotrope and is the recommended initial
vasoactive agent in children with cardiogenic shock. However, in children with a low-­SVR state, as may be seen with distributive, septic, or
neurogenic shock, norepinephrine should be preferentially prescribed
as the first-­line vasoactive therapy. Although vasoactive agents are ideally administered through a central venous line, these medications can
be safely initiated through a peripheral IV or an IO in dilute concentrations while central venous access is obtained.
Electrolyte abnormalities, such as hypoglycemia and hypocalcemia, may precipitate or worsen shock. Blood glucose and ionized

calcium can both be measured rapidly via bedside point-­of-­care testing, and if present, hypoglycemia and hypocalcemia should be corrected during the initial resuscitation. Other patterns of electrolyte
abnormalities may indicate the presence of an underlying inborn error
of metabolism, particularly in a neonate with shock. Any provider
treating a patient with known or suspected inborn error of metabolism
should consult immediately with a specialty center while resuscitating
with volume and dextrose.
Airway management is an essential component of the initial management of shock. Early intervention to maintain an unobstructed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

610 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 85.7

Vasoactive Medications to Treat Shock

DRUG
Epinephrine

EFFECT(S)
↑ Heart rate and ↑ cardiac contractility

DOSING RANGE

May ↓ renal perfusion at high
doses
↑ Myocardial O2 consumption
Risk of arrhythmia at high doses

0.05-­2.0 μg/kg/min

↑ Blood pressure secondary to ↑
systemic vascular resistance
↑ Left ventricular afterload

Vasodilator at low doses, but potent
vasoconstrictor at doses >0.1 mcg/kg/min
Norepinephrine

Potent vasoconstriction

COMMENT(S)

0.05-­2.0 μg/kg/min

↑ Cardiac contractility (but may be blunted by
increased afterload)
Dopamine

↑ Cardiac contractility
Significant peripheral vasoconstriction at
>10 μg/kg/min

3-­20 μg/kg/min

↑ Risk of arrhythmias at high doses

Dobutamine

↑ Cardiac contractility
Peripheral vasodilator

3-­10 μg/kg/min

—

Phenylephrine

Potent vasoconstriction
No effect on cardiac contractility

0.25-­2.0 μg/kg/min

Can cause sudden hypertension

Vasopressin

Potent vasoconstriction

0.5-20 milliunits/kg/min

Can cause sudden hypertension

Angiotensin II

Potent vasoconstrictor

Stepwise increase 5-­10-­25-­40-80
ng/kg/min over 3 hr with titration
down to 1.25-40 ng/kg/min after
3 hr

Can cause sudden hypertension,
arterial ischemia

Methylene blue

Reduce responsiveness to cGMP-­dependent
(e.g., ischemia-­reperfusion, NO mediated)
vasodilators

Bolus 1-2 mg/kg, then consider
continuous infusion 0.5-.01 mg/
kg/hr

Causes blue/green discoloration
of skin and urine

Milrinone

Increased cardiac contractility
Improves cardiac diastolic function
Peripheral vasodilation

0.25-1.0 μg/kg/min

Phosphodiesterase inhibitor—
slows cyclic adenosine
monophosphate breakdown

Prostaglandin E1

Vasodilator
Maintains an open ductus arteriosus in the
newborn with ductal-­dependent congenital
heart disease

0.01-­0.2 μg/kg/min

Can lead to hypotension
Risk of apnea

airway may be needed in patients who are obtunded or have suffered a traumatic neck or chest injury. Supplemental oxygen should
be provided to correct hypoxemia if Spo2 is <92–94%. Although universal supplemental oxygen administration can, in theory, augment
tissue oxygen delivery by increasing oxygen content of the blood, this
approach is of little benefit if the oxyhemoglobin saturation is >92–
94%, and some studies suggest harm from hyperoxia. However, universal administration of high fraction of inspired oxygen is likely to be
beneficial for patients with severe anemia or dissociative shock. When
oxygen is required, use of a 100% non-­rebreather mask provides the
highest amount of noninvasive supplemental oxygen delivery.
Indications for intubation and mechanical ventilation include acute
hypoxemic or hypercarbic respiratory failure or persistence of circulatory failure, in which case a reduction in metabolic demand facilitated by
sedation and ventilatory support can be helpful. Sedation and endotracheal intubation reduce the work of breathing, which can divert cardiac
output away from the muscles of respiration and improve perfusion to
other organs. However, extra caution needs to be taken during intubation
and the transition from negative pressure to positive pressure ventilation.
Positive pressure ventilation will decrease venous return in a patient who
is already hypovolemic, which could precipitate cardiovascular collapse.
It is therefore prudent to have fluid boluses readily available and vasoactive agents started or immediately ready to administer during this transition. Of the sedative agents available for intubation, ketamine is generally
preferred because of its favorable hemodynamic effects that typically
augment cardiac output and BP. As several studies have reported adverse
outcomes after intubation with etomidate, pediatric septic shock guidelines recommend against using etomidate in these patients.

Specific Management Considerations by Shock Type

For children with cardiogenic shock due to congenital heart disease,
cardiomyopathies, myocarditis, MIS-­
C, or other causes, decreased
myocardial contractility must be reversed by early treatment with
inotropes, such as epinephrine, dopamine, dobutamine, or milrinone.
Gentle volume resuscitation to optimize preload may also be helpful,
but excessive fluid administration can worsen volume overload and
further compromise heart function. Despite adequate cardiac output
with the support of inotropic agents, a high SVR with poor peripheral
perfusion and acidosis may persist in cardiogenic shock. Therefore, if
not already started, inodilators such as milrinone may improve systolic
function and decrease SVR without causing a significant increase in
HR. Furthermore, this agent has the added benefit of enhancing diastolic relaxation. Dobutamine or other vasodilating agents, such as
nitroprusside, may also be considered in this setting (see Table 85.7).
In obstructive shock, action is often needed to relieve the point of
mechanical obstruction. Examples include thoracentesis for tension
pneumothorax, pericardiocentesis for cardiac tamponade, and administration of systemic fibrinolytic medications for pulmonary embolism.
For neonates or young infants (typically <2-­3 weeks of age) with shock
caused by ductal-­dependent congenital heart disease, a prostaglandin
infusion should be started to maintain systemic cardiac output while
preparing to transfer to a pediatric specialty center.
The management of septic shock should follow the recommendations of the 2020 Surviving Sepsis Campaign International Guidelines
for the Management of Septic Shock and Sepsis-­Associated Organ
Dysfunction in Children (see Fig. 85.2 and Fig. 85.3). These guidelines
recommend six initial management steps in the first hour after shock

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85 u Shock
recognition, including obtaining IV/IO access, collecting a blood culture, administering empiric broad-­spectrum antibiotics, measuring
lactate, providing volume resuscitation, and initiating vasoactive medication if shock persists despite fluid therapy. Early administration of
antibiotics targeted to the most likely pathogens for each patient has
been associated with reduced mortality and more rapid resolution of
organ dysfunction.
Notably, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign suggests volume resuscitation with up to 40-­60 mL/kg in bolus fluid (10-­20 mL/kg per bolus)
over the first hour, titrated to clinical markers of cardiac output and
discontinued if signs of fluid overload develop, for children with septic
shock treated in geographic regions that have access to intensive care
(either locally or via transport) or in any setting when hypotension is
present. However, in healthcare systems with no availability to access
intensive care, fluid bolus therapy was associated with increased risk of
mortality in the FEAST clinical trial when hypotension was not present, and thus fluid management should focus on starting maintenance
fluids only in these settings (see Fig. 85.3).

Fluid-­Refractory and Catecholamine-­Resistant Shock

If shock persists despite volume resuscitation and vasoactive support
with an initial catecholaminergic agent, such as epinephrine, the child
has fluid-­refractory and catecholamine-­resistant shock. Such children have an increased risk for MODS and death, especially if requirement for vasoactive support is high, blood lactate exceeds 8 mmol/L
(or is rising after 6 hours of resuscitation), and/or myocardial dysfunction is present. Several additional management considerations must
be taken into account in this scenario, including evaluation for atypical and/or reversible etiologies, second-­line vasoactive medications,
stress-­dose corticosteroids, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO).
Atypical and reversible etiologies that may contribute to refractory shock include hypothyroidism and intraabdominal hypertension/
abdominal compartment syndrome. In addition, one must consider
the presence of obstructive shock (tamponade, pneumothorax), an
unrecognized closing ductus arteriosus, uncontrolled hemorrhage
(which often requires surgical intervention), anaphylaxis, and need
for removal of an infectious source (e.g., infected catheter, empyema,
abdominal abscess).
Stress-­dose corticosteroids are indicated for patients with septic
shock who have absolute adrenal insufficiency, such as that caused by
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, septic shock with purpura, prior steroid therapy for chronic illness, or hypopituitarism. Some children with
septic shock may also develop critical illness–related corticosteroid insufficiency with an inadequate adrenal response to a severe stress. Stress
doses of hydrocortisone (50-­100 mg per m2 per day) are recommended
for those with risk factors for absolute adrenal insufficiency (e.g., septic
shock with purpura, prior steroid therapy for chronic illness, known
pituitary or adrenal abnormalities) and can be considered for children
with fluid-­refractory, catecholamine-­resistant shock without a reversible etiology pending further data from ongoing clinical trials.
Second-­line vasoactive therapy should be considered for patients
in whom shock persists despite titration of the initial vasoactive agent.
For patients with “warm” shock or evidence of low SVR initially
treated with norepinephrine, the addition of vasopressin or epinephrine may be considered. Case reports, case series, and one trial indicate that administration of vasopressin is associated with an increase
in mean arterial BP and urine output in children with fluid-­refractory,
catecholamine-­resistant septic shock. However, in a multicenter trial
of 65 children with vasodilatory shock, low-­dose vasopressin did not
decrease the time to hemodynamic stability off of vasoactive agents
versus placebo (49.7 vs 47.1 hours), and there was a concerning trend
toward increased mortality in the vasopressin group (30% vs 16%, p =
0.24). For patients with “cold” shock or evidence of myocardial dysfunction, priority should be given to improving cardiac contractility

611

with inotropes. First-­line therapy with epinephrine is recommended,
with addition of dopamine, dobutamine, or norepinephrine as second-­
line agents, but these agents should be carefully titrated, as they may
contribute to arrhythmias and increase myocardial oxygen demand.
Initiation of inodilators, such as milrinone, can help to augment contractility, improve lusitropy (diastolic relaxation), and lower SVR but
are generally longer-­acting and should be carefully titrated to avoid
worsening hypotension. Notably, it may be difficult to accurately differentiate between “warm” (low SVR) from “cold” (high SVR) shock
using only clinical signs, such as extremity temperature, strength of
peripheral pulses, and capillary refill time. Frequent reassessment and
response to therapy are therefore paramount to ensure optimal titration of vasoactive therapies.
ECMO is a rescue option for patients suffering refractory septic
shock, with reported survival rates of ∼70% for newborns and ∼50%
for older children. One study suggests that central cannulation via sternotomy may achieve survival rates of 74% for refractory septic shock.
In cardiogenic shock due to myocarditis treated with ECMO, survival
rates of 70% have been reported. Although counterintuitive because
of the need for systemic anticoagulation, ECMO has also been used
successfully in hemorrhagic shock in a small series. In most cases of
refractory shock, venoarterial ECMO is preferred over the venovenous
route due to the presence of hemodynamic instability. A ventricular
assist device may be considered as an alternative to ECMO in some
children with cardiogenic shock.

Targets for Shock Reversal

Clinical signs of successful resuscitation include a decrease in HR and
respiratory rate, increase in BP, improved urine output to >0.5 mL/
kg/hr, normalization of mental status, decreased capillary refill time,
warmth of distal extremities, and improved peripheral pulses. Serial
laboratory measurements should aim for a rise in Svo2 to >70% and a
decreasing trend in blood lactate levels as evidence for increased tissue
oxygen extraction and adequate oxygen delivery to meet cellular metabolic demand. In one observational study of septic shock in children,
normalization of blood lactate to <2 mmol/L within 4 hours was associated with reduced organ dysfunction. Blood pH and base deficit may
also be used as laboratory surrogates for improved tissue perfusion,
but these may be affected by the degree of hyperchloremia after fluid
resuscitation or by changes in ventilation.
Other parameters to monitor for improvement in shock include
serial POCUS to assess volume status, cardiac output, and tissue
perfusion; cutaneous near-­infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) to measure
regional tissue perfusion; and other devices that can estimate cardiac
output based on the relationship among BP, stroke volume, arterial
compliance, and SVR (e.g., pulse contour waveform analysis). If cardiac output is measured, aiming for a cardiac index between 3.3 and
6.0 L/min/m2 is appropriate.
Though children can have isolated cardiovascular dysfunction with
shock, many have additional associated organ dysfunctions or MODS.
Ongoing support of noncardiovascular organ dysfunction is often
required even after improvement or resolution of shock.

PROGNOSIS

In septic shock, mortality rates are as low as 3% in previously
healthy children and 6–9% in children with chronic illness (compared with 25–30% in adults). With early recognition and therapy,
the mortality rate for pediatric shock continues to improve, but
shock and MODS remain one of the leading causes of nonaccidental
death in infants and children. The risk of death involves a complex
interaction of factors, including the underlying etiology, presence
of chronic illness, host immune response, and timing of recognition
and therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

612 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Respiratory Disease Manifesting as Respiratory
Distress

Chapter 86

Acute Care of Respiratory
Distress and Failure
Alexandre T. Rotta, Martin C.J. Kneyber,
and Ashok P. Sarnaik

Clinical examination is paramount in localizing the site of pathology
and creating a differential diagnosis. Extrathoracic airway obstruction
occurs anywhere above the thoracic inlet and is marked by inspiratory
stridor, retractions, and prolongation of inspiration. In contrast, features of intrathoracic airway obstruction are prolongation of expiration
and expiratory wheezing. Typical manifestations of alveolar interstitial
pathology are rapid, shallow respirations, chest wall retractions, and
grunting (Tables 86.1 and 86.2).

Respiratory Distress Without Respiratory Disease
The term respiratory distress is used to denote signs and symptoms of
an abnormal respiratory pattern. A child with nasal flaring, tachypnea,
chest wall retractions, stridor, grunting, dyspnea, or wheezing has
respiratory distress. Taken together, the magnitude of these findings is
used to judge clinical severity. Nasal flaring is nonspecific, but the other
signs are useful in localizing the site of pathology (see Chapter 421).
Respiratory failure is defined as the inability of the lungs to provide sufficient oxygen (hypoxic respiratory failure) or remove carbon dioxide
(ventilatory failure) to meet metabolic demands. Therefore, whereas
respiratory distress is determined by a clinical impression, respiratory
failure is diagnosed when inadequate oxygenation or ventilation (or
both) are present. Respiratory distress can occur in patients without
respiratory disease, and respiratory failure can occur in patients without respiratory distress.

RESPIRATORY DISTRESS

A careful physical examination must be performed when evaluating
a child in respiratory distress. Nasal flaring, although nonspecific,
is an extremely important sign of distress in infants. It may indicate
discomfort, pain, fatigue, acidosis, or breathing difficulty. The state of
responsiveness is another crucial sign. Lethargy, disinterest in surroundings, and weak cry are suggestive of exhaustion, hypercarbia,
and impending respiratory failure. Abnormalities of the rate and depth
of breathing can occur with both pulmonary and nonpulmonary
causes of respiratory distress. In diseases of decreased lung compliance, such as pneumonia and pulmonary edema, breathing is characteristically rapid and shallow (decreased tidal volume). In obstructive
airway diseases, such as asthma and laryngotracheitis, breathing generally is deep with increased tidal volume, but less rapid. Rapid and
deep breathing (tachypnea and hyperpnea) without other respiratory
signs should raise suspicion of possible nonpulmonary or nonthoracic
causes of respiratory distress, such as response to metabolic acidosis
(e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis, renal tubular acidosis) or stimulation of
the respiratory center (e.g., encephalitis, ingestion of central nervous
system stimulants). Suprasternal, intercostal, and subcostal retractions are manifestations of increased inspiratory effort, weak chest
wall, or both. Inspiratory stridor indicates airway obstruction above
the thoracic inlet, whereas expiratory wheezing results from airway
obstruction below the thoracic inlet. Grunting is most commonly
heard in diseases with decreased functional residual capacity (e.g.,
pneumonia, pulmonary edema) or peripheral airway obstruction
(e.g., bronchiolitis).

Although respiratory distress most frequently results from diseases of
lungs, airways, and chest wall, pathology in other organ systems can
manifest as respiratory distress and lead to misdiagnosis and inappropriate management (Table 86.3). Respiratory distress resulting from
heart failure or diabetic ketoacidosis may be misdiagnosed as asthma
and improperly treated with albuterol, resulting in worsened hemodynamic state or ketoacidosis. Careful history and physical examination
provide essential clues in avoiding misdiagnosis.

Cardiovascular Disease Manifesting as Respiratory
Distress

A child with cardiovascular pathology may present with respiratory
distress caused by either decreased lung compliance or cardiogenic shock
(Table 86.4). Diseases that result in increased pulmonary arterial blood
flow (e.g., left-­to-­right shunts) or increased pulmonary venous pressure (e.g., left ventricular dysfunction from hypertension or myocarditis, obstructed total anomalous pulmonary venous return) cause an
increase in pulmonary capillary pressure and transudation of fluid
into the pulmonary interstitium and alveoli. The increased pulmonary
blood and water content lead to decreased lung compliance and result
in rapid shallow breathing.
It is important to recognize that interstitial lung edema may not
only manifest as alveolar fluid but as small airway obstruction as well.
Wheezing as a sign of congestive cardiac disease is common in infants
and young children and should be recognized. Patients with cardiac
lesions that result in low cardiac output often present in shock. For
example, obstructive lesions of the left side of the heart (e.g., critical
coarctation of the aorta) and acquired or congenital cardiomyopathy
result in decreased perfusion and metabolic acidosis, as well as respiratory distress because of chemoreceptor and baroreceptor stimulation.
The likelihood of a particular cardiovascular illness manifesting as
respiratory distress depends on age at presentation (Table 86.5).

Neurologic Disease Manifesting as Respiratory
Distress

Central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction can lead to alterations in
respiratory patterns and manifest as respiratory distress. Increased
intracranial pressure (ICP) may manifest as respiratory distress. Early
rise in ICP results in stimulation of respiratory centers, leading to
increases in the rate (tachypnea) and depth (hyperpnea) of respiration. The resultant decrease in arterial blood partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (Paco2) and elevation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pH leads
to cerebral vasoconstriction and temporary amelioration of intracranial hypertension. Stereotypical respiratory patterns are associated

Table 86.1  Typical Localizing Signs for Pulmonary Pathology
SITE OF PATHOLOGY

RESPIRATORY RATE

RETRACTIONS

Extrathoracic airway

↑

↑↑↑↑

AUDIBLE MANIFESTATION
Stridor

Intrathoracic extrapulmonary

↑

↑↑

Wheezing

Intrathoracic intrapulmonary

↑↑

↑↑

Wheezing

Alveolar or interstitial

↑↑↑

↑↑↑

Grunting, crackles

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure
Table 86.2  Examples of Anatomic Sites of Lesions Causing
Respiratory Failure
LUNG
CENTRAL AIRWAY
OBSTRUCTION
Choanal atresia
Tonsilloadenoidal hypertrophy
Retropharyngeal/peritonsillar
abscess
Laryngomalacia
Epiglottitis
Vocal cord paralysis
Laryngotracheitis
Subglottic stenosis
Vascular ring/pulmonary sling
Mediastinal mass
Foreign body
PERIPHERAL AIRWAY
OBSTRUCTION
Asthma
Bronchiolitis
Foreign body
Aspiration of gastric contents
Cystic fibrosis
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
ALVEOLAR OR INTERSTITIAL
DISEASE
Lobar pneumonia*
ARDS
Surfactant deficiency
Interstitial pneumonia
Hydrocarbon pneumonitis
Pulmonary hemorrhage/
hemosiderosis
Vaping lung injury
Smoke inhalation
Drowning

RESPIRATORY PUMP

Table 86.3  Nonpulmonary Causes of Respiratory Distress
DOMAIN

↑ Pulmonary blood/water
content
Metabolic acidosis
Baroreceptor stimulation

CNS

Increased intracranial
pressure
Encephalitis
Neurogenic pulmonary
edema
Toxic encephalopathy

Stimulation of brainstem
respiratory centers

Metabolic

Diabetic ketoacidosis
Organic acidemia
Hyperammonemia

Stimulation of central
and peripheral
chemoreceptors

Renal

Renal tubular acidosis

Stimulation of central
and peripheral
chemoreceptors
Left ventricular
dysfunction → increased
pulmonary blood/water
content

Hypertension

Infection

Toxic shock syndrome
Septic shock
Meningococcemia

SPINAL CORD
Trauma
Transverse myelitis
Spinal muscular atrophy
Poliomyelitis
Compression (tumor, abscess,
bleed)
Acute flaccid myelitis

NEUROMUSCULAR
Phrenic nerve injury
Birth trauma
Infant botulism
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Muscular dystrophy
Myasthenia gravis
Organophosphate poisoning
*Including bacteria and viral; fungal or parasitic less common.
ARDS, Acute respiratory distress syndrome; CNS, central nervous system.

with dysfunction at various levels of the brain. Cerebral hemisphere
and midbrain lesions result in hyperpnea and tachypnea. In such situations, arterial blood gas (ABG) measurements typically show respiratory alkalosis without hypoxemia. Pathology affecting the pons and
medulla manifests as irregular breathing patterns such as apneustic breathing (prolonged inspiration with brief expiratory periods),
Cheyne-­Stokes breathing (alternate periods of rapid and slow breathing), and irregular, ineffective breathing or apnea (Table 86.6). Along
with respiratory changes, other manifestations of CNS dysfunction
and increased ICP generally are present, such as focal neurologic signs,
pupillary abnormalities, hypertension, and bradycardia (see Chapter
82). Occasionally, severe CNS dysfunction can result in neurogenic
pulmonary edema and respiratory distress, which may follow excessive sympathetic discharge resulting in increased pulmonary venous
hydrostatic pressure and increased pulmonary capillary permeability.
Central neurogenic hyperventilation is characteristically observed in
illnesses such as urea cycle defects and encephalitis. Bradycardia and
apnea may be caused by CNS-­depressant medications, poisoning, prolonged hypoxia, trauma, or infection (see Table 86.2).

MECHANISM(S)

Left-­to-­right shunt
Congestive heart
failure
Cardiogenic shock

BRAINSTEM
Arnold-­Chiari malformation
Central hypoventilation syndrome
CNS depressants, including drug
overdose
Trauma
Increased intracranial pressure
CNS infections

EXAMPLE(S)

Cardiovascular

THORACIC CAGE
Kyphoscoliosis
Diaphragmatic hernia
Flail chest
Eventration of diaphragm
Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy
Prune-­belly syndrome
Dermatomyositis
Abdominal distention

613

Cytokine stimulation of
respiratory centers
Baroreceptor stimulation
from shock
Metabolic acidosis

CNS, Central nervous system.
Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.

Toxic Metabolic States Manifesting as Respiratory
Distress

Direct stimulation of respiratory centers resulting in respiratory
alkalosis is encountered in intoxication involving agents such as
salicylates and theophylline. Similarly, intoxication with general
CNS stimulants, such as cocaine and amphetamines, may result in
increased respiration. Presence of endogenous (e.g., organic acids)
or exogenous (e.g., methanol, ethylene glycol, salicylates) toxins
causes metabolic acidosis and compensatory hyperventilation,
which can manifest as respiratory distress. ABG measurements
show decreased pH and compensatory hypocarbia with normal
oxygenation. Conversely, metabolic disorders with hyperammonemia cause respiratory alkalosis (decreased Paco2 with increased
pH) as ammonia directly stimulates the respiratory centers. Cyanide poisoning and methemoglobinemia may also produce respiratory distress.

Other Nonpulmonary Entities Manifesting as
Respiratory Distress

Sepsis and septic shock may cause respiratory distress from hypovolemic stimulation of baroreceptors, cytokine stimulation of respiratory
centers, and lactic acidosis; they can also lead to acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS). Other indirect causes of ARDS include
systemic inflammatory conditions, trauma, transfusion-­related acute
lung injury, and pancreatitis. Similarly, renal disease may manifest as
respiratory distress by causing metabolic acidosis (e.g., renal tubular
acidosis or renal failure) or hypertensive left ventricular failure and
fluid overload.

RESPIRATORY FAILURE

Respiratory failure occurs when oxygenation and ventilation are insufficient to meet the metabolic demands of the body. Respiratory failure
may result from an abnormality in (1) lung and airways, (2) chest wall
and muscles of breathing, or (3) central and peripheral chemoreceptors. Clinical manifestations depend largely on the site of pathology.
Although respiratory failure is traditionally defined as respiratory

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

614 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 86.4  Cardiovascular Pathology Manifesting as
Respiratory Distress

Table 86.5  Typical Chronology of Heart Disease
Presentation in Children

I. DECREASED LUNG COMPLIANCE
A. Left-­to-­right shunts
1.	Ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect, patent ductus
arteriosus, atrioventricular canal, truncus arteriosus
2.	Cerebral or hepatic arteriovenous fistula

AGE

B. Ventricular failure
1.	Left heart obstructive lesions
a. Aortic stenosis
b. Coarctation of the aorta
c. Interrupted aortic arch
d. Mitral stenosis
e. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
2.	Myocardial infarction
a. Anomalous left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery
(ALCAPA)
b. Ventriculocoronary arterial connections (coronary sinusoids)
3.	Hypertension
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
4.	Inflammatory/infectious
a. Myocarditis
b. Pericardial effusion
5.	Idiopathic/genetic
a. Dilated cardiomyopathy
b. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
c. Takotsubo syndrome
C. Pulmonary venous obstruction
1.	Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection with obstruction
2.	Cor triatriatum
II. SHOCK RESULTING IN METABOLIC ACIDOSIS
A. Left heart obstructive lesions
B. Acute ventricular failure
1.	Myocarditis, myocardial infarction

dysfunction resulting in arterial partial pressure of oxygen (Pao2) <60
mm Hg when breathing ambient air and Paco2 >50 mm Hg resulting
in acidemia, the patient’s general state, respiratory effort, and potential
for impending exhaustion are more important indicators than ABG
values.

Pathophysiology

Respiratory failure can be classified into hypoxic respiratory failure
(failure of oxygenation) and hypercarbic respiratory failure (failure
of ventilation). Systemic venous (pulmonary arterial) blood is arterialized through equilibration with alveolar gas in the pulmonary
capillaries and is carried back to the heart by pulmonary veins. Arterial blood oxygen and carbon dioxide content are influenced by the
composition of the inspired gas, effectiveness of alveolar ventilation,
pulmonary capillary perfusion, and diffusion capacity of the alveolar
capillary membrane. An abnormality in any of these steps can result
in respiratory failure. Hypoxic respiratory failure results from intrapulmonary shunting and venous admixture or insufficient diffusion of
oxygen from alveoli into pulmonary capillaries. This physiology can
be caused by small airways obstruction, increased barriers to diffusion
(e.g., interstitial edema, fibrosis), and conditions in which alveoli are
collapsed or filled with fluid (e.g., pneumonia, atelectasis, pulmonary
edema). In most cases, hypoxic respiratory failure is associated with
decreased functional residual capacity and can be managed by lung
volume recruitment with positive pressure ventilation. Hypercarbic
respiratory failure is caused by decreased minute ventilation (i.e., tidal
volume multiplied by respiratory rate). This can result from centrally
mediated disorders of respiratory drive, increased dead space ventilation, or obstructive airway disease. Hypoxic and hypercarbic respiratory
failure may coexist as a combined failure of oxygenation and ventilation.

Newborn
(1-­10 days)

MECHANISM

DISEASE

↑ Arteriovenous
pressure difference
Ductal closure

Arteriovenous
malformation (brain, liver)
Single ventricle lesions or
severe ventricular outflow
obstruction
Transposition of the great
arteries

Independent
pulmonary and
systemic blood flow
Pulmonary venous
obstruction
Young infant
(1-­6 mo)

Any age

Total anomalous pulmonary
venous return (TAPVR)

↓ Pulmonary vascular
resistance
↓ Pulmonary artery
pressure

Left-­to-­right shunt lesions

Heart rate disturbance

Tachyarrhythmias or
bradyarrhythmias
Myocarditis, endocarditis,
pericarditis
Cardiomyopathy

Infection
Abnormal cardiac
myocytes
Excess afterload

Anomalous left coronary
artery from the pulmonary
artery (ALCAPA)

Hypertension

Ventilation-­Perfusion Mismatch

For exchange of O2 and CO2 to occur, alveolar gas must be exposed to
blood transiting in close proximity through the pulmonary capillaries. Both ventilation and perfusion are lower in nondependent areas
(upper lobes in upright position) of the lung and higher in dependent
areas (lower lobes in upright position). The difference in perfusion (Q̇)
is greater than the difference in ventilation ( V̇). Perfusion in excess
of ventilation results in incomplete arterialization of systemic venous
(pulmonary arterial) blood and is referred to as venous admixture.
Perfusion of unventilated areas is referred to as intrapulmonary
shunting. Conversely, ventilation that is in excess of perfusion is
wasted; that is, it does not contribute to gas exchange and is referred
to as dead space ventilation. Dead space ventilation results in return
of greater amounts of atmospheric gas (which has not participated in
gas exchange and has negligible CO2) back to the atmosphere during
exhalation. The respiratory dead space is divided into the anatomic
dead space and the alveolar dead space. The anatomic dead space
includes the conducting airways from the nasopharynx to the terminal
bronchioles, ends at the alveoli, and has no contact with the pulmonary
capillary bed. The alveolar dead space refers to areas of the lung where
alveoli are ventilated but not perfused. Under normal conditions,
this usually occurs in West zone I, where alveolar pressure is greater
than pulmonary capillary pressure, thus restricting blood flow. Under
clinical conditions, this alveolar dead space may result from dynamic
hyperinflation, high levels of positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP),
or large tidal volume in mechanically ventilated patients. Additionally,
conditions that cause decreased pulmonary artery perfusion (e.g., pulmonary embolism, decreased cardiac output, hypovolemia) can result
in alveolar dead space. The result is a decrease in mixed expired CO2
(Peco2) and an increase in the Paco2 − Peco2 gradient. Dead space as
a fraction of tidal volume (Vd/Vt) is calculated as:
(Paco2 − Peco2) ÷ Paco2
Normal Vd/Vt is approximately 0.33. Venous admixture and intrapulmonary shunting predominantly affect oxygenation, resulting in
an alveolar partial pressure of oxygen (Pao2) to Pao2 (A-­ao2) gradient without elevation in Paco2. This occurs due to greater ventilation
of perfused areas, which is sufficient to normalize Paco2 but not Pao2
because of their respective dissociation curves. The relative straight-­line

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure

615

Table 86.6  Respiratory Patterns in Neurologic Disease
INJURY SITE

PATTERN*

Normal

COMMENTS
Variable Vt with normal respiratory pauses and sighs

Cortex
Hyperpnea and tachypnea
Midbrain
Cheyne-­Stokes breathing: Gradually increasing and decreasing Vt

Pons
Apneustic breathing: Prolonged inspiration followed by prolonged expiration
Medulla and
pons

Biot breathing: Rapid and irregular respirations with pauses

*Pattern tracings represent lung volume over time.
Vt, Tidal volume.

A

B

C

D

Fig. 86.1 Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). A, Normal chest radiograph. B, Chest radiograph demonstrating bilateral alveolar infiltrates

consistent with ARDS. C, Chest CT showing bilateral pneumonitis and consolidation with air bronchograms consistent with ARDS. D, Lung ultrasonogram illustrating smooth pleural line, absence of horizontal A lines, and presence of vertical B lines suggestive of ARDS. (Modified from MacSweeney
R, McAuley DF. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet. 2016;388:2416-­2430, Fig. 3.)

relationship of the hemoglobin-­CO2 dissociation allows for averaging
of capillary Pco2 (Pcco2) from hyperventilated and hypoventilated
areas. Because the association between oxygen tension and hemoglobin
saturation plateaus with increasing Pao2 (i.e., “S-­shaped” curve), the
decreased hemoglobin-­O2 saturation in poorly ventilated areas cannot
be compensated for by well-­ventilated areas where hemoglobin-­O2 saturation has already reached near-­maximum. This results in decreased
arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sao2) and Pao2. Elevation of Paco2
in such situations is indicative of coincident alveolar hypoventilation.
Examples of diseases leading to venous admixture include asthma and
aspiration pneumonia and pulmonary embolism, and those of intrapulmonary shunt include lobar pneumonia and ARDS.

Diffusion

Even if ventilation and perfusion are matched, gas exchange requires
diffusion across the interstitial space between the alveoli and pulmonary capillaries. Under normal conditions, there is sufficient time for
the pulmonary capillary blood to equilibrate with alveolar gas across
the interstitial space. When the interstitial space is thickened by extravasated fluid or inflammatory cells, diffusion is impaired. Because the
diffusion capacity of CO2 is 20 times greater than that of O2, diffusion
defects manifest as hypoxemia rather than hypercarbia. Even with the
administration of 100% oxygen, Pao2 increases to approximately 660

mm Hg from 100 mm Hg at sea level, and the concentration gradient for diffusion of O2 is increased by only 6.6 times. Therefore, with
diffusion defects, lethal hypoxemia will set in before clinically significant CO2 retention results. In fact, in such situations, Paco2 is often
decreased because of the hyperventilation that accompanies hypoxemia. The presence of hypercarbia in diseases that impair diffusion is
indicative of alveolar hypoventilation from coexisting airway obstruction, CNS depression, or exhaustion. Examples of disease that impair
diffusion are interstitial pneumonia, scleroderma, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, and ARDS.

Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome

Some patients with respiratory failure meet criteria for ARDS, a pulmonary condition of myriad etiologies characterized by hypoxemia of
acute onset and chest radiograph findings consistent with acute pulmonary parenchymal disease (Fig. 86.1). ARDS affects both children and
adults and can be the result of pulmonary (direct) or extrapulmonary
(indirect) insults. Causes of direct ARDS include pneumonia, aspiration of gastric contents or toxic chemicals, lung contusion, and smoke
inhalation. Causes of indirect ARDS include sepsis, transfusion-­related
lung injury, and pancreatitis, to name a few. The diagnostic criteria for
pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome (PARDS) are outlined in
Table 86.7.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

616 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 86.7    Pediatric Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (PARDS 2.0) Definition
Age

Excludes patients with perinatal-related lung disease

Timing

Within 7 days of a known clinical insult

Origin of edema

Not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload

Chest imaging

New opacities (unilateral or bilateral) consistent with acute pulmonary parenchymal disease and which are not due
primarily to atelectasis or pleural effusiona

Oxygenationb

IMV: OI ≥ 4 or OSI ≥ 5
NIVc: Pa 2/ Fio2 ≤ 300 or SPo2/ Fio2 ≤ 250
o

Stratification of PARDS severity: Apply ≥ 4 after initial diagnosis of PARDS
Severe: OI ≥16 or OSI ≥12

IMV PARDS

Mild/moderate: OI <16 or OSI <12

NIV PARDSc

Mild/moderate: Pa 2/ Fio2>100 or SP 2/ Fio2 >150
o

o

Severe: Pa 2/ Fio2 ≤ 100 or SP 2/ Fio2 ≤ 150
o

o

Special Populationsd
Cyanotic heart disease

Above criteria, with acute deterioration in oxygenation not explained by cardiac disease

Chronic lung disease

Above criteria, with acute deterioration in oxygenation from baseline

aChildren in resource-limited settings where imaging is not available who otherwise meet PARDS criteria are considered to have possible PARDS.

bOxygenation should be measured at steady state and not during transient desaturation episodes. When S
Po2 is used, ensure that SPo2 is ≤ 97%.
cDiagnosis of PARDS on NIV (NIV PARDS) requires full facemask interface with continuous airway positive pressure/positive end-expiratory pressure ≥ 5cm H O.
2
dStratification of PARDS severity does not apply to these populations.

IMV, invasive mechanical ventilation; NIV noninvasive ventilation; OI, oxygenation index; OSI, oxygen saturation index; PARDS, pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome; SPo2,
pulse oximeter oxygen saturation; Pa 2, partial pressure of arterial oxygen; Fio2, fraction of inspired oxygen.
OI = mean airway pressure (MAP) (cm H2O) × Fio2 /Pa 2 (mm Hg).
OSI = MAP (cm H2O) × Fio2 /SPo2.
Adapted from Executive Summary of the Second International Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Pediatric Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (PALICC-2): Pediatr
Crit Care Med 2023;24:143–168.
o

o

MONITORING A CHILD IN RESPIRATORY DISTRESS
AND RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Clinical Examination

Clinical observation is the most important component of monitoring.
The presence and magnitude of abnormal clinical findings, their progression with time, and their temporal relation to therapeutic interventions serve as guides to diagnosis and management (see Chapter
421). As much as possible, the child with respiratory distress or failure
should be observed in the position of greatest comfort and in the least
threatening environment.
Pulse oximetry is the most commonly used technique to monitor
oxygenation. Noninvasive and safe, it is the standard of care in bedside
monitoring of children during transport, procedural sedation, surgery,
and critical illness. It indirectly measures arterial hemoglobin-­O2 saturation by differentiating oxyhemoglobin from deoxygenated hemoglobin
through their respective light absorption at wavelengths of 660 nm (red)
and 940 nm (infrared). A pulsatile circulation is required to enable detection of arterialized blood entering the capillary bed. Percentage of arterial oxyhemoglobin is reported as Sao2; however, the correct description
is oxyhemoglobin saturation as measured by pulse oximetry (Spo2). Such
precision is needed because Spo2 may not always reflect Sao2. It is important to be familiar with the hemoglobin-­O2 dissociation curve (see Chapter 421) to estimate Pao2 at a given oxyhemoglobin saturation. Because
of the shape of the hemoglobin-­O2 dissociation curve, changes in Pao2
above 70 mm Hg are not readily identified by pulse oximetry. Also, at the
same Pao2, there may be significant change in Spo2 at a different blood
pH value. In most situations, Spo2 >95% is a reasonable goal, especially
in emergency care. In patients receiving supplemental oxygen, a target
saturation range of 94–96% should be considered in order to decrease
unnecessary exposure that could result in oxygen toxicity. There are
exceptions, such as in patients with large left-­to-­right shunts (e.g., ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus) or with single-­ventricle
cardiac lesions in whom the pulmonary and systemic circulations are
receiving blood flow from the same ventricle (e.g., after stage I palliation
for hypoplastic left heart syndrome). In the latter, a lower Spo2 (75–85%)
is desired to avoid excessive blood flow to the lungs and reduced blood
flow to the systemic circulation that can lead to morbidity and death.

Because most commercially available pulse oximeters recognize all types
of hemoglobin as either oxyhemoglobin or deoxygenated hemoglobin,
they provide inaccurate information in the presence of carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin. In carbon monoxide poisoning, carboxyhemoglobin absorbs light in the same (red) wavelength as oxyhemoglobin,
leading to overestimation of oxygen saturation. Methemoglobin absorbs
light in both the oxygenated and deoxygenated wavelengths, which can
cause either an overestimation or underestimation of oxygen saturation.
Data suggest that increasing methemoglobin concentrations tend to
drive Spo2 toward 85%, no matter the actual percent of oxyhemoglobin. At lower methemoglobin levels, the pulse oximetry reading is falsely
low, whereas high levels lead to a falsely high pulse oximetry reading.
Newer specialized pulse oximeters can distinguish dyshemoglobinemias
and prevent false readings, but their use is not widespread. It should be
recognized that dangerous levels of hypercarbia may exist in patients
with ventilatory failure, who have satisfactory Spo2 if they are receiving
supplemental oxygen. Pulse oximetry should not be the only monitoring
method in patients with primary ventilatory failure, such as neuromuscular weakness and CNS depression. It is also unreliable in patients with
poor perfusion and poor pulsatile flow to the extremities. Pulse oximetry
may underestimate the degree of hypoxia in Black patients. Despite these
limitations, pulse oximetry is a noninvasive, easily applicable, and effective means of assessing oxygenation in most patients.
Volumetric capnography (end-­tidal CO2 [Petco2] measurement) is
helpful to noninvasively assess the effectiveness of ventilation and pulmonary circulation. The Petco2 can be used to determine the alveolar
dead space fraction (VD/VT) and is calculated as follows:
VD/VT = (Paco2 − Petco2) ÷ Paco2
Changes in the alveolar dead space fraction usually correlate well
with changes in the gradient of Paco2 and Petco2 (Paco2 − Petco2).
Thus a change in Paco2 − Petco2 can be used as an index of changes
in alveolar dead space. Diseases resulting in increased alveolar dead
space (e.g., asthma with dynamic hyperinflation) or decreased pulmonary blood flow (e.g., pulmonary embolism, low cardiac output) lead
to decreases in Petco2 and an increase in Paco2 − Petco2. Petco2 alone
may overestimate adequacy of ventilation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure
Blood Gas Abnormalities

Arterial blood gas analysis offers valuable assistance in diagnosis, monitoring, and management of a child in respiratory distress and failure.
Because arterial blood sampling in children can be impractical without an indwelling catheter, a capillary blood gas (CBG) sample often
is obtained, especially in emergency situations. A properly arterialized
CBG sample obtained by warming the digit or heel that yields free-­
flowing blood is an acceptable surrogate. The blood sample needs to
be processed without delay. CBG provides a good estimate of Paco2
and arterial pH, but less so for Pao2. In patients who mainly require
monitoring of ventilation (especially those whose oxygenation is being
monitored with pulse oximetry), a venous blood gas sample provides a
reasonable estimate of arterial pH and Paco2 values, provided tissue
perfusion is adequate. Venous Pco2 (Pvco2) is approximately 6 mm
Hg higher and pH approximately 0.03 lower than the arterial values.
Pvo2 has a poor correlation with Pao2. Mixed venous O2 saturation
obtained from a central venous catheter in the right atrium is a useful
marker of the balance between oxygen delivery and oxygen consumption. In patients with a constant arterial O2 content and O2 consumption, mixed venous O2 saturation offers valuable information about
cardiac output.
Blood gas analysis is important not only for determining the adequacy of oxygenation and ventilation but also for determining the site
of respiratory pathology and planning treatment (see Chapter 421).
Briefly, in the presence of pure alveolar hypoventilation (e.g., airway
obstruction above carina, decreased CO2 responsiveness, neuromuscular weakness), the blood gas will show respiratory acidosis with an
elevated Paco2 but a relative sparing of oxygenation. V̇/Q̇ mismatch
(peripheral airway obstruction, bronchopneumonia) will be reflected
in increasing hypoxemia and variable levels of Paco2 (low, normal,
high) depending on severity of disease. Intrapulmonary right-­to-­left
shunting and diffusion defects (alveolar-­interstitial diseases such as
pulmonary edema, ARDS) will be associated with a large A-­ao2 gradient and hypoxemia with relative sparing of CO2 elimination, unless
there is coincident fatigue or CNS depression.

Acid-­Base Abnormalities

It is crucial to analyze the magnitude and appropriateness of changes
in pH, Paco2, and bicarbonate concentration ([HCO3−]) because they
provide useful clues to the underlying pathophysiology and presence
of more than one disorder. To do so, it is useful to assume baseline values of pH 7.40, Paco2 40 mm Hg, and [HCO3−] 24 mEq/L. Newborns
have a lower renal threshold for bicarbonate and therefore have slightly
different baseline values of pH 7.38, Paco2 35 mm Hg, and [HCO3−]
20 mEq/L.

Metabolic Acidosis with Respiratory Compensation

Patients with metabolic acidosis have decreased pH resulting from
decreased serum [HCO3−]. Chemoreceptor stimulation results in
hyperventilation and respiratory compensation that may clinically
manifest as respiratory distress. Normal compensation does not completely correct the pH, but rather minimizes a change in pH that would
otherwise occur without compensation. The adequacy of respiratory compensation is judged by the extent of the decline in Paco2 in
response to the decline in [HCO3−] or pH. A normal compensation for
metabolic acidosis results in a fall in Paco2 by 1.2 mm Hg for every 1
mEq/L fall in [HCO3−]. The most commonly used method to analyze
the adequacy of respiratory compensation is Winter’s formula:
Paco2 mm Hg = (HCO3− × 1.5) + 8 ± 2
A quick method is to look at the last two digits of pH (provided it is
not <7.10), which should be within 2 mm Hg of Paco2. For example,
pH 7.27, Paco2 26 mm Hg, and [HCO3−] 12 mEq/L represent metabolic acidosis with a normal respiratory compensation response. On
the other hand, pH 7.15, Paco2 30 mm Hg, and [HCO3−] 10 mEq/L
constitutes metabolic acidosis with inadequate respiratory compensation. The reasons for inadequate compensation include decreased CO2
responsiveness (e.g., narcotic poisoning, cerebral edema), abnormalities of lungs and airways, or neuromuscular weakness. A decrease in

617

Paco2 that is greater than what could be expected as a normal compensatory response to metabolic acidosis is indicative of a mixed disorder. A pH 7.20, Paco2 15 mm Hg, and [HCO3−] 7.5 mEq/L represent
metabolic acidosis with a concomitant respiratory alkalosis because
the decline in Paco2 is greater than what can be expected as normal
compensation. A combination of metabolic acidosis and respiratory
alkalosis is often encountered in serious conditions such as cardiogenic
shock (e.g., stimulation of baroreceptors), sepsis, or toxic-­metabolic
states (e.g., salicylates, organic acidemia).

Respiratory Acidosis with Metabolic Compensation

Patients with respiratory acidosis have decreased pH as a result of
elevated Paco2. An acute increase in Paco2 of 10 mm Hg results in a
decrease in pH by 0.08. Thus a child with severe critical asthma and
a Paco2 of 60 mm Hg will have a blood pH of approximately 7.24.
Chronically elevated (>3-­5 days) Paco2 is accompanied by renal compensation and increase in serum [HCO3−], limiting the fall in pH to
0.03 for every 10 mm Hg rise in Paco2. Thus an infant with bronchopulmonary dysplasia who has a basal Paco2 of 60 mm Hg will have a
blood pH of approximately 7.34. These findings are helpful in distinguishing acute from chronic changes in Paco2. Also, for a given level
of CO2 accumulation, a decrease in pH that is greater than expected is
indicative of concomitant metabolic acidosis, and a decline in pH that
is less than expected is caused by accompanying metabolic alkalosis.

Assessment of Oxygenation and Ventilation Deficits

For standardizing management, following clinical progress, and determining prognosis for patients with defects in oxygenation or ventilation, the following indicators have been proposed, each with its
strengths and limitations:
A-­ao2 gradient is calculated by the subtraction, Pao2 − Pao2. For
the comparison to be valid, both values must be taken at the same
time and with the same fraction of oxygen in the inspired gas
(Fio2).
Pao2/Fio2 ratio (P/F ratio) is calculated by dividing Pao2 by Fio2. The
P/F ratio is the measure of oxygenation adequacy employed in the
Berlin definition of ARDS in adults (Table 86.8). According to the
Berlin definition, a P/F ≤300 mm Hg is consistent with mild ARDS,
a P/F ratio between 100 and 200 mm Hg is consistent with moderate ARDS, and a P/F ratio ≤100 mm Hg is consistent with severe
ARDS. Although the intent is to gauge the degree of V̇/Q̇ mismatch,
intrapulmonary shunt, and diffusion defect, the status of alveolar hypoventilation could have a significant impact on P/F ratio.
Spo2/Fio2 ratio may be used as a surrogate measure of oxygenation
adequacy when Pao2 is not available. It is calculated by dividing
the pulse oximeter saturation by the Fio2. P/F ratios of 200 mm
Table 86.8  The Berlin Definition of ARDS
• Acute onset (within 7 days of new or worsening respiratory
symptoms)
• Bilateral radiographic opacities that are not fully explained by
effusion, atelectasis, or masses
• Arterial hypoxemia defined by thresholds:
Mild: 200 <Pao2/Fio2 ratio ≤300 mm Hg, on CPAP* or PEEP† ≥5 cm
H2O (observed mortality 27%)
Moderate: 100 <Pao2/Fio2 ratio ≤200 mm Hg, on PEEP ≥5 cm H2O
(observed mortality 32%)
Severe: Pao2/Fio2 ratio ≤100 mm Hg, on PEEP ≥5 cm H2O
(observed mortality 45%)
• Identified risk factor for ARDS (if no clear risk factor, exclude heart
failure as a cause)
• Not exclusively the result of cardiac causes
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure;
Fio2, fraction of inspired oxygen; Pa 2, partial pressure of oxygen; PEEP, positive end-­
expiratory pressure.
*Delivered by noninvasive or invasive ventilation.
†Delivered by invasive mechanical ventilation.
From Meyer NJ, Gattinoni L, Calfee CS. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet.
2021;398:622-­637, Panel 1, p. 622.
o

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

618 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Hg and 300 mm Hg correlate approximately with S/F ratios of
235 and 315, respectively. This relationship is most valid for Spo2
values between 80% and 97%.
Pao2/Pao2 ratio is determined by dividing Pao2 by Pao2. The level
of alveolar ventilation is accounted for in the calculation of Pao2.
Therefore Pao2/Pao2 is more indicative of V̇/Q̇ mismatch and alveolar capillary integrity.
Oxygenation index (OI) is aimed at standardizing oxygenation to
the level of concomitant therapeutic interventions (e.g., mean airway pressure [MAP] and Fio2) that influence oxygenation. None
of the indicators of oxygenation mentioned earlier take into account the degree of positive pressure respiratory support. The OI
is calculated as follows:
OI = (MAP × Fio2 × 100) / Pao2
Oxygenation saturation index (OSI) is analogous to OI and useful
when Pao2 measurements are not available. It substitutes Spo2 for
Pao2 in the formula as follows:
OSI = (MAP × Fio2 × 100) / Spo2
Both the OI and OSI are used in the Pediatric Acute Lung Injury
Consensus Conference (PALICC) definition of PARDS. The main limitation of OI and OSI is that level of ventilation is not accounted for in
the assessment.

MANAGEMENT

The goal of management for respiratory distress and respiratory failure
is to ensure a patent airway and provide necessary support for adequate
oxygenation of the blood and removal of CO2. Compared with hypercapnia, hypoxemia is a life-­threatening condition; therefore initial therapy for
respiratory failure should be aimed at ensuring adequate oxygenation.

Oxygen Administration

Supplemental oxygen administration is the least invasive and most easily tolerated therapy for hypoxemic respiratory failure. Nasal cannula
oxygen provides low levels of oxygen supplementation and is easy to
administer. Oxygen is humidified in a bubble humidifier and delivered via nasal prongs inserted into the nares. In children, a flow rate
<5 L/min is most often used because of increasing nasal irritation with
higher flow rates. A common formula for an estimation of the Fio2
during use of a nasal cannula in older children and adults follows:
Fio2 (as a percentage) = 21% + (Nasal cannula flow [L/min] × 3)
The typical Fio2 value (expressed as a percentage rather than a fraction of 1) using this method is between 23% and 40%, although the
Fio2 varies according to the size of the child, the respiratory rate, and
the volume of air moved with each breath. In a young child, because
typical nasal cannula flow rates are a greater percentage of total minute
ventilation, significantly higher Fio2 may be provided. Alternatively,
a simple mask may be used, which consists of a mask with open side
ports and a valveless oxygen source. Variable amounts of room air are
entrained through the ports and around the side of the mask, depending on the fit, size, and minute volume of the child. Oxygen flow rates
administered through a simple mask generally vary from 5 to 10 L/
min, yielding typical Fio2 values (expressed as a percentage rather than
a fraction of 1) between 30% and 65%. If more precise delivery of oxygen is desired, other mask devices should be used.
A Venturi mask provides preset Fio2 through a mask and reservoir
system by entraining precise flow rates of room air into the reservoir
along with high-­flow oxygen. The adapter at the end of each mask reservoir determines the flow rate of entrained room air and the subsequent Fio2 adapters provide Fio2 of 0.30-­0.50. Oxygen flow rates of 5-­10
L/min are recommended to achieve the desired Fio2 and to prevent
rebreathing. Partial rebreather and non-­rebreather masks use a reservoir bag attached to a mask to provide higher Fio2. Partial rebreather
masks have two open exhalation ports and contain a valveless oxygen
reservoir bag. Some exhaled gas can mix with reservoir gas, although
most exhaled gas exits the mask via the exhalation ports. Through these
same ports, room air is entrained, and the partial rebreather mask can

provide Fio2 up to 0.60 for as long as oxygen flow is adequate to keep
the bag from collapsing (typically 10-­15 L/min). As with nasal cannulas, smaller children with smaller tidal volumes entrain less room air,
and their delivered Fio2 will be higher. Non-­rebreather masks include
two one-­way valves, one between the oxygen reservoir bag and the
mask and the other on one of the two exhalation ports. This arrangement minimizes mixing of exhaled and fresh gas and entrainment of
room air during inspiration. The second exhalation port has no valve,
a safeguard to allow some room air to enter the mask in the event of
disconnection from the oxygen source. A non-­rebreather mask can
provide Fio2 up to 0.95. The use of a non-­rebreather mask in conjunction with an oxygen blender allows delivery of Fio2 between 0.50 and
0.95 (Table 86.9). When supplemental oxygen alone is inadequate to
improve oxygenation, or when ventilation impairments coexist, additional therapies may be necessary.

Airway Adjuncts

Maintenance of a patent airway is a critical step in establishing adequate
oxygenation and ventilation. Artificial pharyngeal airways may be useful in patients with oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway obstruction and in those with neuromuscular weakness in whom inherent
extrathoracic airway resistance contributes to respiratory compromise.
An oropharyngeal airway is a stiff plastic spacer with grooves along
each side that is placed in the mouth to run from the teeth along the
tongue to its base just above the vallecula. The spacer prevents the
tongue from opposing the posterior pharynx and occluding the airway.
Because the tip sits at the base of the tongue, it is usually not tolerated
by patients who are awake or whose gag reflex is strong. The nasopharyngeal airway, or nasal trumpet, is a flexible tube that can be inserted
into the nose to run from the nostril along the top of the hard and soft
palate with the tip ending in the hypopharynx. It is useful in bypassing
obstruction from enlarged adenoids or from contact of the soft palate
with the posterior pharynx. Because it is inserted past the adenoids, a
nasopharyngeal airway should be used with caution in patients with
bleeding tendencies.

Inhaled Gases

Helium-­oxygen mixture (heliox) is useful in overcoming airway
obstruction and improving ventilation. Helium is much less dense
and slightly more viscous than nitrogen. When substituted for nitrogen in the inspired gas, helium helps maintain laminar flow across an
obstructed airway, decreases airway resistance, and improves ventilation. It is especially helpful in diseases of large airways obstruction in
which turbulent airflow is more common, such as acute laryngotracheobronchitis, subglottic stenosis, and vascular ring. To be effective,
helium should be administered in concentrations of at least 60%, so
associated hypoxemia may limit its use in patients requiring >40%
oxygen.

Table 86.9  Approximate Oxygen Delivery According to
Device and Flow Rates in Infants and Older
Children*
DEVICE

FLOW (L/min)

Fio2 DELIVERED

Nasal cannula

0.1-­6

0.21-­0.4

Simple face mask

5-­10

0.4-­0.6

Partial rebreather

6-­15

0.55-­0.7

Non-­rebreather

6-­15

0.7-­0.95

Venturi mask

5-­10

0.25-­0.5

Hood/tent

7-­12

0.21-­1.0

High-­flow systems

1-­60

0.21-­1.0

*Individual delivery varies and depends on the patient’s size, respiratory rate, and gas
volume moved with every breath.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure
Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) is a powerful pulmonary vasodilator. Its
use may improve pulmonary blood flow and V̇/Q̇ matching in patients
with diseases that elevate pulmonary vascular resistance, such as persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn, primary pulmonary
hypertension, and secondary pulmonary hypertension from chronic
excess pulmonary blood flow (e.g., ventriculoseptal defect) or collagen
vascular diseases. iNO is administered in doses ranging generally from
5 to 20 parts per million of inspired gas. Although administration of
iNO to unintubated patients is possible, it is most commonly used in
patients undergoing mechanical ventilation via an endotracheal tube.

Positive Pressure Respiratory Support

Noninvasive positive pressure respiratory support is useful in treating
both hypoxemic and hypoventilatory respiratory failure. Positive airway pressure helps with aeration of partially atelectatic or fluid-­filled
alveoli, prevention of alveolar collapse at end exhalation, and increase
in functional residual capacity (FRC). These actions improve pulmonary compliance and hypoxemia, and decrease intrapulmonary shunt.
In addition, positive pressure ventilation is useful in preventing collapse of extrathoracic airways by maintaining positive airway pressure
during inspiration. Improving compliance and overcoming airway
resistance also improves tidal volume and, therefore, ventilation.
A high-­flow nasal cannula (HFNC) delivers conditioned (heated
and humidified) gas at flows generally ranging from 0.5 to 2 L/kg/min
up to a maximum of 60 L/min. The Fio2 can be adjusted by provision
of gas flow through an oxygen blender, or directly, when a dedicated
commercial high-­flow system is employed. A properly sized cannula
for HFNC support should have prongs that occupy no more than 50%
of the cross-­sectional area of the nostrils, thus allowing for ample leakage of gas (open system). Therefore although elevated pressures may
be generated in areas of the nasopharynx, very low levels of positive
expiratory pressure (<1 cm H2O) thought to be clinically insignificant
are transmitted to the intrathoracic airway. The principal mechanisms
of action of HFNC are washout of CO2 from the pharyngeal anatomic
dead space and facilitation of gas movement across the nasopharyngeal airway resistor. This is in contrast to continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP), a clinically equivalent support modality predicated
on the use of a tight-­fitting interface (closed system) in the form of
nasal prongs, masks, or helmet. CPAP creates a stable level of operator-­
selected airway pressure that is transmitted to the intrathoracic airway.
CPAP levels of 6-­7 cm H2O have been shown to unload the diaphragm
and decrease work of breathing in infants with bronchiolitis. CPAP is
most useful in diseases of mildly decreased lung compliance and low
FRC, such as bronchiolitis with atelectasis and pneumonia. Patients
with diseases of extrathoracic airway obstruction, in which extrathoracic negative airway pressures during inspiration result in airway
narrowing (e.g., laryngotracheitis, laryngomalacia, obstructive sleep
apnea, postextubation airway edema), may also benefit from CPAP.
Potential risks include nasal irritation, pressure injury, hyperinflation
from excessive CPAP in smaller patients, and abdominal distention
from swallowed air.
Noninvasive positive airway pressure ventilation (NIPPV) provides positive airway pressure during exhalation and a higher pressure
that supports inspiration, also termed bilevel noninvasive ventilation
(see Chapter 86.1).

Endotracheal Intubation and Mechanical Ventilation

When hypoxemia or significant hypoventilation persists despite the
interventions already described, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are indicated. Additional indications for intubation
include maintaining airway patency in patients who have the potential
for airway compromise, such as those with actual or potential neurologic deterioration, and in patients with hemodynamic instability.
Proper monitoring is essential to ensuring a safe and successful
endotracheal intubation. Pulse oximetry, heart rate, and blood pressure
monitoring are mandatory and should be forgone only in situations
calling for emergency intubation. All necessary equipment, including
bag-­mask ventilation device, laryngoscope, endotracheal tube (ETT)
with stylet, and suction equipment, must be available and working

619

properly before intubation. The proper internal diameter (ID) for the
ETT can be estimated using the following formula:
ID = (Age [yr]/4)+4
Table 86.10 provides average values for age, size, and depth of insertion for tracheal tubes. Preoxygenation of the patient with high Fio2
is essential and will allow maximum procedure time before the onset
of hypoxemia. Although intubation can be accomplished without
sedation and pharmacologic paralysis in selected patients, the physiologic benefits of these measures to the patient and to the facilitation
of the intubation usually far outweigh the risks. Administration of a
sedative and analgesic followed by a neuromuscular-­blocking agent is
a common pharmacologic regimen for facilitating intubation. In fact,
sedation and paralysis with neuromuscular blocking agents should be
considered standard unless contraindicated. The particular type and
dose of each agent often depends on the underlying disease and clinician preference. Table 86.11 lists commonly used agents. Dexmedetomidine has been a standard sedating agent for maintenance during
mechanical ventilation. An alternative to this pharmacologic approach
is rapid sequence intubation, used when endotracheal intubation
is urgent or the patient is suspected of having a full stomach and at
increased risk of aspiration (see Chapter 79).
Once adequate sedation and/or paralysis has been achieved, ventilation should be assisted with a bag-­mask device. After optimal
preoxygenation, intubation can be performed. The clinician uses the
dominant hand to open the patient’s mouth and insert the laryngoscope blade gently along the tongue to its base. The airway opening
can be visualized by lifting up and away from the clinician, along the
axis of the laryngoscope handle. When a straight (Miller) laryngoscope
blade is used to visualize the glottis, the tip of the blade lifts the epiglottis anteriorly. When a curved (Macintosh) blade is used to visualize
the glottis, the tip of the blade should be advanced into the vallecula
and then lifted. Secretions often obscure visualization at this step and
should be suctioned clear. Once clear visualization of the vocal cords is
accomplished, the ETT can be placed through the vocal cords. Rapid
confirmation of ETT placement is essential and should be assessed
by as many of the following steps as possible: (1) presence of exhaled
CO2 determined by a colorimetric device, capnometry, or, preferably,
capnography, attached in-­line with the ETT; (2) auscultation of both
lung fields for equal breath sounds and the epigastrium; (3) bilateral
chest wall expansion; and (4) condensation (misting) inside the ETT.
An increasing heart rate, if heart rate had decreased before or during

Table 86.10  Average Size and Depth Dimensions for
Tracheal Tubes
INTERNAL
DIAMETER
(mm)

OROTRACHEAL
DEPTH (cm)

NASOTRACHEAL
DEPTH (cm)

Premature

2.0-­3.0

8-­9

9-­10

Full-­term
neonate

3.0-­3.5

10

11

6 mo

4.0

11

13

12-­24 mo

4.5

13-­14

16-­17

4 yr

5.0

15

17-­18

6 yr

5.5

17

19-­20

8 yr

6.0

19

21-­22

10 yr

6.5

20

22-­23

12 yr

7.0

21

23-­24

14 yr

7.5

22

24-­25

Adult

8.0-­9.0

23-­25

25-­28

PATIENT AGE

Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

620 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 86.11  Medications Commonly Used for Intubation
DRUG

DOSE

ONSET (min)

DURATION (min)

COMMENTS

0.1 mg/kg IV

3-­5

60-­120

Lorazepam

0.1 mg/kg IV

3-­5

120-­240

Ketamine

2-­3

10-­15

Propofol

1-­2 mg/kg IV
4-­6 mg/kg IM
1-­3 mg/kg IV

0.5-­2

10-­15

Thiopental

4-­7 mg/kg IV

0.5-­1

5-­10

Amnesia
Respiratory depression
Amnesia
Respiratory depression
↑ HR, BP, and ICP
Bronchodilation, sialorrhea
↓ BP
Apnea
↓ BP
Apnea

ANALGESICS
Fentanyl

2-­5 μg/kg IV

3-­5

30-­90

Morphine

0.1 mg/kg IV

5-­15

120-­240

NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING AGENTS
Vecuronium
0.1 mg/kg IV

1.5-2

30-­75

Rocuronium

1-1.5

15-­60

3-5

25-­30

SEDATIVES/ANESTHETICS
Midazolam

Cisatracurium

0.6-­1.2 mg/kg IV
1 mg/kg IM
0.1 mg/kg IV

Respiratory depression
Chest wall rigidity
↓ BP
Respiratory depression
↑ HR
Renal elimination
↑ HR
Renal elimination
Histamine release
Nonrenal elimination

BP, Blood pressure; HR, heart rate; ICP, intracranial pressure; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously.

the attempt, and a rising or normal Spo2 reading are suggestive of successful tube placement. Preoxygenation may significantly delay any
drop in Spo2 with improper tube placement, leading to a delay in its
recognition. A properly placed ETT should be well secured to avoid
displacement or dislodgement. As soon as feasible, a chest radiograph
should also be obtained to confirm proper position of the ETT, which
should lie with the tip about halfway between the thoracic inlet and the
carina (see Chapter 79).

Transient Manual Ventilation in Immediate
Preintubation and Postintubation Periods

Establishment of supportive ventilation via bag-­mask or bag-­ETT is
required before transport of the patient to a setting of continued critical
care. The technique of manual ventilation should take into account the
underlying pathology. Mechanical ventilation of patients with diseases
characterized by low FRC (e.g., pneumonia, pulmonary edema, ARDS)
should include the application of PEEP to prevent alveolar derecruitment. Lung volume recruitment can be accomplished with a PEEP
valve on a self-­inflating ventilation bag or by careful manipulation of
exhaust gas using an anesthesia bag. Such diseases are also characterized by a short time constant for lung deflation and therefore are best
managed with relatively small tidal volumes and high ventilation rates.
In contrast, diseases characterized by airway obstruction, such as
critical asthma, have prolonged deflation time constants and are therefore best managed with relatively slow rates and high tidal volumes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

86.1 Mechanical Ventilation
Martin C.J. Kneyber, Ashok P. Sarnaik, and
Alexandre T. Rotta
The decision to institute mechanical ventilation is based mainly on
the need to assist native pulmonary function in patients with acute
respiratory failure; supporting performance of the left ventricle (LV),
decreasing metabolic demand, and modulating of cerebral blood flow

in intracranial hypertension are additional indications. Respiratory
distress leading to fatigue and impending exhaustion are also indications for respiratory support, even in the presence of adequate gas
exchange. Although there are no absolute criteria for derangement of
gas exchange, Pao2 <60 mm Hg while breathing >60% oxygen, Paco2
>60 mm Hg, and pH <7.25 are often used in the decision-­making to
institute respiratory support. Positive pressure ventilation is a powerful means of decreasing LV afterload, and it is used for this purpose
in patients with cardiogenic shock resulting from LV dysfunction.
Mechanical ventilation is also used in patients whose breathing is
unreliable (e.g., unconscious patients, those with neuromuscular dysfunction) and when deliberate hyperventilation is desired, such as in
patients with intracranial hypertension.
Mechanical ventilation is not intended to normalize gas exchange.
The goals are to maintain sufficient oxygenation and ventilation to
ensure tissue viability until the disease process that has compromised
the patient’s lung function has resolved, while minimizing excessive work of breathing and complications. When precisely employed,
mechanical ventilation is a lifesaving intervention, yet care must be
taken to avoid ventilator-­induced lung injury (VILI). Several factors
have been identified as contributors to VILI. These include lung strain
from the delivery of excessive tidal volume (volutrauma), injury from
the repetitive opening and closing of alveoli (atelectrauma), injury
from excessive pressure delivery (barotrauma), local and systemic
cytokine release (biotrauma), and damage caused by oxygen toxicity
(Figs. 86.2 and 86.3).

BASIC CONCEPTS OF VENTILATOR MANAGEMENT
Equation of Motion

A pressure gradient is required for air to move from one place to
another. During natural spontaneous ventilation, inspiration results
from generation of negative intrapleural pressure from contraction of
the diaphragm and intercostal muscles, drawing air from the atmosphere across the airways into the alveoli. During mechanical ventilation, inspiration results from positive pressure created by compressed
gases through the ventilator, which pushes air across the airways into
alveoli. In both spontaneous and mechanical ventilation, exhalation
results from alveolar pressure generated by the elastic recoil of the lung

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure
Zone of
overdistension

B

621

1. Pressure gradient is required to move air from one place to another
2. Movement of air is opposed by flow-resistive and elastic properties
of the system
Resistance 

∆ pressure
∆ flow

Dynamic
process

C
Elastance (inverse of Compliance)
Zone of
atelectasis

A

Fig. 86.2 Atelectrauma. The interface between collapsed and con-

solidated lung (A) and overdistended lung units (B) is heterogeneous
and unstable. Depending on ambient conditions, this region is prone to
cyclic recruitment and derecruitment and localized asymmetric stretch
of lung units (C) immediately apposed to regions of collapsed lung.
(From Pinhu L, Whitehead T, Evans T, et al. Ventilator-­associated lung
injury. Lancet. 2003;361:332-­340.)

Volume
Compliance 

Pressure gradient 

∆ volume
compliance



Elastic properties
Upper
inflection
point

Volume

Deflation

Inflation

Lower inflection point

Pressure

Zone of recruitment
and derecruitment

Zone of
over-distension

Volume

Upper
inflection
point

Lower
inflection
point
PEEP

Pmax

Fig. 86.3 Pulmonary pressure-­volume relation in a patient with acute

lung injury. Top, The lower inflection point is typically 12-­18 cm H2O
and the upper inflection point 26-­32 cm H2O. Bottom, Specific protective ventilation strategies require that positive end-­expiratory pressure
(PEEP) is set just above the lower inflection point and the pressure limit
(Pmax) just below the upper inflection point. Thus the lung is ventilated
in the safe zone between the zone of recruitment and derecruitment
and the zone of overdistention, and both high-­volume and low-­volume
injuries are avoided. This zone is located on the deflation limb of the
pressure-­volume curve, making use of the pulmonary hysteresis. (From
Pinhu L, Whitehead T, Evans T, et al. Ventilator-­associated lung injury.
Lancet. 2003;361:332-­340.)

∆ volume
∆ pressure

Static
process

(Flow  resistance)
Flow-resistive properties

Fig. 86.4 Equation of motion. A pressure gradient is required to
move air from one place to another. In the lungs, the required pressure gradient must overcome the lung and chest wall elastance (static
component) and the flow-­resistive properties (dynamic component).
The static component is increased in alveolar interstitial diseases and
stiff chest wall, whereas the dynamic component is increased with airway obstruction.

and the chest wall. Pressure necessary to move a given amount of air
into the lung is determined by two factors: lung and chest wall elastance
and airway resistance. Figure 86.4 describes the relationship in pressure gradient, compliance, and resistance. Elastance—defined as the
change in pressure (ΔP) divided by the change in volume (ΔV)—refers
to the property of a substance to oppose deformation. It is opposite of
compliance (ΔV ÷ ΔP), the property of a substance to allow distention
or lengthening when subjected to pressure. Compliance (C) is therefore expressed as 1/elastance.
The pressure needed to overcome tissue elastance is measured in
conditions in which there is no flow (at end inspiration and end expiration) and is therefore a reflection of static conditions in the lung. It
is influenced by tidal volume (Vt) and compliance (P = ΔV ÷ C). It
is increased with high Vt and low compliance. This pressure gradient is used to calculate the static compliance of the respiratory system
(CSTAT).
Resistance (R) refers to the opposition to generation of flow. It is
measured as the amount of pressure needed to generate a unit of flow
(ΔP ÷ ΔFlow). Pressure needed to overcome airway resistance is calculated as flow multiplied by resistance. Because this pressure is needed
only when the flow is occurring through the airways, it is referred to
as the dynamic component. Pressure to overcome flow-­resistive properties is measured when there is maximum flow and is therefore under
dynamic conditions. It is increased in conditions with greater airway
resistance and flow rate. Flow rate depends on the time allowed for
inspiration and expiration. At higher respiratory rates, there is less
time available for each inspiration and expiration, necessitating higher
flows; therefore higher pressure is required to overcome flow-­resistive
properties. The pressure gradient necessary to move air from one place
to another is the sum of pressure needed to overcome the elastic and
flow-­resistive properties of the lung. This pressure gradient is taken
into account to calculate the dynamic compliance of the respiratory
system (CDYN). The difference in change in pressure between static
conditions and dynamic conditions is attributable to airway resistance.

Functional Residual Capacity

During inspiration, oxygen-­enriched gas enters alveoli. During exhalation, oxygen continues to be removed by the pulmonary capillary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

622 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
circulation. Functional residual capacity (FRC) is the volume of gas
left in the alveoli at end expiration; in mechanically ventilated patients,
it is generally referred to as end-­expiratory lung volume (EELV). It is
the only source of gas available for gas exchange during exhalation.
In diseases with decreased FRC (e.g., pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome [PARDS], pulmonary edema), Pao2 declines sharply
throughout expiration, resulting in hypoxemia. Two ventilator strategies used to improve oxygenation in such situations are the application of PEEP and increasing the inspiratory time (Ti) (Fig. 86.5).
Positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP) increases EELV by stabilizing
recruited alveoli, whereas a longer Ti allows longer exposure of pulmonary capillary blood to a higher concentration of O2 during inspiration
(see also Chapter 421).

Time Constant

At the beginning of inspiration, the atmospheric pressure is higher
than the pressure in the alveoli, resulting in movement of air into the
alveoli. During mechanical ventilation, the ventilator circuit serves as
the patient’s atmosphere. As alveoli expand with air, the alveolar pressure rises throughout inspiration until it equilibrates with the ventilator pressure, at which time airflow ceases. Expiration starts when the
ventilator pressure falls below the alveolar pressure. Alveolar pressure

Airway pressure (cm H2O)

30
2
20
1
3
10
5
4
0

decreases throughout expiration until it reaches the ventilator pressure,
at which time no further egress of air from the alveoli occurs. If inspiration or expiration is terminated before pressure equilibration between
alveoli and the ventilator is allowed to occur, alveolar expansion during inspiration or alveolar emptying during expiration is incomplete.
Incomplete inspiration results in delivery of decreased Vt, whereas
incomplete expiration is associated with air trapping and the presence
of residual PEEP in the alveoli that is greater than the PEEP set at the
ventilator, referred to as auto-­PEEP. Some time is required for pressure equilibration to occur between alveoli and the atmosphere, which
is reflected in the time constant (TC). It takes 3 TCs for 95% (and 5
TCs for 99%) of pressure equilibration to occur. The TC depends on
compliance (C) and resistance (R), and their relationship is depicted in
Figure 86.6. TC is calculated as compliance multiplied by resistance (C
× R) and is measured in seconds.
Diseases with decreased compliance (increased elastance) are characterized by high elastic recoil pressure, which results in more rapid
equilibration of alveolar and ventilator pressures, thereby decreasing TC. Diseases with increased airway resistance are associated with
slower flow rates, require longer time for movement of air from one
place to another, and therefore have increased TC. Airways expand
during inspiration and narrow during expiration. Therefore expiratory
time constant (TCe) is longer than inspiratory time constant (TCi).
In intrathoracic airway obstruction (e.g., asthma, bronchiolitis, aspirated foreign body), airway narrowing is much more pronounced during expiration. Therefore although both TCe and TCi are prolonged in
such diseases, TCe is much more prolonged than TCi. Patients with
such diseases therefore are best ventilated with slower rates, larger Vt,
and longer expiratory time than inspiratory time. In diseases characterized by decreased compliance, both TCe and TCi are short; however,
the TCe is closer to TCi than in normal lungs because the stiffer alveoli
recoil with greater force. Patients with these diseases are best ventilated
with smaller Vt to prevent VILI, increased respiratory rate, and a relatively longer inspiratory time in each breath to improve oxygenation.

Critical Opening Pressure
0

1
Seconds

2

Time

Fig. 86.5 Five different ways to increase mean airway pressure. (1)

Increase the respiratory flow rate, producing a square wave inspiratory pattern; (2) increase the peak inspiratory pressure; (3) reverse the
inspiratory-­
expiratory ratio or prolong the inspiratory time without
changing the rate; (4) increase positive end-­expiratory pressure; and
(5) increase the ventilatory rate by reducing the expiratory time without
changing the inspiratory time. (From Harris TR, Wood BR. Physiologic
principles. In Goldsmith JP, Karotkin EH, eds. Assisted Ventilation of the
Neonate, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;1996.)

Normal lung
pressure

Low compliance
pressure

Collapsed or atelectatic alveoli require a considerable amount of pressure to open. Once open, the alveoli require relatively less pressure
for continued expansion. The process of opening atelectatic alveoli
is called recruitment. In a normal lung, alveoli remain open at end
expiration, and therefore the lung requires relatively less pressure to
receive its Vt. In a disease process in which alveoli collapse at end expiration (e.g., PARDS), a substantial amount of pressure is required to
open the alveoli during inspiration. This pressure causes VILI by two
mechanisms: barotrauma at the terminal airway-­alveolar junction and
volutrauma as a result of overdistention of alveoli that are already open
(see Figs. 86.2 and 86.3). Although pulmonary parenchymal disease
is rarely uniform and each of the millions of alveoli may have its own
mechanical characteristics, a composite volume-­pressure relationship
could be conceptualized for the whole lung (Fig. 86.7).

High resistance
pressure

Fig. 86.6 Time constant (TC). A certain amount of time

TC  X sec

TC  X sec

TC  X sec

TCE  TCI

TCI  TCE

TCE  TCI

is necessary for pressure equilibration (and therefore
completion of delivery of gas) to occur between the proximal airway and alveoli. TC, a reflection of time required
for pressure equilibration, is a product of compliance and
resistance. In diseases of decreased lung compliance,
less time is needed for pressure equilibration to occur,
whereas in diseases of increased airway resistance, more
time is required. Expiratory TC (TCE) is increased much
more than inspiratory TC (TCI) in obstructive airway diseases because airway narrowing is exaggerated during
expiration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure
Critical opening pressure
Normal lung

Upper inflection point (PFLEX)
ARDS

“Safe” zone of ventilation
Pressure
Critical opening pressure
Lower inflection point (PFLEX)

Fig. 86.7 Volume-­pressure relationship in normal lung and in acute

respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). In ARDS, atelectatic alveoli require a considerable amount of pressure to open. Critical opening pressure, also referred to as lower PFLEX, is the airway pressure above which
further alveolar expansion occurs with relatively less pressure. Upper
PFLEX is the airway pressure above which further increase in pressure
results in less alveolar expansion; this is the area of alveolar overdistention. Keeping tidal volume between upper and lower PFLEX values is
considered less injurious to the lung.

In these situations, the lower and upper portions of the curve are
relatively horizontal and the middle portion is more vertical. At the
beginning of inspiration, atelectatic alveoli are being recruited, requiring high pressure for a relatively small increase in volume. Once they
are recruited, further increase in volume requires relatively less pressure. The pressure at which most alveoli are open is called critical opening pressure; this point is also referred to as the lower inflection point
(lower PFLEX). After the lower PFLEX, greater volume can be delivered
for relatively less pressure until the upper PFLEX is reached, at which
point the volume-­pressure curve again becomes relatively horizontal.
The goal of mechanical ventilation in alveolar interstitial pathology is
to deliver a Vt between the lower and upper inflection points, the so-­
called safe zone of ventilation. If Vt is delivered with a change in inflation pressure that includes the lower PFLEX, alveoli are likely to open
and close during every breath, a process termed tidal recruitment
that is injurious to the lung (atelectrauma), especially at the terminal
airway-­alveolar junction. If Vt is delivered with a change of pressure
that includes the upper PFLEX, overdistention of alveoli is likely to
occur, resulting in volutrauma and barotrauma. Keeping tidal ventilation between the upper and lower PFLEX values is accomplished by
maintaining a level of PEEP to produce baseline alveolar recruitment
and delivering a relatively small Vt. This lung-­protective ventilation is
also known as “open lung” strategy and is the preferred approach in
diffuse alveolar interstitial diseases such as PARDS.
Mechanical ventilation may be delivered either noninvasively with a
patient-­machine interface other than an ETT or invasively after endotracheal intubation.

NONINVASIVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION

Delivering positive pressure mechanical respiratory support without
the use of endotracheal intubation is called noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV). This type of respiratory support has been
increasingly used in the pediatric intensive care setting.
The most common techniques applied are continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or biphasic (inspiratory and expiratory) positive airway pressure (BiPAP). Of note, CPAP is only the delivery of
a continuous airway pressure; therefore by definition, it is not a true
form of noninvasive ventilation because a minute volume is generated exclusively by the patient, not by the device. A variety of devices
with increasing sophistication has been developed in recent years, and

623

different interfaces are available, such as nasal prongs, nasal and full-­
face masks, and helmets. Especially in the pediatric population, an age-­
appropriate, properly sized, and comfortable interface that minimizes
air leak is critical for the successful application of NIPPV. NIPPV has
been successfully used in acute and chronic hypoxic and/or hypercarbic
respiratory failure. Indications range from acute lower airway obstruction, such as asthma, or acute upper airway obstruction, including
postextubation airway swelling, to parenchymal lung diseases such as
pneumonia and mild to moderate PARDS. Acute and chronic respiratory failure from neuromuscular weakness or chest wall deformities
have been the classic indication for its use. NIPPV can also be used to
help prevent reintubation after prolonged mechanical ventilation.
BiPAP provides positive airway pressure during exhalation and
additional positive pressure during inspiration. These pressures can
be adjusted independently to suit individual needs and comfort, and a
respiratory rate can be delivered. The additional positive pressure during inspiration helps improve alveolar ventilation in low compliance
and obstructive lung disease. During exhalation, expiratory positive
airway pressure can decrease the effects of airway closure by raising
intraluminal pressure and ameliorating intrathoracic airway collapse.
During inspiration, inspiratory positive airway pressure unloads inspiratory muscle work.
These mechanics may explain many of the physiologic benefits of
NIPPV, including an increase in lung compliance and FRC, a decrease
of dynamic airway narrowing, augmentation of Vt and alveolar ventilation, and decreased work of breathing. Physiologic benefits of NIPPV
in obstructive (e.g., asthma) and restrictive (e.g., PARDS) lung disease
are schematically presented in Figures 86.8 and 86.9. Additional benefits result from improving cardiopulmonary interactions, especially
LV afterload reduction, thereby improving cardiac output in patients
with acute or chronic LV dysfunction.
NIPPV is often well tolerated and may be associated with fewer
complications compared to invasive mechanical ventilation; airway
trauma from endotracheal intubation can be avoided, and less sedation is required. Breaks can be given for the administration of oral
medications and clearance of respiratory secretions, and selected stable patients can be fed by mouth. The rate of nosocomial infections,
ventilator-­associated pneumonia, and VILI is expected to decrease as
well. In addition, aerosol therapy delivered by NIPPV appears to be
more effective.
Complications of NIPPV include pressure injury, upper airway
mucosal irritation, abdominal distention, aspiration, feeding intolerance, and pulmonary hyperinflation with resulting interstitial emphysema, pneumomediastinum, and pneumothorax. Patients initiated on
NIPPV need close cardiorespiratory monitoring because the respiratory failure may progress, leading to the need for endotracheal intubation. Patients with more severe respiratory distress and those who
do not show improvement of respiratory indices (i.e., respiratory rate,
SpO2/Fio2 ratio, reduction in Fio2) within 2 hours of initiation are
more likely to require invasive ventilation. Patients with underlying
severe systemic diseases such as sepsis, multiorgan dysfunction, and
malignancies are less likely to respond favorably to NIPPV. Absolute
contraindications include loss of airway reflexes, acute severe neurologic insults, cardiorespiratory arrest, and severe hemodynamic instability. Patients with midface abnormalities or facial trauma and burns
should not be considered candidates for NIPPV. Other contraindications include the immediate postoperative period after facial and upper
airway surgery, recent gastrointestinal surgery, or patients with bowel
obstruction and vomiting. Patients who are severely agitated and confused should not be initiated on NIPPV. NIPPV has been shown to
decrease intubation rates and reintubation rates after liberation from
invasive mechanical ventilation, and has been increasingly used to treat
acute or chronic respiratory failure in pediatric patients.

INVASIVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION

Mechanical ventilation involves considering the four phases of the
respiratory cycle: (1) initiation of respiration and a variable that is controlled, often referred to as mode; (2) inspiratory phase characteristics,
which determine the duration of inspiration and how the pressure or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

624 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
pulmonary hypertensive crisis, but rather should assist the patient’s
own respiratory effort, if present.

+40

re
la
tio
ns
hi
p

IPAP
Spontaneous

A B
+20
+10
0
–10
–20
Intrapleural Pressure (Cm H2O)

+30

Initiation of Inspiration and the Control Variable
(Mode)

PV
St
at
ic

Tidal Volume (ml)

Spontaneous
EPAP

–30

–40

= resistive inspiratory WOB with IPAP
= resistive expiratory WOB with EPAP
+

= spontaneous resistive inspiratory WOB

+

= spontaneous resistive expiratory WOB

Fig. 86.8 Work of breathing (WOB) in status asthmaticus with and

without noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. In the expiratory limb
of the respiratory cycle, the equal pressure point is displaced distally,
causing airways to begin to close at a higher lung volume (increased
closing capacity), leading to dynamic hyperinflation, and auto–positive
end-­expiratory pressure (auto-­PEEP). (A), Application of expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP) stents the airways, reducing intrathoracic
airway collapse, dynamic hyperinflation, auto-­PEEP (B), and WOB. In
the inspiratory limb, the patient needs to generate less negative pressure to initiate inspiration because of lower auto-­PEEP. Inspiratory muscles are further unloaded by inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP)
throughout inspiration for the given tidal volume. Both expiratory and
inspiratory WOB are thus reduced by application of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. P-­V, Pressure-­volume. (From Sarnaik AA, Sarnaik AP. Noninvasive ventilation in pediatric status asthmaticus: Sound
physiologic rationale but is it really safe, effective, and cost-­efficient?
Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2012;13:484-­485.)

Spontaneous Breath

Tidal Volume

Tidal Volume

Total WOB = WOB/Breath Cycle X Respiratory Rate

Breath on NIPPV
10
0
−10 −20 −30 −40
Intrapleural Pressure (Cm H2O)

10
0
−10 −20 −30 −40
Intrapleural Pressure (Cm H2O)

Expiratory work associated with grunting
Inspiratory work

Fig. 86.9 Beneficial physiologic pulmonary effects of noninvasive pos-

itive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) in restrictive lung disease (e.g., ARDS).
Left, Without NIPPV, the slope of pressure-­volume relationship is flatter,
resulting in lower tidal volume for a given inflation pressure and necessitating an increased respiratory rate to maintain required minute alveolar ventilation. Start of inspiration is at a lower lung volume, indicating
decreased functional residual capacity (FRC). Expiration is active toward
the end as a result of grunting aimed at increasing FRC. Right, On institution of NIPPV, the slope of the pressure-­volume relationship is increased, resulting in greater tidal volume for a given inflation pressure,
with a subsequent decrease in respiratory rate and inspiratory work of
breathing (WOB). FRC is increased because of expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP), resulting in improved oxygenation and decreased
expiratory work associated with grunting.

volume is delivered; (3) termination of inspiration, often referred to as
cycle; and (4) expiratory phase characteristics. Ventilation should not
completely take over the work of breathing unless indicated in specific clinical conditions, such as in severe traumatic brain injury or

The initiation of inspiration may be set to occur at a predetermined rate
and interval regardless of patient effort, or it could be timed in response
to patient effort. Once inspiration is initiated, the ventilator breath
either is controlled entirely by the ventilator (control mode) or supports
the patient’s inspiratory effort to a predetermined inspiratory volume
or pressure target (support mode). Advances in technology allow for
greater patient-­ventilator synchrony to occur. The ventilator may be set
to be triggered by the signal it receives as a result of patient effort. This
feature may be in the form of lowering of either pressure (pressure trigger) or airflow (flow trigger) in the ventilator circuit generated by the
patient’s inspiratory effort. If no such signal is received because of lack
of patient effort, the ventilator delivers a breath at an interval selected
by the operator. Most ventilators make use of flow triggering.

Control Modes

Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation Mode. In intermittent man-

datory ventilation (IMV), inspiration is initiated at a set frequency
with a timing mechanism independent of patient effort. In between
machine-­
delivered breaths, the patient can breathe spontaneously
from a fresh source of gas. IMV allows for adjustment of ventilator
support according to the patient’s needs, making it useful in the weaning process. Lack of synchrony between machine-­delivered breaths
and patient efforts may result in ineffective ventilation and patient
discomfort, especially when IMV is delivered at a high rate. In such
cases the patient may require sedation and pharmacologic neuromuscular blockade for efficient delivery of Vt. To obviate this problem,
synchronized IMV (SIMV) is preferred, whereby the machine-­
delivered breaths are triggered by the patient’s inspiratory efforts (Fig.
86.10). In between the machine-­delivered breaths, a fresh source of gas
is available for spontaneous patient breaths. In the absence of patient
effort, the patient receives a predetermined backup rate. Even with
SIMV, ventilator-­patient asynchrony can occur because Vt, inflation
pressure, and inspiratory time are determined by the ventilator alone.
Assist-­Control Mode. In assist-­control (AC) mode, every patient
breath is triggered by pressure or flow generated by patient inspiratory effort and “assisted” with either preselected inspiratory pressure
or volume. The rate of delivered breaths is therefore determined by the
patient’s inherent respiratory rate. A backup total (patient and ventilator) obligatory rate is set to deliver a minimum number of breaths. For
illustration, on AC mode with a backup rate of 20 breaths/min and a
patient’s inherent rate of 15 breaths/min, the ventilator will assist all the
patient’s breaths and the patient will receive 5 additional breaths/min.
On the other hand, a patient with an inherent rate of 25 breaths/min
will receive all 25 breaths assisted. Although useful in some patients,
the AC mode cannot be used in the weaning process, which involves
gradual decrease in ventilator support.

Control Variable

Once initiated, either the Vt or the pressure delivered by the machine
can be controlled. The machine-­delivered breath is thus referred to as
either volume controlled or pressure controlled (Table 86.12). With
volume-­controlled ventilation (VCV), machine-­delivered volume is
the primary control, and the inflation pressure generated depends on
the respiratory system’s compliance and resistance. Changes in respiratory system compliance and resistance are therefore easily detected
from changes observed in inflation pressure. In pressure-­controlled
ventilation (PCV), the pressure change above the baseline is the primary control, and the Vt delivered to the lungs depends on the respiratory system’s C and R. Changes in respiratory system C and R do
not affect inflation pressure and may therefore go undetected unless
the exhaled Vt is closely monitored. VCV and PCV have their own
advantages and disadvantages (see Table 86.12). Favoring one mode
over the other is largely driven by institutional preference and personal beliefs. VCV is characterized by a constant inspiratory flow with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure

Airway pressure (cm H2O)

a constant, preset Vt, whereas PCV makes use of a decelerative flow
pattern, with a variable delivered Vt. A potential benefit of PCV is that
the inspiratory pressures are limited, making it a more attractive mode
in disease conditions where there is airway obstruction, preventing the
normally compliant alveolus from being exposed to large Vt. Generally
speaking, PCV is more efficient than VCV in terms of amount of Vt
delivered for a given inflation pressure during ventilation of a lung that
has nonuniform TC, as in asthma. In VCV, relatively less-­obstructed
airways are likely to receive more of the machine-­delivered volume
throughout inspiration than relatively more obstructed airways with
longer TC (Fig. 86.11A). This situation would result in uneven ventilation, higher peak inspiratory pressure (PIP), and a decrease in CDYN. In
PCV, because of a constant inflation pressure that is held throughout
inspiration, relatively less obstructed lung units with shorter TC would
achieve pressure equilibration earlier during inspiration than the relatively more obstructed areas. Thus units with shorter TCs would attain
their final volume earlier in inspiration, and those with longer TCs
would continue to receive additional volume later in inspiration (see
Fig. 86.11B). This situation would result in more uniform distribution

Timing
“window”: Time when cycling mechanism
is activated.

A

B

Exhalation
5
0

Spontaneous Spontaneous
inhalation
inspiratory
effort

Time (sec)

Fig. 86.10 Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation. At set

intervals, the ventilator’s timing circuit becomes activated and a timing
“window” appears (dashed line area). If the patient initiates a breath
in the timing window, the ventilator delivers a mandatory breath (A).
If no spontaneous effort occurs, the ventilator delivers a mandatory
breath at a fixed time after the timing window (B). (From Banner MJ,
Gallagher TJ. Respiratory failure in the adult: Ventilatory support. In:
Kirby RR, Smith RA, Desautels DA, eds. Mechanical Ventilation. New
York: Churchill Livingstone;1985.)

625

of inspired gas, delivery of more Vt for the same inflation pressure, and
improved CDYN compared with VCV.
Pressure-­regulated volume control (PRVC) combines the characteristics of VCV and PCV. In this mode, Vt and Ti are controlled
as primary variables, but the ventilator determines the lowest amount
of pressure needed to deliver the desired Vt. Inflation pressure is thus
continuously adjusted to deliver the prescribed Vt over the Ti, depending on the patient’s respiratory C and R.

Support Modes

Pressure-­support ventilation (PSV) and volume-­support ventilation
(VSV) are designed to support the patient’s spontaneous respirations.
With PSV, initiation of inspiration is triggered by the patient’s spontaneous breath, which is then “supported” by a rapid rise in ventilator
pressure to a preselected level. The inspiration is continued until the
inspiratory flow rate falls to a set level (generally 25% of peak flow rate)
as the patient’s lungs inflate. Each inspiration is initiated and terminated by the patient, thus Ti is controlled by the patient’s own efforts.
PSV has no backup rate, so a ventilator breath will not be delivered
to the apneic patient. PSV can be combined with SIMV so that any
breath above the SIMV rate is supported by PSV. Allowing the patient
to control as much of the rate, Vt, and inspiratory time as possible is
considered to be a more comfortable form of mechanical ventilation
than those in which the Vt (or inflation pressure) and Ti are preset.
PSV as the sole source of mechanical ventilator support is often inadequate for patients with severe lung disease and those with a depressed
respiratory drive, but may be especially useful in patients being weaned
and in those who require mechanical ventilation for relatively minor
lung disease or for neuromuscular weakness.
VSV is similar to PSV, in that all the spontaneous breaths are supported.
In VSV, inspiratory pressure to support spontaneous breaths is adjusted to
guarantee a preset Vt goal. If there is a change in respiratory mechanics or
patient effort, the inspiratory pressure to support the breath initiated by
patient effort is automatically adjusted to achieve the set Vt.

Inspiratory Phase Characteristics

Inspiratory flow waveform, Ti, and pressure rise time can be adjusted
in the inspiratory phase to suit the patient’s respiratory mechanics.
In PCV the duration of Ti is directly set in seconds. In VCV the Ti can be
adjusted by adjusting the inspiratory flow (volume/time) and/or setting an
inspiratory pause before exhalation starts. Irrespective of ventilator mode,
the choice of Ti value depends on the respiratory rate, which determines
the total duration of each breath, and on the estimation of inspiratory and
expiratory TCs. Decreasing the flow rate delivery increases Ti, and vice
versa. With an increase in Ti, the pulmonary capillary blood is exposed to
a higher level of Pao2 for a longer time. This feature is beneficial in diseases
with decreased EELV, such as PARDS and pulmonary edema. An increase

Table 86.12  Characteristics of Pressure-­Controlled and Volume-­Controlled Methods of Ventilation
PRESSURE-­CONTROLLED VENTILATION

VOLUME-­CONTROLLED VENTILATION

Control setting(s)

Inflation pressure
Inspiratory time
Rise time

Tidal volume
Flow rate
Inspiratory flow pattern (constant vs decelerating)

Machine-­delivered volume

Depends on respiratory system compliance and
resistance

Constant

Inflation pressure

Constant

Depends on respiratory system compliance and resistance

Endotracheal tube leak

Somewhat compensated

Leaked volume part of tidal volume

Distribution of ventilation

More uniform in lungs with varying time
constant units

Less uniform in lungs with varying time constant units

Patient comfort

Possibly compromised

Possibly enhanced

Weaning

Inflation pressure adjustment required to deliver
desired tidal volume

Tidal volume remains constant; inflation pressure automatically
weaned

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

626 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Volume control ventilation

Areas with low
resistance
are preferentially filled
throughout inspiration
(both early and late)
resulting in uneven
ventilation especially
in obstructive lesions

Pressure control ventilation
Early inspiration: Areas with short time constants fill
up quickly and equilibriate with proximal airway pressure.
Late inspiration: Areas with prolonged time constants
receive more volume with slower equilibrium of pressure.
Result: More even gas distribution compared to volumecontrolled ventilation especially in obstructive lesions
Early phase
Pressure equilibration
Max volume reached

Late phase
Pressure & volume
equilibration still occurring

P

A

B

P

P

P

Fig. 86.11 A, In volume-­controlled ventilation (VCV), tidal volume (Vt) is delivered to the less obstructed areas throughout inspiration. Obstructed
areas of the lung therefore receive a lower proportion of Vt, resulting in uneven ventilation. B, In pressure-­controlled ventilation (PCV), less obstructed areas equilibrate with inflation pressure and therefore receive most of their Vt early during inspiration. More obstructed areas, with prolonged
time constants, require longer time for pressure equilibration and therefore continue to receive a portion of their Vt later during inspiration. The
entire Vt is more evenly distributed than with volume-­cycled ventilation.

in Ti also increases Vt without increasing inflation pressure in PCV if
inspiratory flow is still occurring at end expiration. It must be recognized
that at a given ventilator rate, an increase in Ti decreases expiratory time
(Te). Therefore any strategy that employs an increase in the inspiratory
component of the respiratory cycle should ensure that the decreased Te is
still sufficient for complete exhalation.
Inspiratory flow waveform can be adjusted in VCV mode as either
a constant flow (square waveform) or a decelerating flow (descending ramp waveform). With a square waveform, flow is held constant
throughout inspiration. In a descending ramp waveform, flow is maximal at the start of inspiration and declines throughout its duration. It is
debatable which flow pattern is better for a given disease.
In PCV and PSV, the prescribed PIP is reached through delivery of
airflow. Pressure rise time reflects the time required for the ventilator
to reach PIP and can be adjusted by control of flow at the beginning of
the inspiratory phase. The inspiratory flow rise time may be adjusted to
prevent too rapid a rise in inspiratory pressure, which can be uncomfortable for a patient who is awake and lead to dyssynchrony.

Termination of Inspiration (Cycle)

The two most commonly used inspiratory terminating mechanisms in
control modes are time-­cycled and volume-­cycled. With a time-­cycled
mechanical breath, inspiration is terminated after a preselected Ti has
elapsed, whereas with volume-­cycled breath, the inspiration ends after
a preselected volume has been delivered by the machine into the ventilator circuit. A time-­cycled breath is almost always pressure-­limited,
with the PIP held constant for the duration of inspiration. A volume-­
cycled breath can be pressure-­limited as a safety mechanism to avoid
barotrauma. The inspiration-­terminating mechanism is set somewhat
differently in support modes. In PSV the inspiration is set to end after
the inspiratory flow decreases below a certain percentage (usually 25%)
of peak inspiratory flow. This happens when the patient no longer desires
to receive additional Vt. Such a breath is termed flow-­cycled. In VSV the
inspiration is terminated when the patient has received the selected Vt.

Expiratory Phase Maneuvers

The most useful expiratory phase maneuver is the application of PEEP,
which is applied to both the control breath and the assisted breath. The
most important clinical benefits of PEEP are to stabilize recruited alveoli
to increase EELV in patients with alveolar-­interstitial diseases and thereby
improve oxygenation. Any situation where there is zero end-­expiratory
pressure (ZEEP), as is the case when the patient is disconnected from the
ventilator circuit (even if briefly), will result in alveolar derecruitment
and decline in oxygenation. In patients with obstructive lesions in which

insufficient exhalation results in air trapping and auto-­PEEP, extrinsic
PEEP (applied through a mechanical device) can prevent airway closure during expiration and improve ventilation. Other salutary effects of
PEEP include redistribution of extravascular lung water away from gas-­
exchanging areas, improved V̇/Q̇ relationship, stabilization of the chest
wall, and reduction in work of breathing in patients with intrinsic PEEP.
The effect of PEEP on lung C is variable, depending on the level of PEEP
provided and the patient’s pulmonary mechanics. By shifting tidal ventilation to a more favorable part of the pressure-­volume curve, PEEP may
maintain more recruited alveoli, delay airway closure, and improve lung
C. Excessive PEEP, on the other hand, may lead to overdistention of alveoli
and reduced C. The effect of PEEP in individual patients can be ascertained
by measuring exhaled Vt and calculating CDYN. Other potentially deleterious effects of PEEP include decreased venous return, increased pulmonary
vascular resistance, and decreased cardiac output.

ADDITIONAL VENTILATORY MODALITIES
Airway Pressure Release Ventilation

Airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) aims to improve oxygenation
in patients with preserved respiratory drive suffering from severe hypoxemic respiratory failure due to alveolar-­interstitial disease. This modality applies a CPAP, designated CPAPHIGH, to recruit and maintain EELV
with brief intermittent release phases of CPAPLOW to allow alveolar gas
to escape. CPAPHIGH is analogous to PIP, and CPAPLOW is similar to setting PEEP. In contrast to the patient receiving conventional mechanical
ventilation, a patient receiving APRV spends the majority of time in the
CPAPHIGH phase, which may last as long as 3-­5 seconds with a brief (0.3-­
0.5 seconds) time in the CPAPLOW phase. These atypically long Tis are tolerated because of a floating expiratory valve in the ventilator circuit that
permits spontaneous breathing during CPAPHIGH phase. Therefore even
if the CPAPHIGH phase can be considered “inspiratory” and the CPAPLOW
phase “expiratory” in regard to the ventilator, the patient is able to breathe
spontaneously during both these phases. The longer ventilator Ti recruits
lung units, and the ability to breathe spontaneously during this phase
allows distribution of gas flow to atelectatic lung regions. The outcome
benefit of APRV in pediatric hypoxemic respiratory failure has not been
proven.

High-­Frequency Ventilation

Mechanical ventilation at supraphysiologic rates and low Vt, known as
high-­frequency ventilation (HFV), improves gas exchange in a select
group of patients who show no response to more traditional ventilatory
modalities. The mechanism of alveolar ventilation in HFV is very different from that in conventional ventilation, in that HFV is less dependent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure

627

on Vt and more dependent on asymmetric velocities and convective
dispersion of inspired gas. Patients with severe persistent hypoxic failure
are most likely to benefit from HFV. HFV is also helpful in patients with
bronchopleural fistula and persistent air leaks. The main tenet of HFV is to
recruit lung volume with a high mean airway pressure (MAP) and produce
smaller fluctuations in alveolar pressure during inspiration and expiration,
thus maintaining a satisfactory EELV and reducing alveolar stretch. The
two most investigated techniques of HFV are HFOV and HFJV.
The most commonly used HFV modality is high-­frequency oscillatory
ventilation (HFOV), which employs a mechanism to generate to-­and-­fro
air movement. Additional air is drawn in (entrained) through a parallel
circuit via a Venturi effect. Air is pushed in during inspiration and actively
pulled out during expiration. The main determinants of oxygenation are
Fio2 and MAP, whereas ventilation is determined by changes in pressure
(amplitude) around the MAP and frequency. The optimal frequency varies
for the individual patient and disease process and depends on the so-­called
corner frequency, where the pressure cost of ventilation is the lowest. In
PARDS this usually means frequency >8 Hz, irrespective of age.
In high-­frequency jet ventilation (HFJV), a high-­frequency interrupter is interposed between a high-­pressure gas source and a small
cannula that is incorporated in the ETT. The cannula propels tiny
amounts of gas (jets) at high velocity and high frequency through the
ETT. An additional amount of gas is entrained from a parallel circuit.
Unlike in HFOV, expiration occurs passively in HFJV as a result of elastic recoil of the lung and the chest wall. PEEP is set through the parallel
circuit by a conventional ventilator in-­line. Respiratory rate is generally
set at 420 breaths/min. Major determinants of oxygenation are Fio2
and PEEP, and the major determinant of ventilation is PIP.

hypercapnia (permissive hypercapnia) should be accepted, especially when
one is attempting to limit injurious inflation pressures or Vt.

CONVENTIONAL VENTILATOR SETTINGS
Fraction of Inspired Oxygen

The patient must be able to trigger the ventilator without excessive effort.
Ventilators can be pressure-­triggered or flow-­triggered. With pressure
triggering, the inspiratory valve opens and flow is delivered when a set
negative pressure is generated within the patient-­ventilator circuit during inspiration. The amount of pressure required to trigger an inspiration
depends on the pressure trigger sensitivity. In flow triggering, the ventilator provides a base flow of gas through the ventilator-­patient circuit. When
a flow sensor on the expiratory limb of the patient-­ventilator circuit detects
a decrease in flow as a result of the patient’s inspiratory effort, the inspiratory valve opens and a ventilator breath is delivered. The degree of change
in flow required to trigger an inspiration depends on the flow trigger sensitivity. Flow triggering is considered to be more comfortable, primarily
because the patient receives some flow before triggering the ventilator, in
contrast to pressure triggering, in which no flow is provided until the ventilator breath is triggered through generation of negative pressure. Increasing the trigger sensitivity by decreasing the change in either pressure or
flow needed to trigger an inspiration decreases the work of breathing and
may improve comfort. However, reducing the required pressure or flow
excessively could result in accidental triggering and unwanted breaths by
turbulence, caused by condensation in the ventilator circuit, endotracheal
tube (ETT) air leaks, or cardiac oscillations.

The shape of the hemoglobin-­O2 dissociation curve dictates that oxygen
content in the blood is not linearly related to Pao2. A Pao2 value that
results in an oxyhemoglobin saturation of ≤97% is reasonable in most
situations, because a higher Pao2 would cause minimal increase in arterial oxygen content, and a modest (10 mm Hg) drop in Pao2 would result
in minimal decrease in oxyhemoglobin saturation. In most cases, a Pao2
value of >60 mm Hg is a reasonable goal. Fio2 values that are higher than
those necessary to attain oxyhemoglobin saturations of approximately
95% expose the patient to unnecessary oxygen toxicity. Whenever possible, Fio2 values should be decreased to a level ≤0.40 as long as oxyhemoglobin saturation remains ≥92%. In patients with severe lung disease,
oxyhemoglobin saturation of 88–92% may be acceptable.

Mode

The choice of mode of ventilation depends on the disease entity that is
being treated and how much ventilator-­patient interaction is desired.
SIMV or AC is chosen as the control mode; PCV, VCV, or PRVC as
the variable that is to be controlled; and pressure support and volume
support are the choices for support modes. SIMV pressure-­controlled
modes are most commonly used in children.

Tidal Volume and Rate

As previously discussed, alveolar ventilation, the chief determinant of
Paco2, is calculated using Vt, respiratory rate, and Vd. A change in Vt
results in a corresponding change in alveolar ventilation without affecting
Vd-­ventilation. A change in respiratory rate will affect alveolar ventilation
and the Vd-­ventilation. Choice of Vt and rate depends on the TC. In a
patient with relatively normal lung compliance, an age-­appropriate ventilator rate and a Vt of 5-­8 mL/kg would be appropriate initial settings. Diseases
associated with decreased TC (decreased static compliance; e.g., PARDS,
pneumonia, pulmonary edema) are best treated with small (4-­6 mL/kg)
Vt and relatively rapid rates (e.g., 25-­40 breaths/min). Diseases associated
with prolonged TCs (increased airway resistance; e.g., asthma, bronchiolitis) are best treated with relatively slow rates and higher (10-­12 mL/kg) Vt.
In PCV the delivered Vt depends on the C and R of the patient’s respiratory
system and needs to be monitored to ensure the appropriate amount for a
given situation. The operator titrates the inflation pressure, depending on
the volume of exhaled Vt. It should be emphasized that achieving a normal Paco2 value is not a goal of mechanical ventilation. Some degree of

Inspiratory Time and Expiratory Time

Ti and Te are adjusted by setting inspiratory flow rate and/or inspiratory pause in VCV and by setting the precise Ti in PCV. Increasing the
Ti results in increased MAP, improved oxygenation in diseases with
decreased EELV, and potentially a better distribution of Vt in obstructive lung disease. Sufficient expiratory time must be provided to ensure
adequate emptying of the alveoli.

Positive End-­Expiratory Pressure

The best level of PEEP depends on the disease entity that is being treated,
and it may change in the same patient from time to time. Decisions are
often based on the Pao2/Fio2 ratio and the measurement of CDYN. For
patients with PARDS, the adult-­based PEEP/Fio2 grid may be useful.

PATIENT-­VENTILATOR ASYNCHRONY

Patient-­ventilator asynchrony occurs when the patient’s respiratory
pattern does not match that of the ventilator. This can occur during all
phases of respiration. Adverse effects of patient-­ventilator asynchrony
include wasted effort, ineffective delivery of desired Vt, excessive generation of intrathoracic pressure resulting in injury and adverse effects
on cardiac output, increased work of breathing, and patient discomfort. Although several mechanisms exist to facilitate patient-­ventilator
synchrony, a certain amount of asynchrony is inevitable unless the
patient is pharmacologically sedated and paralyzed.

Triggering the Ventilator

Selection of Appropriate Inspiratory Time

The duration of Ti should match the patient’s own inspiratory phase. If Ti
is too long, the patient’s drive to exhale may begin before the ventilator
breath has cycled off. When this occurs, exhalation occurs against inspiratory flow and a closed exhalation valve, resulting in increased work of
breathing, excessive rise in intrathoracic pressure, and discomfort. If Ti is
too short, the patient may be still inhaling without respirator support. In
general terms, Ti is usually initiated at 0.5-­0.7 second for neonates, 0.8-­1
second in older children, and 1-­1.2 second for adolescents and adults,
but should really be driven by the inspiratory TC. Adjustments need to
be made through individual patient observations and according to the
type of lung disease present. In patients with severe lung disease (both
obstructive and restrictive), unnatural Ti and Te values may have to be
selected, as discussed earlier. In such situations, adequate analgesia, sedation, and, in extreme cases, neuromuscular blockade may be needed.

Selection of Inspiratory Flow Pattern

In VCV, inappropriate flow may be another source of patient-­ventilator
dyssynchrony. After initiation of inspiration, if the set amount of flow is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

628 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
inadequate to meet patient demand, a state of flow starvation occurs,
resulting in excessive work of breathing and discomfort. Such patients may
require a decelerating inspiratory flow pattern, in which a higher flow is
provided in the beginning of inspiration and less toward the end as the
lungs fill up. On the other hand, such a pattern may be uncomfortable for a
patient who desires more gradual alveolar filling. The selection of inspiratory flow pattern should be based on the individual patient’s respiratory
mechanics. In PCV and PSV, the inspiratory rise time determines the
manner in which the airway pressure is raised and Vt delivered. Considerations for choosing the appropriate rise time in PCV and PSV are similar
to those for choosing the inspiratory flow pattern in VCV.

Use of Support Modes

A conscious patient should be allowed to have spontaneous breaths
that are supported by either PSV or VSV. This approach minimizes
the mandatory breaths generated by the ventilator that are beyond the
patient’s control to modulate. Therefore continued assessments should
be made to determine whether the patient is able to maintain ventilatory requirements more in support modes and less in control modes.

Use of Sedation and Neuromuscular Blockade

Having a conscious yet comfortable patient is a desirable goal during
mechanical ventilation. Spontaneous breaths with good muscle tone and
presence of cough are important for adequate clearance of tracheobronchial secretions. The patient’s ability to indicate distress is also important in
identifying and preventing potential injurious factors. In certain situations,
management of patient-­
ventilator asynchrony assumes much greater
importance when the asynchrony is causing unacceptable derangement
of gas exchange and VILI. Both alveolar interstitial lung pathology and
obstructive airway diseases may necessitate unnatural and uncomfortable
settings for respiratory rate, Ti, and inflation pressures. In such patients,
deep sedation is often necessary; dexmedetomidine, benzodiazepines, and
opiates are the agents most commonly used for this purpose. In extreme
situations, pharmacologic neuromuscular blockade is required to abolish
any patient effort and respiratory muscle tone. When such pharmacologic
paralysis is used, deep sedation must be ensured so that the patient does
not sense pain and discomfort. Pharmacologic sedation and paralysis
can ensure total control of the patient’s ventilation by mechanical means
and may result in lifesaving improvement in gas exchange with reduction in inflation pressures. However, long-­term use of such agents may
be associated with undesirable consequences and higher morbidity. The
risk of inadequate clearance of tracheobronchial secretions and atelectasis
is potentially greater. Long-­term use of pharmacologic sedation may be
associated with chemical dependency and withdrawal manifestations, and
prolonged neuromuscular blockade is associated with neuromyopathy in
critically ill patients. The benefits of sedation and pharmacologic paralysis
therefore should be carefully balanced with the risks, and periodic assessments should be made to determine the need for their continuation.

Cardiopulmonary Interactions

Mechanical ventilation can have salutary and adverse effects on cardiac performance. By decreasing oxygen consumption necessary for
work of breathing, oxygen supply to vital organs is improved. Positive
pressure breathing decreases LV afterload, thus enhancing stroke volume and cardiac output in patients with a failing myocardium (e.g.,
myocarditis). On the other hand, the decreased systemic venous return
may further compromise stroke volume in hypovolemic (preload-­
dependent) patients. Such patients will require intravascular fluid loading when subjected to positive pressure ventilation. Also, an increase in
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) caused by positive intrathoracic
pressure may result in further decompensation of a poorly performing
right ventricle. PVR is at its lowest value at an optimum FRC. When
FRC is too low or too high, PVR (and therefore the right ventricular
afterload) is increased. Both desirable and undesirable effects of cardiopulmonary interactions may coexist and require ongoing assessment
and necessary interventions (Table 86.13).

MONITORING RESPIRATORY MECHANICS
Exhaled Tidal Volume

Exhaled tidal volume (Vte) is measured by a pneumotachometer in the
ventilator circuit during exhalation; in small children, it is preferably

Table 86.13  Suggested Mechanical Ventilation Strategies
in Various Clinical Situations
SITUATION

DISEASE

STRATEGY

Low compliance, normal
resistance

ARDS

PCV, APRV, HFOV

Normal compliance, high
resistance

Asthma

PCV, PRVC

Normal compliance,
normal resistance, for
weaning

Head trauma,
drug overdose,
subglottic stenosis

VCV

APRV, Airway pressure release ventilation; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome;
HFOV, high-frequency oscillatory ventilation; PCV, pressure-­controlled ventilation;
PRVC, pressure-­regulated volume control; VCV, volume-­controlled ventilation.

measured near the connection of the ETT. Measurement of Vte more
accurately describes the Vt that is contributing to the patient’s alveolar
ventilation. In PCV the Vte depends on the patient’s respiratory system
compliance and resistance and therefore offers valuable diagnostic clues. A
decrease in Vte during PCV is indicative of either decrease in compliance
or increase in resistance and is helpful in directing the clinician to appropriate investigation and management. An increase in Vte is indicative of
improvement and may require weaning of inflation pressures to adjust the
Vte.

Peak Inspiratory Pressure

In VCV and PRVC, the PIP is the secondary variable determined by the
patient’s respiratory system compliance and resistance. An increase in PIP
in these modes is indicative of decreased C (e.g., atelectasis, pulmonary
edema, pneumothorax) or increased R (e.g., bronchospasm, obstructed
ETT). During VCV and PRVC, decreasing the respiratory rate or prolonging the Ti will result in a lower PIP in patients with prolonged TCs because
more time will be available for alveoli to fill. In such patients, a decrease
in PIP (or plateau pressure when an inspiratory pause is set during VCV)
suggests increased C or decreased R of the respiratory system.

Respiratory System Dynamic Compliance and Static
Compliance

The changes in PIP (or plateau pressure) during VCV and PRVC, and
in Vte during PCV, are determined by CDYN of the respiratory system
(lung and chest wall). CDYN is calculated as follows
CDYN = VTE ÷ (PIP ‐ PEEP)

CDYN takes into account both the flow-­resistive and the elastic properties of the respiratory system. Changes in CDYN can be used to assess
effects of different levels of PEEP as tidal ventilation is shifted along the
slope of the volume-­pressure curve (see Fig. 86.7). An increase in PEEP in
alveolar-­interstitial diseases (increased elastance), resulting in an increase
in CDYN, suggests alveolar recruitment, whereas a decrease in CDYN may
indicate overdistention. Similarly, in obstructive diseases (increased R),
adjustment in PEEP levels to ameliorate airway collapse during exhalation can be guided by monitoring CDYN. To assess only the elastic recoil
of the lung, measurement of CSTAT when there is no airflow is required.
This measurement is performed by using an inspiratory hold maneuver
with the patient under neuromuscular blockade and observing pressure-­
time and flow-­time waveforms (Fig. 86.12). During this maneuver, inspiratory flow ceases while the expiratory valve continues to remain closed,
thus allowing pressure to equilibrate throughout the ventilator circuit and
the patient’s lungs. This pressure, referred to as the plateau pressure (Pplat),
reflects alveolar pressure. CSTAT is calculated as follows:
Cstat = Vte ÷ (Pplat − PEEP)
The difference between CDYN and CSTAT is attributable to airway
resistance. This difference is minimal in alveolar-­interstitial diseases
but substantial in airway obstruction.

Assessment of Auto-­PEEP

Auto-­PEEP is assessed with the use of an expiratory pause maneuver in which inspiration is delayed and alveolar pressure is allowed to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86 u Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure

629

clinicians aim for a value <0.6. Regional mechanics may play a role
in lung injury.

PIP
Pplat
PEEP
pause

Inspiratory

Expiratory
Time

Fig. 86.12 Alveolar pressure is best determined by measurement of

plateau pressure (Pplat). Inspiration is paused for an extended period, and
alveolar gas pressure is allowed to equilibrate with the ventilator circuit
pressure. Airway pressure at the end of the inspiratory pause is Pplat. The
difference between peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) and Pplat is meant to
overcome flow-­resistive properties of the lung, whereas Pplat reflects the
pressure needed to overcome elastic properties of the lung and chest
wall. PEEP, Positive end-­expiratory pressure.

equilibrate with the airway. In diseases with airway obstruction, insufficient alveolar emptying may occur if exhalation time is not adequate.
The alveolar pressure in excess of the set PEEP at the completion of the
expiratory pause is measured as auto-­PEEP or intrinsic PEEP. Auto-­
PEEP can have adverse effects on ventilation and hemodynamic status.
It can be managed by decreasing the respiratory rate or Ti and thus
allowing longer time for exhalation. Auto-­PEEP may also be managed
by increasing the set PEEP (extrinsic PEEP), thereby delaying airway
closure during exhalation and improving alveolar emptying.

Assessment of Dead Space Ventilation

Positive pressure ventilation and application of PEEP may result in a
decrease in venous return, cardiac output, and therefore pulmonary perfusion. Ventilation of poorly perfused alveoli results in dead space ventilation, which does not contribute to gas exchange. The Vd/Vt fraction
can be calculated (see Chapter 86). Normal Vd/Vt is 0.33. Increased Vd/
Vt is indicative of poorly perfused alveoli. Patients with increased Vd/Vt
may require intravascular volume infusion or other means of augmenting
the cardiac output to improve pulmonary perfusion. The Vd/Vt fraction
is calculated and displayed by commercially available capnographs, which
measure endotracheal Petco2 continuously.

VENTILATOR-­INDUCED LUNG INJURY (VILI)

As with most medical therapies, mechanical ventilation can be harmful.
Pathophysiology of VILI can be multifactorial. Large tidal volumes and
high inspiratory pressures delivered with increased frequency cause cyclic
strain, which may lead to disruption of the tight junctions between the
alveolar epithelial and capillary endothelial cells, with intracapillary blebs
resulting in alveolar and interstitial edema. This may cause the release of
proinflammatory mediators (biotrauma) that further injure the lung and
travel in the blood outside the lung, contributing to the development of
multiorgan failure. Evidence shows that in patients with ARDS, avoidance
of Vt ≥10 mL/kg and Pplat ≥30 cm H2O limits diffuse alveolar damage.
Atelectrauma is shear stress on the alveolar walls caused by cyclic
opening and closing of the alveoli. PEEP can be used to prevent collapse and keep alveoli open. It is important that alveolar units are
neither overdistended nor collapsed. Careful adjustments of PEEP
may also permit the clinician to wean a patient from a high Fio2,
another potential source of lung injury, through exposure to reactive oxygen species (oxytrauma). Although most patients receive an
Fio2 of 1.0 at the time of endotracheal intubation and at the beginning of mechanical ventilation, increasing PEEP to recruit alveoli
without overdistention should be quickly instituted to improve oxygenation and permit weaning of the Fio2. Although the Fio2 value
below which there is no risk of oxygen toxicity is unknown, most

Ventilator-­Associated Pneumonia

The pathophysiology of ventilator-­
associated pneumonia (VAP) is
multifactorial. Aspiration of oral and/or gastric secretions, colonization of the ETT, and suppression of cough reflexes from sedation all
play a role. New-­onset fever and leukocytosis accompanied by demonstration of an infiltrative process on chest radiography are consistent
with a diagnosis of VAP. This complication can lead to worsened gas
exchange, increased duration of ventilation, and even death. Elevation
of the head of the bed to 30 degrees after initiation of mechanical ventilation and use of a protocol for oral decontamination during mechanical ventilation are common means of reducing the risk for VAP. The
most effective strategy to minimize any of the aforementioned complications is regular assessment of extubation readiness and liberation
from mechanical ventilation as soon as clinically possible.

Weaning

Weaning from mechanical ventilation should be considered as a
patient’s respiratory insufficiency begins to improve. Most pediatricians favor gradual weaning from ventilator support. With SIMV, the
ventilator rate is slowly reduced, allowing the patient’s spontaneous
breaths (typically assisted with pressure or volume support) to assume
a larger proportion of the minute ventilation. When the ventilator rate
is low (<5 breaths/min) such that its contribution to minute ventilation
is minimal, assessment of extubation readiness is performed. An alternative method of gradual weaning is transition to PSV. In this mode, no
ventilator rate is set, allowing all triggered breaths to be assisted with
pressure support. The clinician reduces the pressure support slowly to
a low value (<5-­10 cm H2O), at which point assessment of extubation
readiness is performed. During either technique, weaning should be
halted if tachypnea, increased work of breathing, hypoxemia, hypercapnia, acidosis, diaphoresis, tachycardia, or hypotension occurs.
The most objective means of assessing extubation readiness is a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT). Before performance of an SBT, a patient
should be awake with intact airway reflexes, capable of handling oropharyngeal secretions, and with stable hemodynamic status. In addition, gas
exchange should be adequate, defined as Pao2 >60 mm Hg while receiving Fio2 <0.4 and PEEP ≤5 cm H2O. If these criteria are present, a patient
should be started on CPAP with minimal (≤5 cm H2O) or no pressure
support. If this SBT is tolerated with no episodes of respiratory or cardiovascular decompensation, successful extubation is likely.
Some neonates and small children cannot be calmed or consoled long
enough to complete the SBT. In this situation, extubation readiness must
be assessed on a low level of ventilator support. Data suggest a low risk
of extubation failure if the patient is comfortable and has stable hemodynamic status, with adequate gas exchange and spontaneous Vt >6.5 mL/
kg while receiving <20% of total minute ventilation from the ventilator.
Certain patient populations are at increased risk for extubation failure,
such as young infants, children mechanically ventilated for longer than 7
days, and patients with chronic respiratory or neurologic conditions. These
children often benefit from transition to a noninvasive form of respiratory
support (e.g., high-­flow nasal cannula, CPAP, or BiPAP) upon liberation
from mechanical ventilation to increase the odds of successful extubation.
The likelihood of postextubation upper airway obstruction, the most
common cause of extubation failure in children, cannot be predicted by
the results of an SBT or bedside measurements of physiologic variables.
Traumatic endotracheal intubation and subglottic swelling from ETT irritation, especially in patients who exhibit agitation while receiving mechanical ventilation, are common causes of airway narrowing after extubation.
Administration of intravenous corticosteroids (dexamethasone 0.5 mg/kg
every 6 hr for four doses before extubation) has been shown to decrease
the incidence of postextubation airway obstruction. In patients in whom
postextubation airway obstruction develops, the need for reintubation
may be obviated by administration of nebulized racemic epinephrine and
helium-­oxygen mixtures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 87 u Altitude-­Associated ­Illness in Children
blood cells, which begin to appear in the circulation in 4 or 5 days.
Hypoxemia also increases 2,3-­DPG, resulting in a rightward shift
of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve and favoring release of
oxygen from the blood to the tissues. This is counteracted by the
leftward shift of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve caused by
the respiratory alkalosis from hyperventilation. The result is a net
null change in the oxyhemoglobin curve and an increase in oxygen-­
hemoglobin binding in the lung, raising Sao2. Climbers at extreme
altitude respond with marked hyperventilation, alkalosis, and leftward shift. This leftward shift favors oxygen loading in a hypoxic
environment and increases Sao2.

ACUTE MOUNTAIN SICKNESS
Epidemiology and Risk Factors

The incidence of high-­altitude illness depends on several variables,
including the rate of ascent, previous altitude exposure, and individual genetic susceptibility. Sleeping altitude, final altitude reached, and
duration of stay at altitude are also risk factors for AMS development.
Individual susceptibility for the development of AMS plays a significant role in risk assessment. Most individuals with previous histories of
AMS after acute ascent are likely to experience similar symptoms with
repeated visits to altitude. Gender and age do not affect the incidence
of AMS.
AMS is very common with rapid ascent. Climbers around the
world who ascend quickly (1 or 2 days) from sea level to altitudes of
4,000-­6,000 m (∼13,000-­20,000 ft) have a very high incidence of AMS
(27–83%). The rapid ascent profile associated with air travel to high
altitude locations also results in high AMS rates. Trekkers who fly into
the Khumbu region to explore the Mt. Everest area have a higher incidence of AMS (47%) compared with those who walk (23%). Skiers who
visit resorts in the western United States from sea level generally fly
or drive to the region but sleep at relatively moderate altitudes: 2,000-­
3,000 m (∼6,500-­9,800 ft). Among this population, AMS occurs in
approximately 25%.

Pathophysiology

The symptoms of AMS develop several hours after arrival at high
altitude, whereas the development of HAPE and HACE generally require several days of altitude exposure. Because hypoxemia
occurs within minutes of arrival, it cannot be the direct cause
of high-­altitude illness, but rather the initiating factor for a cascade of events that lead to the development of the altitude clinical
syndromes.
The clinical manifestations of AMS/HACE are primarily the
result of central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction caused by
hemodynamic mechanical factors and biochemical mediators of
permeability. The CNS vasodilatory response to hypoxemia causes
an increase in cerebral blood flow and volume. Significant elevation
of brain volume is observed in moderate to severe AMS and HACE
but has not been demonstrated in mild AMS. Hypoxic alteration
of CNS vascular autoregulation and hypertension from exercise
may increase pressure transmission to the brain’s capillary beds,
resulting in transcapillary leakage and vasogenic edema. Inflammatory mediators also contribute to vascular permeability and edema
formation. HIF-­mediated vascular endothelial growth factor, the
inducible form of nitric oxide synthase, reactive cytokines, and
free radical formation can increase permeability. Both mechanical
and biochemical activation of the trigeminovascular system have
been proposed as the cause of high-­altitude headache, the primary
symptom of AMS. Although vasogenic edema has been implicated
in severe AMS and HACE, MRI reveals signal changes in subjects
with and without clinical AMS.
Many of these responses to hypoxia and altitude exposure occur
both in individuals who develop symptoms and those who remain free
of AMS. To address the discrepancy in symptomatic illness, the “tight
fit” hypothesis was proposed. This theory suggests that the development of AMS/HACE is due to a lack of intracranial space to accommodate increasing volume from brain swelling and edema that develop at

631

altitude. The adequacy of the intracranial and intraspinal space to buffer changes in brain and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume is the central
concept. Buffering occurs as the intracranial CSF is displaced via the
foramen magnum into the space available in the spinal canal, followed
by increased CSF absorption and decreased CSF production. Individuals
with less CSF buffering capacity have less compliance and are hypothesized to become more symptomatic (develop AMS).

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of AMS in older children and adults requires the history
of a recent gain in altitude, presence at the new altitude for at least
several hours, and the report of a headache plus one or more of the
following symptoms: gastrointestinal (GI) upset (anorexia, nausea, or
vomiting), general weakness or fatigue, dizziness, or lightheadedness.
The 2018 Lake Louise Acute Mountain Sickness Score is based on
self-­report of symptoms and aids clinicians in making the diagnosis
and quantifying AMS severity in older children and adolescents (Table
87.1). Symptoms develop within a few hours after ascent and generally
reach maximum severity between 24 and 48 hours, followed by gradual
resolution. Sleep disturbance caused by periodic breathing is common
in all visitors to high altitudes and is not part of the adult diagnostic criteria; sleep disturbance is likely the result of hypoxia rather than
AMS. There are no diagnostic physical signs in cases of mild AMS. Any
evidence of CNS dysfunction, such as mild ataxia or altered mentation,
is early evidence of HACE. Similarly, whereas shortness of breath on
exertion is common at high altitudes, dyspnea at rest is an early indicator of HAPE.
Table 87.1  2018 Lake Louise Acute Mountain Sickness
Score
HEADACHE
0 – None at all
1 – Mild headache
2 – Moderate headache
3 – Severe headache, incapacitating
GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS
0 – Good appetite
1 – Poor appetite or nausea
2 – Moderate nausea or vomiting
3 – Severe nausea and vomiting, incapacitating
FATIGUE AND/OR WEAKNESS
0 – Not tired or weak
1 – Mild fatigue/weakness
2 – Moderate fatigue/weakness
3 – Severe fatigue/weakness, incapacitating
DIZZINESS/LIGHTHEADEDNESS
0 – No dizziness/lightheadedness
1 – Mild dizziness/lightheadedness
2 – Moderate dizziness/lightheadedness
3 – Severe dizziness/lightheadedness, incapacitating
AMS CLINICAL FUNCTIONAL SCORE
Overall, if you had AMS symptoms, how did they affect your
activities?
0 – Not at all
1 – Symptoms present, but did not force any change in activity or
itinerary
2 – My symptoms forced me to stop the ascent or to go down on my
own power
3 – Had to be evacuated to a lower altitude
To obtain the AMS score, add number from each category earlier.
Although no official severity rankings exist, many consider mild
AMS to be 3-­5 points, moderate AMS 6-­9 points, and severe AMS
10-­12 points.
From Roach RC, Hackett PH, Oelz O, et al. The 2018 Lake Louise Acute Mountain
Sickness Score. High Alt Med Biol. 2018;19(1):4–6, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

632 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The diagnosis of AMS in children with early language skills (age 4-­11
years) may be made with cautious use of the 2018 Lake Louise criteria
(see Table 87.1). The language used in this adult questionnaire may be
too complex and may underestimate AMS if not understood by the
child. This is particularly true for questions regarding headache (the
key symptom of AMS) and GI symptoms.
In preverbal young children and infants, recognition of AMS
relies on observable signs and exclusion of other causes. In this age
range, AMS is manifested by increased fussiness, decreased playfulness, decreased appetite, and sleep disturbance. In most cases of AMS
in very young children, all these symptoms are present. Fussiness is
defined as a state of irritability that is not easily explained by another
cause, such as tiredness, wet diaper, hunger, teething, or pain from an
injury. Fussy behavior may include crying, restlessness, or muscular
tension. Decreased playfulness may be profound. Alterations of appetite may progress to frank vomiting. Sleep disturbance can manifest
with either increased or decreased sleep when compared with normal
patterns. Most often, decreased sleep and the inability to nap are noted.
The Children’s Lake Louise Score (CLLS) has been successfully tested
in preverbal children <4 years old by parents briefed on the use of the
scoring system. The CLLS combines a score for the amount and intensity of unexplained fussiness with a symptom score of how well the
child has eaten, played, and slept in the past 24 hours. Evaluating for
the presence of headache can be accomplished by asking if the “head
hurts” or by using a visual “faces” pain scale. GI symptoms are evaluated by asking children if they are “hungry” rather than trying to evaluate their appetite. A combined score of ≥7 is indicative of AMS (Fig.
87.1). Many of the symptoms manifested by AMS in children may also
result from the disruption of the normal routine with travel. A change
in environment, sleeping accommodation, or eating options can result
in a fussy child. The threshold scores for AMS diagnostic criteria are
modified to account for these baseline variations. Educating parents to
recognize the symptoms of AMS in themselves is also important, as an
ill parent can indirectly compromise a child’s safety.
Other acute illnesses can mimic AMS in young children. It must be
emphasized that altered mental status, neurologic abnormalities, breathing difficulty, and cyanosis are not part of uncomplicated AMS. Any of
these signs warrant immediate medical attention. If serious bacterial illness, a surgical condition, or another problem meriting specific
intervention is suspected in a child, descent to lower altitude is recommended to eliminate the confounding variable of altitude illness.

Periodic Breathing

Periodic breathing at altitude is common at all ages during sleep,
resulting in brief repeated episodes of oxyhemoglobin desaturation.
Prepubertal children (9-­12 years old) have similar nighttime oxygen
desaturations as their parents; however, they have somewhat more stable breathing patterns with less periodicity. Although periodic breathing is not a sign of AMS, the exacerbation of hypoxia during sleep plays
a role in AMS development. Newborn infants normally have periodicity in their respiratory pattern, and this periodicity is increased by
high-­altitude exposure and sleep. Oxygen saturations of awake neonates born at 3,100 m (∼10,100 ft) in Colorado range from 88% to 91%.
During sleep with increased periodic breathing, oxygen saturation may
drop to 81% during the first week of life. The amount and magnitude
of respiratory periodicity decrease as the child matures, and saturation
during sleep increases to 86% after 2 months. A stable mature pattern
is usually reached by 6 months of age. Preterm babies may demonstrate marked periodicity with prolonged desaturation because of their
immaturity. Acute ascent with a child born preterm is best delayed
until maturity, when normal pulmonary function and respiratory drive
can be demonstrated. Parents of normal young babies may become distressed as they note marked periodic breathing patterns in their child
after ascent to moderate altitude. Clinicians can reassure parents that
this is generally not a precursor of true apnea; desaturation can occur
with periodic breathing in sleep, especially at higher altitudes.

Management

The management of AMS must include strict adherence to the
principle that further ascent to a higher sleeping altitude is

AMOUNT OF UNEXPLAINED FUSSINESS
0

1

2

No
Fussiness

3

4

5

6

Constant Fussiness
When Awake

Intermittent
Fussiness

INTENSITY OF FUSSINESS
0
No
Fussiness

1

2

3
Moderate
Fussiness

4

5

6

Severe Fussiness
When Awake

FUSSINESS SCORE (FS) = Amount + Intensity
RATE HOW WELL YOUR CHILD HAS EATEN TODAY (E)
0—Normal
1—Slightly less than normal
2—Much less than normal
3—Vomiting or not eating
RATE HOW PLAYFUL YOUR CHILD IS TODAY (P)
0—Normal
1—Playing slightly less
2—Playing much less than normal
3—Not playing
RATE ABILITY OF YOUR CHILD TO SLEEP TODAY (S)
0—Normal
1—Slightly less or more than normal
2—Much less or more than normal
3—Not able to sleep
CLLS = FS + E + P + S
The CLLS must be 7 with both the FS 4 and E+P+S 3 to confirm
acute mountain sickness.

Fig. 87.1 Children’s Lake Louise Score (CLLS). Fussiness is defined

as a state of irritability that is not easily explained by a cause, such
as tiredness, hunger, teething, or pain from an injury. Fussy behavior
may include crying, restlessness, or muscular tension. Please rate your
child’s typical fussy behavior during the last 24 hours without the benefit of your intervention.

contraindicated after the symptoms of altitude illness occur. Halting ascent or activity to allow further acclimatization may reverse the
symptoms; however, continuing the ascent exacerbates the underlying pathologic processes and may lead to disastrous results. Stopping
further ascent and waiting for acclimatization treats most AMS in 1-­4
days. Mild cases of AMS may be treated without descent if monitoring by a reliable caregiver is available. Conservative treatment may be
provided, including rest, analgesics for headache, and antiemetics for
nausea. When conservative measures are inadequate, acetazolamide
and/or oxygen titrated to maintain Sao2 >94% are generally effective.
Although no studies have formally assessed its use in pediatric patients,
anecdotal reports have demonstrated efficacy of acetazolamide in treating mild AMS in this population. AMS that becomes worse or does not
respond to maintenance of altitude, rest, and pharmacologic intervention mandates descent. Descent (500-­1,000 m, ∼1,600-­3,300 ft) is effective treatment for all forms of altitude illness and should be tailored
to the individual response. The presence of neurologic abnormalities
(e.g., ataxia or altered mentation) mandates descent because these
signs indicate a progression of AMS to severe altitude illness (HACE).
Supplemental oxygen administration relieves AMS symptoms,
including small amounts (1-­2 L/min) given during sleep. In the wilderness, oxygen tanks are impractically heavy and are usually unavailable
in adequate amounts; therefore oxygen therapy is usually reserved for
the more serious manifestations of high-­altitude illness. Hyperbaric
therapy that simulates descent is also effective.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 87 u Altitude-­Associated ­Illness in Children

altitude. Controlled studies for prophylaxis with acetazolamide in children
are unavailable; however, anecdotal evidence supports its use (see Table
87.2). Ibuprofen, when compared with acetazolamide, has been found to
be equally efficacious in preventing headache in adults. Dexamethasone
also prevents AMS; however, the potential adverse effects in children
preclude its use for prophylaxis in this age group. Recommendations for
hyperhydration are frequently given in the lay literature, yet no evidence
supports this advice. Drinking excessive amounts of free water may lead to
hyponatremia and possibly complicate altitude illness.

Treatment of headache and nausea can be beneficial for mild AMS, and
in many cases this may be all that is necessary. Evidence supports the use
of ibuprofen and acetaminophen for the treatment of high-­altitude headache in children; aspirin and combination products containing aspirin
should be avoided in children because of possible association with Reye
syndrome. For nausea and vomiting, ondansetron may be used.
Acetazolamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor that induces a renal
bicarbonate diuresis, causing a metabolic acidosis that increases ventilation and arterial oxygenation. This respiratory stimulation improves sleep
when the hypoxemia caused by periodic breathing is eradicated by acetazolamide. Acetazolamide accelerates acclimatization and, if given early in
the development of AMS, rapidly resolves symptoms. Anecdotal experience supports the use of acetazolamide in children, particularly when conservative measures have been insufficient (Table 87.2). Treatment for 48
hours is usually adequate for resolution of symptoms. Acetazolamide may
be prepared as a solution by a compounding pharmacy.
Adverse reactions to acetazolamide in adults include paresthesias, polyuria, and taste alterations for carbonated beverages. Less common reactions include nausea, drowsiness, tinnitus, transient myopia, and rarely,
rash. Acetazolamide is a nonantibiotic sulfa compound that carries a low
risk of cross-­reactivity for individuals with an allergy to sulfa antibiotics.
A history of anaphylaxis or severe skin reactions to any sulfa-­containing
medication contraindicates the use of acetazolamide. Acetazolamide
should be avoided in breastfeeding mothers and pregnant women.
Dexamethasone is an effective alternative treatment for AMS in
adults. Although dexamethasone can resolve the symptoms of AMS,
it does not play a role in acclimatization, and symptoms may recur
when the treatment is withdrawn. Adverse reactions to dexamethasone
of concern in the pediatric population are pancreatitis, pseudotumor
cerebri, and interference with normal growth. Although these reactions are generally seen with prolonged use, dexamethasone should be
used for treatment in children only in extreme situations where alternatives such as descent or oxygen therapy are unavailable.

HIGH-­ALTITUDE CEREBRAL EDEMA
Epidemiology and Risk Factors

HACE is rare and may occur in children. Prompt recognition and treatment are necessary, because if unrecognized, it is rapidly fatal. HACE is
generally seen in adults with prolonged stays above 4,000 m (∼13,000 ft),
but in rare cases has been reported as low as 2,100 m (∼6,900 ft). HACE
is usually associated with concurrent AMS or HAPE, but can occur on its
own.

Pathophysiology

HACE is regarded as the extreme expression of the same pathophysiology underlying AMS. The edema and increased intracranial pressure are
believed to be primarily caused by a vasogenic process where fluid moves
from the vascular to the interstitial space due to a combination of increased
hydrostatic pressure and increased vascular permeability. In the later stages
of HACE, a cytotoxic component may contribute to the edema. These proposed mechanisms are supported by MRI studies revealing white matter
changes consistent with vasogenic and cytotoxic edema.

Diagnosis

HACE is differentiated from severe AMS by the presence of neurologic
signs. Most common are ataxia and altered mental status, including confusion, progressive decrease in responsiveness, and eventually coma. Less
common are focal cranial nerve palsies, motor and sensory deficits, and
seizures. CT imaging is consistent with edema and increased intracranial
pressure. MRI shows a high T2 signal in the white matter, specifically in
the splenium of the corpus callosum, with diffusion-­weighted technique.

Prevention

Individuals who have a known susceptibility to the development of AMS
and those for whom slow ascent is impractical may consider prophylactic
medication. Acetazolamide remains the compound of choice for AMS prophylaxis. Numerous studies have demonstrated its effectiveness in adults
starting 24 hours before ascent and continuing for the first 2 days at high
Table 87.2

633

Management

Descent remains the most effective treatment for HACE. Supplemental oxygen, if available, is useful, especially if descent is not possible or

Medications for Treatment of Altitude-Associated Illness in Children*

MEDICATION
Acetazolamide

CLASSIFICATION
Carbonic anhydrase
inhibitor

INDICATION

DOSE AND ROUTE

ADVERSE EFFECTS

AMS treatment

2.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours;
maximum 250 mg/dose

Collateral effects include
paresthesias, altered taste
and visual acuity, electrolyte
disturbance

AMS or re-entry
HAPE prevention1

1.25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours;
maximum dose 125 mg/dose

Collateral effects reduced at
lower doses

Dexamethasone

Steroid

AMS or HACE
treatment2,3

0.15 mg/kg PO/IM/IV every 6 hours;
maximum 4 mg/dose

Hypertension, GI hemorrhage,
pancreatitis, growth inhibition

Nifedipine

Calcium-channel blocker

HAPE treatment or
prevention4

If > 50 kg use adult dosing of
30 mg extended-release PO
every 12 hours

Flushing, gastrointestinal
distress, hypotension

Amlodipine

Calcium-channel blocker

HAPE treatment or
prevention4,5

1-5 years: 0.1-0.6 mg/kg/dose PO
daily; maximum 5 mg/day
6-17 years: 2.5-5.0 mg PO daily
(tablet or liquid suspension)

Flushing, abdominal pain,
dizziness, hypotension

*No studies in children for high-altitude indications.
1AMS prophylaxis is not routinely recommended in children but indicated when rapid ascent profile is unavoidable or previous altitude illness occurred in a child about to undergo

similar ascent profile. AMS and re-entry HAPE prophylaxis should be started 24 hours before ascent and continued for 2 days at altitude.
2Oxygen and descent are the treatment of choice for severe AMS. If acetazolamide is not tolerated, dexamethasone may be used. Oxygen, descent and dexamethasone should be

used in HACE.
3Prophylactic use of dexamethasone for AMS is not warranted because of potential adverse effects. Use slow graded ascent or acetazolamide.
4In emergency settings where oxygen and descent are not an option, amlodipine or nifedipine may be used for treatment. Extended-release (ER) nifedipine formulations cannot be

broken to obtain smaller doses. If ≥ 50 kg, 30 mg extended-release nifedipine is preferred.

5Amlodipine offers advantages over nifedipine for small children because of once daily dosing and availability as liquid or appropriately sized tablet.

Adapted from Luks AM, Beidleman BA, Freer L et al. Wilderness Medical Society Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Prevention, Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Altitude Illness: 2024
Update. Wilderness Environ Med. 2023;Oct 11:S1080-6032(23)00167-9.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

634 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
delayed. Portable hyperbaric treatment is beneficial, but its use should
not delay descent. Dexamethasone should be administered at a dose
of 0.15 mg/kg per dose given orally every 6 hours to a maximum of 4
mg per dose (see Table 87.2). The few mild cases of HACE reported in
children have recovered with dexamethasone and descent.

HIGH-­ALTITUDE PULMONARY EDEMA
Epidemiology and Risk Factors

HAPE is a noncardiogenic pulmonary edema caused by intense pulmonary vasoconstriction and subsequent high capillary pressure,
secondary to hypoxia, resulting in altered permeability of the alveolocapillary membrane and the extravasation of intravascular fluid
into the extravascular space of the lung. The development of HAPE
depends on factors affecting pulmonary vasoreactivity, rate of ascent,
altitude achieved, and time spent at that altitude. HAPE generally
occurs in the setting of recent ascent, most often at altitudes above
3,000 m (∼9,800 ft), but in some cases at altitudes as low as 1,740 m
(∼5,700 ft). Among children HAPE occurs in 2 distinct settings. Most
commonly, HAPE occurs in a child who resides at low altitude who
travels to high altitude. Reentry HAPE affects children who reside
at high altitude but become ill on their return home after descent to
lower altitudes (see Special Considerations). HAPE may also occur
with or without ascent in children who develop acute respiratory
illnesses that exacerbate hypoxia at high altitude. Fatal outcomes of
HAPE in children have been reported. Most mild and moderate cases
resolve without difficulty; however, if unrecognized and untreated,
rapid progression to death can occur, especially when infection or
cardiac conditions complicate the illness.
HAPE affects male and female children more equally than adults,
among whom the observed male predominance appears due to strenuous sport activities and military assignments. The occurrence, and even
the pathophysiology, of HAPE may vary by population and genetic
background. Several conditions may predispose a child to HAPE (Table
87.3). Preexisting viral respiratory infections have been linked to HAPE,
especially in children. Cardiorespiratory conditions associated with
pulmonary hypertension, such as atrial and ventricular septal defects,
pulmonary vein stenosis, congenital absence of a pulmonary artery, and
obstructive sleep apnea, also predispose to HAPE. Down syndrome is a
risk factor for HAPE development, as are previously repaired congenital
heart defects and the presence of hypoplastic lungs. Undiagnosed structural cardiopulmonary abnormalities may result in severe hypoxia and/
or altitude illness once ascent occurs; for this reason, a new diagnosis of
HAPE in a child warrants active investigation of underlying causes.

Physiology

Alveolar hypoxia results in vasoconstriction of the pulmonary arterioles
just proximal to the alveolar capillary bed. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is a normal physiologic response to optimize ventilation/perfusion ( V̇/Q̇) matching by redistributing regional pulmonary blood flow
to areas of highest ventilation, thereby optimizing arterial oxygenation.
However, under conditions that result in widespread alveolar hypoxia,
extensive pulmonary vasoconstriction will lead to significant elevations in
pulmonary arterial pressure, and uneven pulmonary vasoconstriction can
result in localized overperfusion, increased capillary pressures, distention,
and leakage in the remaining vessels. This explains the patchy and heterogeneous edema that is classically observed in HAPE. The combination of
pulmonary hypertension and uneven pulmonary vasoconstriction appears
to be necessary in the pathogenesis of HAPE. Children and adolescents
acutely exposed to high-­altitude hypoxia demonstrate pulmonary hypertension, with increases in pulmonary artery pressure inversely related to
age. Once the vascular leak occurs and alveolar fluid accumulates, a defect
in transepithelial sodium transport impairs the clearance of alveolar fluid
and contributes to HAPE.
The conditions that predispose to HAPE are often directly referable
to elements in the cascade of pathophysiology. Viral infections result
in inflammation that may predispose the pulmonary endothelium to
mechanical injury and increase susceptibility to alveolar fluid accumulation and HAPE during ascent. Exercise and cold stress at altitude may
increase hypoxemia and exacerbate pulmonary hypertension. Overperfusion of a restricted vascular bed is illustrated by cases of congenital

Table 87.3  Conditions Associated with Increased Risk of
HAPE
ENVIRONMENTAL
Ascent above 2,500 m (∼8,200 ft)
Rapid rate of ascent (generally >1,000 m [∼3,300 ft] per day)
Cold exposure
CARDIAC
Anomalies causing increased pulmonary blood flow or increased
pulmonary arterial pressure
• Ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect, patent foramen ovale, patent
ductus arteriosus
• Anomalous pulmonary venous return or pulmonary vein stenosis
• Unilateral absent pulmonary artery or isolated pulmonary artery of ductal
origin

Coarctation of the aorta
Congestive heart failure
PULMONARY
Chronic lung disease
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Cystic fibrosis (FEV-­1 <30% predicted)
Pulmonary hypoplasia
Supplemental oxygen requirement at sea level
Pulmonary hypertension
Perinatal respiratory distress
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn
Perinatal asphyxia or depression
Sleep apnea
INFECTIOUS
Upper respiratory tract infection
Bronchitis/bronchiolitis
Pneumonitis
Otitis media
PHARMACOLOGIC
Any medication causing central nervous system and respiratory
depression
Alcohol
Sympathomimetics
SYSTEMIC
Down syndrome (trisomy 21)
History of premature birth or low birthweight

unilateral absence of a pulmonary artery in which the entire cardiac output is delivered to one lung, predisposing to pulmonary hypertension and
overperfusion injury. Although data from mechanistic studies of children
are lacking, adult HAPE-­susceptible subjects have been characterized as
having significantly elevated pulmonary artery pressure during altitude
exposure and illness, altered vascular permeability, augmented hypoxic
pulmonary vasoreactivity during hypoxia and normoxic exercise, blunted
hypoxic ventilatory responsiveness, smaller lung volumes, and impaired
alveolar fluid clearance.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of HAPE is based on clinical findings and their evolution in the context of recent ascent from lower elevation. There is no
single diagnostic test or constellation of laboratory findings. Symptoms
commonly develop within 24-­96 hours, and onset of symptoms often
occurs during the first or second night at altitude, when hypoxia may
be exacerbated during sleep. HAPE is rarely observed beyond 5 days
after ascent to altitude (unless additional ascent occurs) because pulmonary vascular remodeling and acclimatization have taken place. The
diagnosis of HAPE is made by observing the combination of symptoms, including dyspnea at rest, cough, weakness, or decreased exercise
performance, and signs including crackles or wheezing in at least one
lung field, central cyanosis, tachypnea, or tachycardia. Determining the
onset and timing of the illness relative to ascent and radiographic evidence of alveolar infiltrates may help confirm the diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 87 u Altitude-­Associated ­Illness in Children
The symptoms of AMS and HAPE show considerable overlap, and AMS
may precede the development of HAPE in approximately half of patients.
Frequently patients with HAPE first exhibit general malaise, which may
progress to more specific signs of cardiopulmonary distress. Young children may show agitation and general debility. Older children may complain of headache, and children of all ages frequently experience nausea
and vomiting. Cough is a common pulmonary sign. Dyspnea at rest,
orthopnea, cyanosis, tachycardia, and chest pain herald worsening compromise, which may advance within hours to production of pink-­tinged
sputum.
Findings on physical exam frequently are less severe than a patient’s
chest radiograph and the hypoxemia on pulse oximetry would predict.
Children often appear pale, with or without visible cyanosis. Low-­grade
fever (<38.5°C) is common, and respiratory rate is generally increased.
Auscultation typically reveals rales, usually greater in the right lung than
the left, on presentation. The radiographic pattern of pulmonary edema
can be highly variable, from patchy and peripheral to more homogeneous in severe cases. Often, the right lung shows more radiographic
changes of edema than the left (Fig. 87.2). Cardiomegaly is an uncommon finding, but peribronchial and perivascular cuffing are frequent, as
is enlargement of the pulmonary artery silhouette and dilation of more
peripheral pulmonary arteries. Portable ultrasound has been shown
useful to diagnose HAPE through the finding of “comet tails,” artifacts
created by microreflections of the ultrasound beam within interlobular
septae thickened by interstitial and/or alveolar edema. Significant arterial oxygen desaturation, as measured by pulse oximetry, is a consistent
finding, with saturations frequently below 75%. A complete blood count
often reveals a leukocytosis with a left shift of the granulocyte series.
The differential diagnosis of HAPE includes viral and bacterial
pneumonia, bronchitis/bronchiolitis, asthma, vaping-­associated lung
disease, and other forms of cardiogenic and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema as well as pulmonary embolism. HAPE is most frequently
misdiagnosed as pneumonia or a viral respiratory illness, especially
when suspicion of altitude-­associated pathology is not appropriately
high. The presenting signs of cough, dyspnea, and orthopnea, followed
by sputum production, can easily be misinterpreted as pneumonia, an
impression that is reinforced by the frequent accompaniment of low-­
grade fever. Respiratory viral infections increase the risk of developing
HAPE, which may lead to further confusion in diagnosis.
Complications of HAPE in children often relate to underlying, sometimes undiagnosed, cardiopulmonary pathology or coexisting viral infections, which potentiate the severity of pulmonary edema and pulmonary
hypertension. Acute altitude exposure in such circumstances may lead to
severe presentations that progress rapidly to extreme hypoxemia or cardiac failure and death. Children with Down syndrome, with or without
structural cardiac anomalies, show increased susceptibility to HAPE and
rapid symptom progression. Neonatal respiratory distress with pulmonary
hypertension has been linked to exaggerated hypoxic pulmonary vasoreactivity in early adulthood and thereby a theoretical predisposition to
HAPE. Other conditions related to pulmonary overcirculation (atrial and
ventricular septal defects, patent foramen ovale, patent ductus arteriosus),
small cross-­sectional area of the pulmonary vascular bed (unilateral absent
pulmonary artery, pulmonary hypoplasia), obstruction to pulmonary
venous return (total anomalous pulmonary venous return, pulmonary
vein stenosis), or left-­sided obstruction (coarctation of the aorta) potentiate HAPE. Recent inflammatory processes, such as viral infection, predispose to HAPE and may worsen hypoxemia. Infection with respiratory
syncytial virus in particular may trigger severe pulmonary hypertension.

Management

Descent with supplemental oxygen is the treatment of choice for HAPE in
children. When feasible, or in the absence of medical care, rapid descent
of at least 500-­1,000 m (∼1,500-­3,300 ft) usually results in rapid recovery.
As with all altitude illness, the magnitude of the descent is tailored to the
resolution of symptoms. Oxygen and bed rest without descent can be safe
and effective treatment for mild HAPE in children where careful medical
observation is available.
Supplemental oxygen at altitude is administered at 2-­6 L/min by
nasal cannula for 48-­72 hours to maintain an arterial oxygen saturation of at least 90%. Increasing oxygen saturation above 90% does not

A

635

B

Fig. 87.2 High-­altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE). A healthy teenager

who resides at low altitude flew to Denver, Colorado, with a school
group and immediately drove to a ski resort at 9,300 feet. The following
day he felt dizzy and complained of headache. Symptoms progressed
over the next 2 days to include emesis, dyspnea, cough, and fatigue.
He was taken to an emergency department, where pulse oximetry
showed an arterial saturation of 51%. Chest x-­ray was obtained. A, This
diagnostic image of HAPE was obtained at the altitude of presentation.
The chest x-­ray shows patchy, nodular infiltrates generalized through
the right lung and the left upper lobe. The patient was started on supplemental oxygen and transported to Denver. Saturations improved
with descent and were 94% on room air at time of arrival. B, Repeat
radiograph obtained at lower altitude 2 days after presentation with
HAPE. This diagnostic image shows substantial resolution of patchy
pulmonary edema. (Courtesy Children’s Hospital Colorado, Department of Radiology.)

result in further reduction in pulmonary artery pressure and does not
accelerate edema resolution in adults. Oxygen flow can be weaned with
improvement in symptoms and saturations; at flow rates below 2-­4 L/
min, children may be sufficiently stable and comfortable to continue
treatment at home under the monitoring of family. Instructions to
avoid physical exertion and exposure to cold should be given to reduce
exposure to factors known to elevate pulmonary artery pressure. Most
children experience complete resolution of mild HAPE within 24-­72
hours of oxygen therapy when treated at the altitude of symptom onset.
Pharmacotherapy for pediatric HAPE is rarely needed because oxygen
and descent are so effective. In emergency situations without the options
of supplemental oxygen or descent, pharmacotherapy aimed at reducing
pulmonary hypertension is indicated (see Table 87.2). Although not systematically studied in children, nifedipine is indicated for the treatment
of adult HAPE. Amlodipine offers advantages over nifedipine in children
because of daily dosing and availability of a liquid suspension. Patients
should be monitored for hypotension during calcium channel blocker
administration.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Reentry HAPE and HAPE in High-­Altitude Residents
Without Travel

Children residing at high altitude may experience reentry HAPE upon
reascent to the altitude of residence after a sojourn to low altitude.
Although stays at low altitude as short as 24 hours may be sufficient
to trigger reentry HAPE, most cases occur after several days at lower
altitude. Several case series have demonstrated that children between
4 and 18 years of age are much more likely to develop reentry HAPE
than adults. Observations from Colorado and Peru suggest that reentry
HAPE may occur in 6–17% of children 2-­19 years of age compared with
<1–3% of adult residents. Various explanations have been proposed for
the greater incidence and severity of reentry HAPE among children,
including general lack of moderated behavior on ascent, increased
likelihood of preexisting inflammatory processes, developmental differences in endothelial cell tight junctions, occult chronic pulmonary
artery hypertension, and retained pulmonary arteriolar muscularity
with potential for elevated pulmonary arterial pressure and potentially
uneven pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction.
Reentry HAPE has a significant probability of recurrence and may
justify pharmacologic prophylaxis to prevent the accumulated burden

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

636 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
of morbidity. There are no controlled trials of prophylaxis for reentry
HAPE in children; however, acetazolamide has been used empirically
(see Table 87.2), based on its blunting of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in adults and the potential risk of hypotension and reflex
tachycardia with calcium channel blockers.
HAPE can also occur in children residing at high altitude without
travel, and it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of children who present with hypoxemia at high altitude. The chest radiograph may be consistent with HAPE or viral pneumonia. When rapid
improvement with oxygen and little to no response to bronchodilators suggest HAPE, the use of antibiotics and other treatments can be
minimized.

Sickle Cell Disease/Trait

Symptomatic High-­Altitude Pulmonary Hypertension

A comprehensive approach to travel to high altitude with children should
focus on 3 phases: planning the ascent and assessment of risk, recognition
and management of altitude-­associated illness, and follow-­up of any illness
relative to future travel or diagnostic testing necessary. Planning for travel
to high altitude with children should consider rate of ascent, formulation
of an emergency plan for communication and evacuation, and availability
of medical care at the high-­altitude destination. Slow ascent with time for
acclimatization is the best prevention for all forms of altitude illness. Ideally, the first night should not be spent at an altitude higher than 2,800 m
(9,000 ft), and then 2-­3 nights should be spent at 2,500-­3,000 m (∼8,200-­
9,800 ft), with a subsequent increase (to a new sleeping altitude) of not
more than 500 m (1,600 ft) each night. One extra night of acclimatization
(at the same sleeping altitude) should be taken for every 1,000 m (∼3,300
ft) gained. Rapid ascent by air may be avoidable through alternative routes
or means of transportation. Difficult descent situations (where further
ascent may be necessary before descent is possible) should be avoided
with children. Widespread coverage by cellular and satellite phone service
may give a false sense of security in remote regions where both terrain and
weather can limit the arrival of definitive help.
Prompt recognition of altitude-­associated illness requires awareness
of the context in which illness occurs and familiarity with the signs
and symptoms. Parents are generally adept at recognizing deviation
from baseline behavior of their children. Scales such as the Lake Louise
Acute Mountain Sickness Score and CLLS may aid parents in modifying activity and/or seeking treatment. Clinicians should emphasize to
parents that breathing difficulty, cyanosis, cough productive of pink-­
tinged sputum, altered mental status, and neurologic abnormalities are
not part of uncomplicated AMS, but instead are serious signs of potential HAPE or HACE that deserve immediate medical attention.
Descent is the mainstay of therapy for all forms of altitude-­associated
illness in children. When descent is not feasible or illness is mild, other
therapeutic options may be considered. Severe altitude illness or death
can be avoided in children by adherence to three general principles:
1.	Recognition of the early signs of altitude illness and willingness by
adult caregivers to acknowledge them
2.	No further ascent, especially to sleep at a higher altitude, when experiencing even minor symptoms/signs of altitude illness
3.	Immediate descent if signs/symptoms worsen while resting/receiving treatment at the altitude of onset
Altitude-­associated illness in children merits follow-­up with the primary care physician. Uncomplicated AMS with full resolution of symptoms upon descent or treatment does not require diagnostic workup, but
may prompt discussion of slower ascent, specific plans for treatment, or
even prophylaxis for future travel. Signs of HAPE or severe hypoxemia in a
child out of proportion to the altitude reached should prompt further diagnostic evaluation, including consideration of echocardiography. Underlying cardiac conditions may not be apparent on physical examination at
low altitude; therefore cardiac catheterization or echocardiography under
conditions of controlled hypoxia or hypoxic exercise may be necessary.
Families of HAPE-­susceptible children should be advised to avoid travel
during or shortly after viral infections.

Infants and young children residing at high altitude may experience symptomatic high-­
altitude pulmonary hypertension (SHAPH). All infants,
regardless of altitude of gestation and birth, have thickened and muscularized interlobular and intralobular pulmonary arteries and pulmonary artery pressures that are initially near systemic. Although muscular
regression and fall in pulmonary artery pressure occur rapidly at sea level,
infants permanently residing at high altitude demonstrate slowed regression of these characteristics through infancy and even childhood. Similar
changes may occur in infants who experience pulmonary complications at
birth (respiratory distress syndrome of prematurity, persistent pulmonary
hypertension of the newborn). Infants with SHAPH become symptomatic
with exaggerated hypoxemia and signs of subacute pulmonary hypertension; these signs correlate with pathologic findings of right ventricular
hypertrophy and dilation, increased muscularization of the pulmonary
arterial bed, and eventual right-­sided congestive heart failure. Although
supplemental oxygen and medications may be used, definitive treatment is
relocation to a lower altitude.

Cognitive Dysfunction

It is known that adults may have reversible changes in cognitive function with acute exposure to high altitude. A small study evaluating
cognitive function in healthy 10-­to 17-­year-­old children found impairment in verbal short-­term memory, episodic memory, and executive
functions 24 hours after ascent to 3,450 m (∼11,400 ft). These findings
were no longer present upon reassessment 3 months after returning to
sea level. Similar results were found in children with permanent residence at high altitude; however, additional study is needed to assess the
long-­term implications of these findings.

Travel with Young Infants

Newborn infants retain some of the circulatory characteristics of recent
fetal life, and these can pose a unique risk for altitude exposure. The
fetal circulation has high pulmonary resistance, low pulmonary blood
flow, and both intracardiac and extracardiac shunts that optimize oxygenation via the placenta instead of the fetal lungs. After birth, a transition begins that closes fetal shunts and establishes normal pulmonary
circulation and oxygen transport. Exposure to marked hypoxia can
result in reversion to fetal shunting patterns despite the absence of a
placenta. Normal infants at sea level complete these changes in 4-­6
weeks, though for infants born at moderate or high altitude, changes
may last 3 months or longer. Travel to high altitude with young infants
is generally safe after 4-­
6 weeks, when circulatory changes have
occurred, breastfeeding is established, and congenital abnormalities
may have been detected.
Air travel with young infants frequently raises questions about the
effects of exposure to hypobaric hypoxia, as the pressurization of aircraft cabins may vary up to an altitude equivalent of 8,500 ft (∼2,600
m). Even transoceanic flights are generally not long enough to trigger
AMS or HAPE. However, infants may experience transient desaturation with feedings during flight and likely experience discomfort due
to dry air and stress resulting from noise and vibration, much as adults
do. Former preterm infants without chronic lung disease who have
attained 3 months corrected gestational age do not appear to experience greater hypoxia during air travel than term infants; infants with
more significant lung disease merit hypoxic challenge or provision of
supplemental oxygen in flight.

Children with sickle cell disease or sickle cell trait should avoid travel
to altitude, as hypoxemia may trigger intravascular sickling, leading
to acute vasoocclusive pain crises or splenic infarction or sequestration. Up to 20% of pediatric patients with sickle cell disease and sickle-­
thalassemia disease may experience a vasoocclusive crisis at moderate
altitude or in pressurized aircraft. Oxygen is advised for air travelers
with known sickle cell disease. Although many children with sickle cell
trait remain asymptomatic, children can experience splenic ischemia
or infarction with severe left upper quadrant pain.

Recommendations for High-­Altitude Travel with
Children

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Dr. Dunbar Ivy and Dr. Deborah Liptzin for their
careful review of the manuscript.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88 u Drowning and ­Submersion Injury

Drowning and
S­ ubmersion Injury
William Benjamin Prince
Drowning is the second most frequent cause of unintentional injury
death among children in the United States after traffic accidents. Prevention is the most important step to reducing the impact of drowning
injury, followed by early initiation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) at the scene.

ETIOLOGY

Children are at risk of drowning when they are exposed to a water
hazard in their environment. The World Congress on Drowning and
the World Health Organization (WHO) definition of drowning is “the
process of experiencing respiratory impairment from submersion/
immersion in liquid.” Drowning outcomes are classified as death, no
morbidity, or morbidity further divided into moderately or severely
disabled, vegetative state/coma, and brain death. Use of confusing
descriptive terms such as “near,” “wet,” “dry,” “secondary,” “silent,” “passive,” and “active” should not be used.

3.5
Deaths per 100,000 population

Chapter 88

Children <1 Year Old

Most (75%) drowning deaths in children younger than 1 year occur
in the bathtub, when an infant is left alone or with an older sibling.
Infant tub seats or rings may exacerbate the risk by giving caregivers a
false sense of security that the child is safe in the tub. The next major
risk to children <1 year is the large (5-­gallon) household bucket. These
buckets are approximately 30 cm (1 ft) tall and designed not to tip over
when half-­full. The average 9-­month-­old child tends to be top-­heavy
and thus can easily fall headfirst into a half-­full bucket, become stuck,
and quickly drown.

Children 1-­4 Years Old

Drowning rates are consistently highest in 1-­to 4-­year-­old children,
likely because of their curious but unaware nature, coupled with the
rapid progression of their physical capabilities. A common factor in
many of these deaths is a lapse in adult supervision, often reportedly <5
minutes. Most U.S. drownings occur in residential swimming pools.
Usually, the child is in their own home, and the caregiver does not
expect the child to be near the pool.
In rural areas, children 1-­4 years old often drown in irrigation
ditches or nearby ponds and rivers. The circumstances are like those

3.0

1–4 years1,2

2.5
2.0

Under 1 year2

1.5
1.0

14–17 years2

0.5

5–13 years3

0.0
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018

Fig. 88.1 Unintentional drowning death rates among children age 0-­

17 years, by age group: United States, 1999–2019. 1Rates significantly
higher than those for other age groups over the study period, p < 0.05.
2Significant decreasing trend from 1999 through 2019, p < 0.05. 3Significant decreasing trend from 1999 through 2005 p < 0.05; stable trend
from 2005 through 2019.Notes: Unintentional drowning deaths are
identified using International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision
underlying cause-­of-­death codes W65–W74 Accidental drowning and
submersion. Rates shown are crude rates (deaths per 100,000). Source:
National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System,
Mortality. (From Spencer MR, Hedegaard H, Warner M. Unintentional
drowning deaths among children aged 0-­17 years: United States, 1999-­
2019. NCHS Data Brief. 2021;413. Fig. 2.)

EPIDEMIOLOGY

2.5
Deaths per 100,000 population

From 2010 to 2020, an average of 4012 people per year were victims of
fatal drowning, and an estimated 8061 persons per year were treated
in U.S. hospital emergency departments (EDs) for nonfatal drowning.
Compared with other types of injuries, drowning has one of the highest
case fatality rates and is in the top 10 causes of death related to unintentional injuries for all pediatric age-­groups. In 2019, the highest drowning death rates were seen in children age 1-­4 years (crude rate of 2.4
per 100,000); in children age 1-­4 years, drowning was the number-­one
cause of death from unintentional injury in the United States in 2019
(Fig. 88.1). Rates of fatal drowning hospitalization declined by ∼25%
during the same period (Fig. 88.2).
The risk of drowning and the circumstances leading to it vary by age.
Drowning risk also relates to other host factors, including male sex,
alcohol or drug use, a history of seizures, autism, or cardiac arrhythmia, and swimming lessons. Environmental risk factors include exposure to water and varying supervision. These factors are embedded in
the context of geography, climate, socioeconomic status, and culture.

637

2.0
Male1,2
1.5

Total2

1.0

Female3

0.5
0.0
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018

Fig 88.2 Unintentional drowning death rates among children age 0-­
17 years, by sex: United States, 1999–2019. 1Rates significantly higher
than those for females over the study period, p < 0.05. 2Significant decreasing trend from 1999 through 2019, with different rates of change
over time, p < 0.05. 3Significant decreasing trend from 1999 through
2014; stable trend from 2014 through 2019, p < 0.05. Notes: Unintentional drowning deaths are identified using International Classification
of Diseases, 10th Revision underlying cause-­of-­death codes W65–W74
Accidental drowning and submersion. Drowning deaths totaled 756
in 2019 among children age 0-­17 years. Rates shown are crude rates
(deaths per 100,000). Source: National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Mortality. (From Spencer MR, Hedegaard
H, Warner M. Unintentional drowning deaths among children aged 0-­
17 years: United States, 1999-­2019. NCHS Data Brief. 2021;413, Fig. 1.)

noted previously, in a body of water that is near the house. Drowning
is one of the leading causes of farm injury–related deaths in children.

School-­Age Children

School-­age children are at increased risk of drowning in natural bodies of water such as lakes, ponds, rivers, and canals. Hazards such as
unknown depths, undefined areas, and presence of currents and waves
increase this risk. Although swimming pools account for most nonfatal drownings across all ages, natural waterways account for a higher
death rate in children 10-­19 years old. Unlike for preschool children,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

638 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
swimming or boating activities are important factors in drowning injuries in school-­age children.

Adolescents

The second peak incidence in drowning death rates occurs in older
adolescents, age 15-­19 years. Almost 90% drown in open water. In this
age-­group particularly, striking disparities in drowning deaths exist in
gender and ethnicity. Drowning death is roughly twice as common for
males when compared with females, but among adolescents, the rate is
almost 10 times higher among males. The gender disparity may likely
be related to males’ greater exposure to aquatic environments, overestimation of swimming ability, underestimation of dangerous situations,
increased risk-­taking behavior, and greater alcohol use.
Dangerous underwater breath-­holding behaviors (DUBBs) are
often performed by experienced healthy swimmers or fitness enthusiasts (hypoxic training) or when teenagers hold breath-­holding contests
during horseplay. DUBBs have been primarily reported in regulated
swimming facilities. Behaviors include intentional hyperventilation
before submersion, static apnea, and extended periods of underwater
distance swimming or breath-­hold intervals.

Ethnic Disparities

There is significant ethnic disparity seen across drowning rates and
causes. Among children age 0-­19 years, the drowning rates from 2014
to 2018 are highest among Black (1.79 per 100,000) and Indigenous
Nations people and Alaska Native (1.49 per 100,000) individuals. Rates
are lower among White (1.06 per 100,000), Asian American and Pacific
Islander (0.85 per 100,000), and Hispanic (0.82 per 100,000) individuals. Age dramatically influences drowning disparities. Black children
drown at significantly higher rates than those for White and Hispanic
children at every age from 5 to 18 years. Black children are more likely
to drown in unguarded public pools, apartment pools, or hotel pools;
White children are more likely to drown in private residential pools.
Reasons for disparities in drowning rates may include cultural attitudes toward swimming, prohibitive cost and location of swimming
lessons, fears about swimming, and lack of lifeguards at pools in many
communities.

Underlying Conditions

Several underlying medical conditions are associated with drowning
at all ages. Epilepsy is a known risk factor in drowning, with a relative
risk for fatal and nonfatal drowning 7.5-­to 10-­fold higher than children without seizures. Drowning is the most common cause of death
from unintentional injury for people with epilepsy. Cardiac etiologies,
including arrhythmias, myocarditis, and prolonged QT or catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia syndromes, have been
found in some children who die suddenly in the water, particularly in
those with a family history of syncope, cardiac arrest, prior drowning,
or QT prolongation. Exertion and fright while swimming can trigger
arrhythmia among individuals with long QT and should be considered a possible cause for unexplained submersion injuries, particularly
among proficient swimmers in low-­risk settings (see Chapter 484.5).
Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are at a significantly
higher risk of drowning when compared with the general population;
wandering was the most reported behavior leading to drowning in children with ASD. Children with muscle disease or peripheral neuropathies
have an increased risk for drowning because of the degree of fatigability.
Drowning may also be an intentional injury. A history of the event
that changes or is inconsistent with the child’s developmental stage is
the key to recognition of intentional drowning. Physical examination
and other physical injuries rarely provide clues. Child abuse is more
often recognized in bathtub-­related drownings. Suicide usually occurs
in lone swimmers in open water.

Alcohol Use

The use of alcohol and drugs greatly increases the risk of drowning.
A meta-­analysis found that 30–70% of swimming and boating fatal
drowning victims have a measurable blood alcohol concentration.
Alcohol can impair judgment, leading to riskier behavior, decreased

balance and coordination, hypothermia, and blunted ability to self-­
rescue. Alcohol use while boating is also associated with low life jacket
use. Furthermore, an intoxicated adult may provide less effective
supervision of children around water.

Sports and Recreation

Most U.S. drowning deaths occur during recreational activities.
Drowning is the leading cause of noncardiac sports-­related deaths. Surveys confirm that not using a personal flotation device (PFD) is common during boating activities. In 2021 the U.S. Coast Guard reported
that 83% of those who drowned in boating accidents were not wearing
a PFD.

Global Impact of Drowning

Drowning injury is the third leading cause of unintentional death
worldwide, with the majority (90%) of fatalities occurring in low-­
and middle-­income countries. More than half of the global drowning
occurs in the WHO Western Pacific and Southeast Asia regions. Global
drowning rates are vastly underestimated, because many drowning
deaths in this region go unreported, and many immediate fatalities are
unrecognized. In addition, these data exclude any cases of drowning
as the result of intentional harm or assault, accidents of watercraft or
water transport, and drowning related to forces of nature or cataclysmic storms, which usually claim large numbers of lives per incident;
thus true numbers of fatal drowning are likely much higher.
Some patterns of pediatric drowning are similar in all countries. By
most accounts, the highest rates are seen in males and in children 1-­4
years old. The predominant locations are near or around the home,
involving bodies of water used for activities of daily living. These
include water-­collecting systems, ponds, ditches, creeks, and watering
holes. In tropical areas, death rates increase during monsoon season,
when ditches and holes rapidly fill with rain, and are highest during
daylight hours, when caregivers are busy with daily chores.
Drowning during natural disasters such as storms and floods is
important in all areas of the world. The largest numbers of reported
flood-­related deaths occur in developing nations; most are drownings
that occur during the storm surge. In the United States and much of
Europe, advances in weather monitoring and warning systems have
reduced such deaths. U.S. flooding incidents, including hurricanes
Katrina and Sandy, showed that drowning caused the most deaths, particularly when people became trapped in their vehicles, were unable or
refused to evacuate homes, or attempted to rescue others.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Drowning victims drown quickly and quietly and do not signal distress
or call for help. Vocalization is precluded by efforts to achieve maximal
lung volume to keep the head above the water or by aspiration leading to laryngospasm (Fig. 88.3). Young children can struggle for only
10-­20 seconds and adolescents for 30-­60 seconds before final submersion. The instinctive drowning response is a phenomenon where actual
or perceived suffocation in water triggers autonomic nervous system
responses resulting in unlearned, instinctive drowning movements. A
swimmer in distress is vertical in the water, with arms extended to the
side to lift the body up and bring the mouth above water to breathe.
This splashing or efforts to breathe are often misconstrued by nearby
persons as merely playing in the water, until the victim sinks.

Anoxic-­Ischemic Injury

During drowning there is a period of voluntary breath-­
holding,
typically less than 1 minute, before small amounts of water enter the
hypopharynx, triggering laryngospasm as a protective reflex. There
is a progressive decrease in arterial blood oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sao2), and the person soon loses consciousness from hypoxia.
Profound hypoxia and medullary depression lead to terminal apnea.
Laryngospasm resolves, allowing additional fluid (water, stomach contents) into the lungs. At the same time, the cardiovascular response
progresses to decreasing cardiac output and oxygen delivery to other
organs. By 3-­
4 minutes, myocardial hypoxia leads to peripheral
vasoconstriction, decreased cardiac output, and abrupt circulatory

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88 u Drowning and ­Submersion Injury

639

Submersion
Victim’s airway falls below level of fluid

Fright
+LQTS
+CPVT

Struggle
Victim attempts to resurface

Breath-holding
Victim actively protects airway

Gasp
Involuntary inhalation due to hypercapnia

Fatal cardiac
arrhythmias

Laryngospasm
Physiologic airway closure
due to fluid inhalation

No laryngospasm
Water may freely enter airway

Laryngospasm may relax
with loss of consciousness

Aspiration
Fresh water
Hypo-osmolar water leaks to
capillary bed and circulation
Salt water
Hyperosmolar water draws
plasma fluid into alveoli

Respiratory failure
Secondary to ARDS

Cardiopulmonary
arrest

Survival ±HIE
or death

Fig. 88.3 Pathophysiologic events of the drowning process. LQTS, Long QT syndrome; CPVT, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia; HIE, hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome. (Courtesy Andrew Schmidt, DO, MPH.)

failure. Cardiac arrhythmias progress from tachycardia, to bradycardia, followed by ineffective cardiac contractions with electrical activity
(pulseless electrical activity). With early initiation of CPR, spontaneous circulation may initially be successfully restored. The extent of the
global hypoxic-­ischemic injury determines the outcome and becomes
more evident over subsequent hours.
With modern intensive care, the cardiorespiratory effects of resuscitated drowning victims are usually manageable and are less often
the cause of death than irreversible hypoxic-­ischemic central nervous
system (CNS) injury (see Chapter 82). CNS injury is the most common cause of mortality and long-­term morbidity. Although the duration of anoxia before irreversible CNS injury begins is uncertain, it
is probably on the order of 3-­5 minutes. Submersion <5 minutes is
associated with a favorable prognosis, whereas those >25 minutes are
generally fatal.
Several hours after cardiopulmonary arrest, cerebral edema may
occur, although the mechanism is not entirely clear. Severe cerebral
edema can elevate intracranial pressure (ICP), contributing to further
ischemia; intracranial hypertension is an ominous sign of profound
CNS damage.

All other organs and tissues may exhibit signs of hypoxic-­ischemic
injury. In the lung, damage to the pulmonary vascular endothelium
can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS; see Chapter 86). Aspiration may also compound pulmonary injury. Myocardial
dysfunction, arterial hypotension, decreased cardiac output, arrhythmias, and cardiac infarction may also occur. Acute kidney injury, cortical necrosis, and renal failure are common complications of major
hypoxic-­
ischemic events (see Chapter 572.1). Vascular endothelial
injury may initiate disseminated intravascular coagulation, hemolysis, and thrombocytopenia. Many factors contribute to gastrointestinal damage; bloody diarrhea with mucosal sloughing may be seen and
often portends a fatal injury. Serum levels of hepatic transaminases and
pancreatic enzymes are often acutely increased. Violation of normal
mucosal protective barriers predisposes the victim to bacteremia and
sepsis.

Pulmonary Injury

Pulmonary aspiration occurs in many drowning victims, but the
amount of aspirated fluid is usually small (see Chapter 446). Aspirated water does not obstruct airways and is readily moved into the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

640 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
pulmonary circulation with positive pressure ventilation. More
importantly, it can wash out surfactant and cause alveolar instability,
ventilation-­perfusion mismatch, and intrapulmonary shunting. The
disruption of the alveolar capillary membrane leads to alveolar edema
resulting in local ARDS-­like syndrome.
In humans, aspiration of small amounts (1-­3 mL/kg) can lead to
marked hypoxemia and a 10–40% reduction in lung compliance. The
composition of aspirated material can also affect the patient’s clinical
course: gastric contents, oropharyngeal flora, pathogenic organisms,
toxic chemicals, and other foreign matter can injure the lung or cause airway obstruction. Aspiration is typically considered the source of pneumonia in cases of drowning, and antibiotics should be initiated based
on radiographic evidence and clinical suspicion; no mortality benefit
has been shown in those patients who received empiric or prophylactic
antimicrobial therapy. Clinical management is not significantly different in saltwater and freshwater aspirations, because most victims do not
aspirate enough fluid volume to make a clinical difference.

Cold Water Injury

Drowning should be differentiated from cold water immersion injuries, in which the victim remains afloat, keeping the head above water
without respiratory impairment in cold waters. The definition of cold
water varies from <15–20°C (<59–68°F).
Heat loss through conduction and convection is more efficient
in water than in air. Children are at increased risk for hypothermia
because of their relatively high ratio of body surface area (BSA) to
mass, decreased subcutaneous fat, and limited thermogenic capacity.
Body temperature may also continue to fall after removal from the
water because of cold air, wet clothes, hypoxia, and hospital transport
time. Hypothermia in pediatric drowning victims may be observed
even after drowning in relatively warm water and in warm climates
(see Chapter 90).
Immersion in cold water has immediate respiratory and cardiovascular effects. Victims experience cold water shock, a dynamic series
of cardiorespiratory physiologic responses that can cause drowning.
In adults, immersion in icy water results in intense involuntary reflex
hyperventilation and a decrease in breath-­holding ability to <10 seconds, which leads to fluid aspiration. Severe bradycardia, the diving
reflex, occurs in adults but is transient and rapidly followed by supraventricular and ectopic tachycardia and hypertension. There is no evidence that the diving reflex has any protective effect.
Even after surviving the chaotic minutes of cold-­water shock, after
an additional 5-­10 minutes of cold-­water immersion, the victim can
become incapacitated. Cooling of large and small muscles disables the
victim’s ability to grab hold, swim, or perform other self-­rescue maneuvers. Severe hypothermia with body temperatures below 28°C (82.4°F)
can lead to cardiac arrhythmia and asystole.
Depending on water and air temperature, insulation, BSA, thermogenic capacity, physical condition, swimming efforts, or high-­
water flow rates, heat loss with continued immersion can significantly
decrease core temperature to hypothermic levels within 30-­60 minutes.
The symptoms and severity of hypothermia are categorized based on
body temperature. The victim with mild hypothermia has a core body
temperature of 32–35°C (90–95°F) with intact thermogenic mechanisms (shivering and nonshivering thermogenesis, vasoconstriction)
and active movements. Compensatory mechanisms usually attempt
to restore normothermia at body temperatures >32°C (89.6°F). Lower
core temperatures lead to impaired cognition, coordination, and muscle strength and, with it, less ability to self-­rescue. Thermoregulation
may fail, and spontaneous rewarming will not occur. With moderate
hypothermia (28 to <32°C [82 to <90°F]), loss of consciousness leads
to water aspiration. Progressive bradycardia, impaired myocardial contractility, and loss of vasomotor tone contribute to inadequate perfusion, hypotension, and possible shock. At body temperatures <28°C
(82.4°F), extreme bradycardia is usually present with decreases in
cardiac output, and the propensity for spontaneous ventricular fibrillation or asystole is high. Central respiratory center depression with
moderate to severe hypothermia results in hypoventilation and eventual apnea. A deep coma, with fixed and dilated pupils and absence of

reflexes at very low body temperatures (<25–29°C [77–84.2°F]), may
give the false appearance of death.
If the cooling process is quick—and cardiac output lasts long enough
for sufficient heat loss to occur before the onset of severe hypoxia—the
brain can cool to a level that may be considered in the neuroprotective range, approximately 33°C (91.4°F) in controlled, experimental
conditions. However, if submersion leading to drowning occurs before
development of a neuroprotective level of hypothermia, severe anoxia
devastates tissue organs. The theoretical benefits, implications, and
consequences of hypothermia in drowning victims are areas of controversy. Known adverse effects are associated with hypothermia,
and these must be balanced against the potential benefits observed in
experimental data. One should clearly differentiate among controlled
hypothermia, such as that used in the operating room before the onset
of hypoxia or ischemia; accidental hypothermia, such as occurs in
drowning, which is uncontrolled and variable, with onset during or
shortly after hypoxia-­ischemia; and therapeutic hypothermia, involving the purposeful and controlled lowering and maintenance of body
(or brain) temperature after a hypoxic-­ischemic event.
In drowning victims with uncontrolled accidental hypothermia
associated with icy water submersion, there are isolated and rare
reports of good neurologic recovery after prolonged (10-­150 minutes)
cardiopulmonary arrest. Almost all these rare survivors have been in
freezing water (<5°C [41°F]) and had core body temperatures <30°C
(86°F), often much lower. Presumably, very rapid and sufficiently deep
hypothermia developed in these fortunate survivors before irreversible hypoxic-­ischemic injury occurred. Intact neurologic functioning
after sustaining a severe hypothermic submersion is likely associated
with a combination of variables, including submersion times (most
important), water temperature, immediate resuscitation, quality and
duration of resuscitation, idioventricular bradycardia, and rewarming
speed.
Most often, hypothermia is a poor prognostic sign, and a neuroprotective effect has not universally been demonstrated. A 2014 study
from Washington State found that submersion duration <6 minutes
is most strongly related to good outcome, not water temperature. In
another study of comatose drowning patients admitted to the pediatric
intensive care unit (PICU), 65% of hypothermic patients (body temperature <35°C [95°F]) died, compared with a 27% observed mortality
rate in nonhypothermic victims. Thus a beneficial effect of drowning-­
associated hypothermia has not been seen in most pediatric submersion victims.

MANAGEMENT

Duration of submersion, speed of the rescue, effectiveness of resuscitative efforts, and clinical course determine the outcome in submersion
victims (Fig. 88.4). Two groups may be identified based on responsiveness at the scene. The first group consists of children who require
minimal resuscitation at the scene and quickly regain spontaneous respiration and consciousness. They have good outcomes and minimal
complications. In awake, alert victims with hypoxemia, the first line of
therapy is supplemental oxygen. These victims should be transported
from the scene to the ED for further evaluation and observation. The
second group comprises children in cardiac arrest who require aggressive or prolonged resuscitation and have a high risk of multiple organ
system complications, major neurologic morbidity, or death. Compared with cardiac arrest from other causes, cardiac arrest from drowning has a higher survival rate.
Initial management of drowning victims requires coordinated and
experienced prehospital care following the ABCs (airway, breathing,
circulation) of emergency resuscitation. CPR of drowning victims must
include providing adequate ventilation as the initial phase of respiratory arrest, as these children may still have intact circulation. However,
this phase will progress to cardiac arrest if hypoxia persists. Children
with severe hypoxic injury and symptoms often remain comatose and
lack brainstem reflexes despite the restoration of oxygenation and circulation. Subsequent ED and PICU care often involve advanced life
support (ALS) strategies and management of multiorgan dysfunction
with discussions about end-­of-­life care.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88 u Drowning and ­Submersion Injury
Check for response to verbal and
tactile stimuli

Evaluation

No answer

Answer

Open the airway and check for ventilation;
if breathing, perform pulmonary auscultation;
if not breathing, give 5 initial breaths
and check carotid pulse

Perform pulmonary auscultation

Pulse absent

Submersion time
>1 hr or obvious
physical evidence
of death

Grade

Dead

Intervention

None

Further
Management

Survival

641

Pulse present

Submersion time
≤1 hr, no obvious
physical evidence
of death

Grade 5

Start CPR
(ABC sequence);
after return of
spontaneous
ventilation,
follow intervention
for grade 4

Start artificial
ventilation;
respiratory arrest
is usually
reversed after a
few imposed
breaths; after
return of
spontaneous
ventilation, follow
intervention
for grade 4

Forensic
evaluation

0%

Rales in all pulmonary fields
(acute pulmonary edema)

Grade 6

Hypotension
or shock

Normal blood
pressure

Grade 4

Grade 3

Administer high-flow oxygen by face
mask or orotracheal tube and
mechanical ventilation

56–69%

Rales in some
pulmonary fields

With cough

Without cough

Grade 2

Grade 1

Rescue

Low-flow oxygen

Advanced medical
attention and
oxygen should
not be required

None

Monitor breathing
because respiratory
arrest can still
occur; start
crystalloid infusion
and evaluate for
use of vasopressors

Emergency
department

Intensive care unit

7–12%

Normal

Abnormal

78–82%

95–96%

99%

If no coexisting conditions, evaluate
further or release from the accident site

100%

100%

Fig. 88.4 Treatment of persons who have drowned, with classification system. (From Szpilman D, Bierens J, Handley A, Orloweski J. Drowning.
N Engl J Med 2012;366:2102–2110. Fig. 1.)

Initial Evaluation and Resuscitation

See Chapter 79.
Immediate resuscitation at the submersion site, even before arrival
of emergency medical services (EMS) personnel, is the most effective
method to improve outcomes after drowning. Neurologic prognosis
is significantly improved by prompt bystander CPR and activation of
prehospital ALS. The goal is to reverse the anoxia from submersion
and limit secondary hypoxic injury after submersion. Every minute
that passes without the reestablishment of adequate breathing and
circulation dramatically decreases the possibility of a good outcome.
When safe for the victim and the rescuer, institution of in-­water resuscitation for nonbreathing victims by trained personnel may improve
the likelihood of survival. In-­water resuscitation protocols recommend
performing up to 1 minute of ventilation before attempting to bring the
unconscious and apneic patient to shore. For patients in deep water,
in-­water resuscitation requires rescue flotation equipment or at least
2 rescuers. Practically, victims usually need to be extricated from the
water as quickly as possible so that effective CPR can be provided.

Initial resuscitation must focus on rapidly restoring oxygenation,
ventilation, and adequate circulation. The airway should be clear of
vomitus and foreign material, which may cause obstruction or aspiration. Abdominal thrusts should not be used for fluid removal, because
many victims have a distended abdomen from swallowed water;
abdominal thrusts may increase the risk of regurgitation and aspiration. In cases of suspected airway foreign body, chest compressions or
back blows are preferable maneuvers.
The cervical spine (C-­spine) should be protected in anyone with potential traumatic neck injury (see Chapters 80 and 81). Cervical spine
injury is a rare concomitant injury in drowning; approximately 0.5% of
submersion victims have C-­spine injuries, and history of the event and
victim’s age should guide suspicion of C-­spine injury. Drowning victims
with C-­spine injury are usually preteens or teenagers whose drowning
event involved diving, a motor vehicle crash, a fall from a height, a
water sport accident, child abuse, or other clinical signs of serious traumatic injury. In such cases, the neck should be maintained in a neutral position and protected with a well-­fitting cervical collar. Patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

642 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
rescued from unknown circumstances may also warrant C-­spine precautions. In low-­impact submersions, spinal injuries are exceedingly
rare, and routine spinal immobilization is not warranted.
If the victim has ineffective respirations or apnea, ventilatory support
must be initiated immediately. Mouth-­to-­mouth or mouth-­to-­nose
breathing by trained bystanders often restores spontaneous ventilation. As soon as it is available, supplemental oxygen should be administered to all victims. Positive pressure bag-­mask ventilation with 100%
inspired oxygen should be instituted in patients with respiratory insufficiency. If apnea, cyanosis, hypoventilation, or labored respiration
persists, trained personnel should perform endotracheal intubation
as soon as possible. Intubation is also indicated to protect the airway
in patients with depressed mental status or hemodynamic instability.
Hypoxia must be corrected rapidly to optimize the chance of recovery.
Concurrent with securing of airway control, oxygenation, and ventilation, the child’s cardiovascular status must be evaluated and treated
according to the usual resuscitation guidelines and protocols. Heart
rate and rhythm, blood pressure, temperature, and end-­organ perfusion require urgent assessment. CPR should be instituted immediately
in pulseless, bradycardic, or severely hypotensive victims, as studies
have shown receiving bystander CPR is associated with neurologically
favorable survival in all age groups. Continuous monitoring of the electrocardiogram (ECG) allows appropriate diagnosis and treatment of
arrhythmias. Slow capillary refill, cool extremities, and altered mental
status are potential indicators of shock (see Chapter 85).
Recognition and treatment of hypothermia are unique aspects of
cardiac resuscitation in the drowning victim. Core temperature must
be evaluated, especially in children, because moderate to severe hypothermia can depress myocardial function and cause arrhythmias. Wet
clothing should be removed to prevent ongoing heat losses, although
in the hemodynamically stable patient, rewarming should be initiated
in the controlled environment of the receiving ED or PICU. Unstable
patients (i.e., arrhythmias) should be warmed to 34°C (93.2°F), taking
care not to overheat (see Chapter 90, Fig. 90.2).
Often, intravenous (IV) fluids and vasoactive medications are
required to improve circulation and perfusion. Vascular access should
be established as quickly as possible for the administration of fluids or
pressors. Intraosseous catheter placement is a potentially lifesaving vascular access technique that avoids the delay usually associated with multiple attempts to establish IV access in critically ill children. Epinephrine
is the initial drug of choice in victims with brady-­asystolic cardiopulmonary arrest (IV dose is 0.01 mg/kg using the 1:10,000 [0.1 mg/mL]
solution given every 3-­5 minutes, as needed). Epinephrine can be given
intratracheally (endotracheal tube dose is 0.1-­0.2 mg/kg of 1:1,000 [1
mg/mL] solution) if no IV access is available. An intravascular bolus of
lactated Ringer solution or 0.9% normal saline (10-­20 mL/kg) is often
used to augment preload; repeated doses may be necessary.

Hospital-­Based Evaluation and Treatment

Most pediatric drowning victims should be observed for at least 4-­6
hours, even if they are asymptomatic on presentation to the ED. Serial
monitoring of vital signs and oxygenation by pulse oximetry, repeated
pulmonary examination, and neurologic assessment should be performed in all drowning victims. Additional studies may also be warranted, depending on the specific circumstances (possible abuse or
neglect, traumatic injuries, or suspected intoxication). Almost half of
asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic alert children (who did not
require ALS in the prehospital setting or who have an initial ED Glasgow
Coma Scale [GCS] score of ≥13) experience some level of respiratory distress or hypoxemia progressing to pulmonary edema during the initial
4-­6 hours after submersion. Most alert children with early respiratory
symptoms respond to oxygen and, despite abnormal initial radiographs,
become asymptomatic with a return of normal room-­air pulse oximetry oxyhemoglobin saturation (Spo2) and pulmonary examination by
4-­6 hours. Subsequent delayed respiratory deterioration is extremely
unlikely in such children. Low-­risk patients who present with normal
mental status and normal respiratory function may be considered for
discharge after 4-­6 hours of observation if there is no deterioration of
respiratory symptoms and appropriate follow-­up can be ensured.

Initial ED management of symptomatic patients with respiratory
distress or lethargy may require further testing depending on clinical
severity. Initial studies may include blood gas monitoring, a complete
metabolic panel, a complete blood count, and chest radiography. Toxicology tests, including drug and alcohol levels, should be considered
when appropriate.
There has been much misinformation about dry drowning and
secondary drowning. These are misnomers and not accepted medical
terms. Dry drowning has been described historically as cases in which
no water was found in the lungs at autopsy. Secondary drowning has
been used interchangeably to describe patients who clinically worsen
due to pulmonary edema after aspiration of water. These terms cause
harm by misdiagnosing cases of sudden death as drowning when there
is an alternative diagnosis. They also cause confusion when describing and monitoring drowning events. Drowning victims with no or
minimal clinical signs of distress will either improve or worsen within
4–6 hours, and patients will not unexpectedly die of drowning days or
weeks later without preceding signs.

Cardiorespiratory Management

For children who are not in cardiac arrest, the level of respiratory support should be appropriate to the patient’s condition and is a continuation of prehospital management. Frequent assessments are required to
ensure that adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and airway control are
maintained (see Chapter 86). Hypercapnia should generally be avoided
in potentially brain-­injured children. Patients with altered mental status, actual or potential hypoventilation, or markedly elevated work of
breathing should receive mechanical ventilation to avoid hypercapnia
and decrease the energy expenditures of labored respiration. Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) strategies such as bilevel positive airway pressure
(BiPAP) and high-­flow nasal canula (HFNC) have been associated with
rapid improvement in the early phase of oxygenation in patients without altered mental status to reduce mortality.
Measures to stabilize cardiovascular status should also continue.
Conditions contributing to myocardial insufficiency include hypoxic-­
ischemic injury, hypoxia, hypothermia, acidosis, high airway pressures
during mechanical ventilation, alterations of intravascular volume,
and electrolyte disorders. Heart failure, shock, arrhythmias, or cardiac
arrest may occur. Continuous ECG monitoring is mandatory for recognition and treatment of arrhythmias (see Chapter 484).
The provision of adequate oxygenation and ventilation is a prerequisite to improving myocardial function. Patients should be given 100%
inspired oxygen until oxygen saturation can be reasonably measured.
Fluid resuscitation and inotropic agents are often necessary to improve
heart function and restore tissue perfusion (see Chapter 79). Increasing preload with IV fluids may be beneficial through improvements in
stroke volume and cardiac output. Overzealous fluid administration,
however, especially in the presence of poor myocardial function, can
worsen pulmonary edema.
For patients with persistent cardiopulmonary arrest on arrival in
the ED after non–icy water drowning, the decision to withhold or stop
resuscitative efforts can be addressed by review of the history and the
response to treatment. Because there are reports of good outcome after
ongoing CPR in the ED, most drowning victims should be treated
aggressively on presentation. However, for children who do not show
ready response to aggressive resuscitative efforts, the need for prolonged
ongoing CPR after non–icy water submersion almost invariably predicts
death or persistent vegetative state. Consequently, in most cases, discontinuation of CPR in the ED is probably warranted for victims of non–
icy water submersion who do not respond to resuscitation within 25-­30
minutes. Final decisions regarding whether and when to discontinue
resuscitative efforts must be individualized, with the understanding that
the possibility of good outcome is generally very low with protracted
resuscitation efforts. In circumstances of severe ARDS or cardiac insufficiency, extracorporeal life support has been successfully employed.

Neurologic Management

Drowning victims who present to the hospital awake and alert usually
have normal neurologic outcomes. In comatose victims, irreversible

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88 u Drowning and ­Submersion Injury
CNS injury is highly likely. The most critical and effective neurologic
intensive care measures after drowning are rapid restoration and maintenance of adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and perfusion. Core
body temperature and glucose management are important modulators
of neurologic injury after hypoxia-­ischemia.
Comatose drowning patients are at risk for intracranial hypertension. There is little evidence that ICP monitoring and therapy to reduce
intracranial hypertension improve outcomes for drowning victims.
Patients with elevated ICP usually have poor outcomes—either death
or persistent vegetative state. Children with normal ICP can also have
poor outcomes, although less frequently. Conventional neurologic
intensive care therapies, such as fluid restriction; hyperventilation; and
administration of muscle relaxants, osmotic agents, diuretics, barbiturates, and corticosteroids, have not been shown to benefit the drowning
victim, either individually or in combination. There is some evidence
that these therapies may reduce overall mortality but increase the number of survivors with severe neurologic morbidity.
Seizures after hypoxic brain injury are common, although detection is often difficult in the ICU because these patients are frequently
sedated. Continuous electroencephalographic (EEG) monitoring
in critically ill patients revealed a 13% incidence of seizures, 92% of
which were exclusively nonconvulsive. However, EEG monitoring has
only limited value in the management of drowning victims, except to
detect seizures or as an adjunct in the clinical evaluation of brain death
(see Chapter 83). Seizures should be treated, if possible, to stabilize
cerebral oxygen use, although benefits are inconclusive. Fosphenytoin
or phenytoin (loading dose of 10-­20 mg of phenytoin equivalents/kg,
followed by maintenance dosing with 5-­8 mg of phenytoin equivalents/
kg/day in two or three divided doses; levels should be monitored) may
be considered as an anticonvulsant; it may have some neuroprotective
effects and may mitigate neurogenic pulmonary edema. Benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and other anticonvulsants may also have some
role in seizure therapy, although no conclusive studies have shown
improved neurologic outcome.
With optimal management, many initially comatose children can
have impressive neurologic improvement, but usually do so within the
first 24-­72 hours. Unfortunately, half of deeply comatose drowning victims admitted to the PICU die of their hypoxic brain injury or survive
with severe neurologic damage. Deeply comatose drowning victims
who do not show substantial improvement on neurologic examination after 24-­72 hours and whose coma cannot be otherwise explained
should be seriously considered for limitation or withdrawal of support.

Additional Management Issues

Many drowning victims may have traumatic injury (see Chapter 80),
especially if their drowning event involved participation in high-­energy
water sports such as personal watercraft, boating, diving, or surfing. A
high index of suspicion for such injury is required. Spinal precautions
should be maintained in victims with altered mental status and suspected
traumatic injury.
Hypoxic-­
ischemic injury can have multiple systemic effects,
although protracted organ dysfunction is uncommon in the absence of
severe CNS injury. Hyperglycemia is associated with a poor outcome
in critically ill pediatric drowning victims. Glucose control in patients
after drowning should be focused on avoiding hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and wide or rapid fluctuations in serum glucose to prevent
further harm.
Manifestations of acute kidney injury may be seen after hypoxic-­
ischemic injury (see Chapter 572). Diuretics, fluid restriction, and
dialysis are occasionally needed to treat fluid overload or electrolyte
disturbances; renal function usually normalizes in survivors. Rhabdomyolysis after drowning has been reported.
Profuse bloody diarrhea and mucosal sloughing usually portend a
grim prognosis; conservative management includes bowel rest, nasogastric suction, and gastric pH neutralization. Nutritional support for
most drowning victims is usually not difficult, because most children
either die or recover quickly and resume a normal diet within a few
days. Enteral tube feeding or parenteral nutrition is occasionally indicated in children who do not recover quickly.

643

Hyperthermia after drowning or other types of brain injury may
increase the risk of mortality and exacerbate hypoxic-­ischemic CNS damage. Almost half of drowning victims have a fever during the first 48
hours after submersion. Hyperthermia is usually not caused by infection and resolves without antibiotics in approximately 80% of patients.
Generally, prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended. However,
there is general consensus that fever or hyperthermia (core body temperature >37.5°C [99.5°F]) in comatose drowning victims resuscitated
from cardiac arrest should be prevented at all times in the acute recovery period (at least the first 24-­48 hours).
Psychiatric and psychosocial sequelae in the family of a pediatric
drowning victim are common. Grief, guilt, and anger are typical among
family members, including siblings. Divorce rates increase within a few
years of the injury, and parents often report difficulties with employment or substance abuse. Friends and family may blame the parents for
the event. Professional counseling, pastoral care, or social work referral
should be initiated for drowning victims and their families.

Hypothermia Management

Attention to core body temperature starts in the field and continues during transport and in the hospital. The goal is to prevent or treat moderate or severe hypothermia. Damp clothing should be removed from all
drowning victims. Rewarming measures are generally categorized as passive, active external, or active internal (see Chapter 90). Passive rewarming measures can be applied in the prehospital or hospital setting and
include the provision of dry blankets, a warm environment, and protection from further heat loss. These should be instituted as soon as possible
for hypothermic drowning victims who have not had a cardiac arrest.
Full CPR with chest compressions is indicated for hypothermic victims if no pulse can be found or if narrow complex QRS activity is
absent on ECG (see Chapters 79 and 90). When core body temperature
is <30°C (86°F), resuscitative efforts should proceed according to the
American Heart Association guidelines for CPR, but IV medications
may be given at a lower frequency in moderate hypothermia because
of decreased drug clearance. When ventricular fibrillation is present in
severely hypothermic victims (core temperature <30°C [86°F]), defibrillation should be initiated, but may not be effective until the core
temperature is ≥30°C (86°F), at which time successful defibrillation
may be more likely.
Significant controversy surrounds the discontinuation of prolonged
resuscitative efforts in hypothermic drowning victims. Body temperature
should be considered before resuscitative efforts are terminated. Other
considerations include whether the victim may have been immersed
before submerged, whether water was icy, or the cooling was very rapid
with fast-­flowing cold water. Victims with profound hypothermia may
appear clinically dead, but full neurologic recovery is possible, although
rare. Attempts at lifesaving resuscitation should not be withheld based
on initial clinical presentation unless the victim is obviously dead
(dependent lividity or rigor mortis). Rewarming efforts should usually
be continued until the temperature is 32–34°C (89.6–93.2°F); if the victim continues to have no effective cardiac rhythm and remains unresponsive to aggressive CPR, resuscitative efforts can be discontinued.
Complete rewarming is not indicated for all arrest victims before
resuscitative efforts are abandoned. Discontinuing resuscitation in
victims of non–icy water submersion who remain asystolic despite 30
minutes of CPR is probably warranted. Physicians must use their individual clinical judgment about deciding to stop resuscitative efforts,
taking into account the unique circumstances of each incident.
Once a drowning victim has undergone successful CPR after a cardiac arrest, temperature management should be carefully considered
and body temperature continuously monitored. In victims in whom
resuscitation duration was brief and who are awake soon after resuscitation, attempts to restore and maintain normothermia are warranted.
Careful monitoring is necessary to prevent unrecognized worsening
hypothermia, which can have untoward consequences.
For drowning victims who remain comatose after successful CPR,
more contentious issues include rewarming of hypothermic patients
and controlled application of therapeutic hypothermia. Although
there is no evidence basis or opinion consensus, many investigators

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

644 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
cautiously recommend that hypothermic drowning victims who
remain unresponsive because of hypoxic-­
ischemic encephalopathy
after restoration of adequate spontaneous circulation should not be
actively rewarmed to normal body temperatures. Active rewarming should be limited to victims with core body temperatures <32°C
(89.6°F), but temperatures 32–37.5°C (89.6–99.5°F) should be allowed
without further rewarming efforts.
More controversial is the induction of therapeutic hypothermia in
drowning victims who remain comatose because of hypoxic-­ischemic
encephalopathy after CPR for cardiac arrest. A specific recommendation
for therapeutic hypothermia, especially in children, is not yet generally
accepted. The Advanced Life Support Task Force of the International
Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (2002) did not recommend
therapeutic hypothermia in drowned children resuscitated after cardiopulmonary arrest, citing insufficient evidence and older studies
demonstrating a potential deleterious effect in pediatric drowning victims. Several subsequent studies evaluating extracorporeal membrane
circulation, rewarming, and therapeutic hypothermia in pediatric and
adult drowning patients have shown no significant improvement in
neurologic outcome or mortality.
The Therapeutic Hypothermia After Out-­
of-­
Hospital Pediatric
Cardiac Arrest (THAPCA) randomized controlled trial (RCT) investigators analyzed post hoc the findings of targeted temperature management (TTM) in pediatric comatose survivors of out-­of-­hospital cardiac
arrest caused by drowning. Drowning comprised 28% of the landmark
pediatric TTM (33°C vs 36.8°C) RCT, and the authors’ principal observation is that targeting hypothermia, compared with targeting normothermia, did not result in better survival.

PROGNOSIS

The outcomes for drowning victims are remarkably bimodal: The
great majority of victims either have a good outcome (intact or mild
neurologic sequelae) or a poor outcome (severe neurologic sequelae,
persistent vegetative state, or death), with very few exhibiting intermediate neurologic injury at hospital discharge. Subsequent evaluation of
good-­outcome survivors may identify significant persistent cognitive
deficits. Of hospitalized pediatric drowning victims, 15% die and as
many as 20% survive with severe permanent neurologic damage.
Strong predictors of outcome are based on the incident and response
to treatment at the scene. Intact survival or mild neurologic impairment has been seen in 91% of children with submersion duration <5
minutes and in 87% with resuscitation duration <10 minutes. Children with normal sinus rhythm, reactive pupils, or neurologic responsiveness at the scene virtually always had good outcomes (99%). Poor
outcome is highly likely in patients with deep coma, apnea, absence of
pupil responses (fixed dilated pupils), and hyperglycemia in the ED;
with submersion durations >10 minutes; and with failure of response
to CPR given for 25 minutes. In one comprehensive case series, all
children with resuscitation durations >25 minutes either died or had
severe neurologic morbidity, and all victims with submersion durations >25 minutes died. Long-­term health-­related quality of life and
school performance in those who had received either bystander-­or
emergency medical service personnel–initiated CPR were high if
their submersion duration was <5 minutes. Higher morbidity, higher
mortality, and lower quality of life were reported in patients with >10
minutes submersion duration. In several studies of pediatric drowning, submersion duration was the best predictor of outcome and water
temperature was not. However, there are rare case reports of intact
recovery after non–icy water drowning with longer submersion or
resuscitation duration.
The GCS score has some limited utility in predicting recovery. Children with a score ≥6 on hospital admission generally have a good outcome, whereas those with a score ≤5 have a much higher probability of
poor neurologic outcome. Improvement in the GCS score during the
first several hours of hospitalization may indicate a better prognosis.
Overall, early GCS assessments fail to adequately distinguish children
who will survive intact from those with major neurologic injury.
Neurologic examination and progression during the first 24-­72 hours
are the best prognosticators of long-­term CNS outcome. Children who

regain consciousness within 48-­72 hours, even after prolonged resuscitation, are unlikely to have serious neurologic sequelae. Laboratory and
technologic methods to improve prognostication have not yet proved
superior to neurologic examination. Serial neurologic evaluations after
CPR should be performed over the ensuing 48-­72 hours, with consideration given to limitation or withdrawal of support in patients who do
not have significant neurologic recovery, even though this may occur
before absolute prognostic certainty is achieved. Patients with minimal
improvement during this initial period rarely show significant subsequent neurologic recovery despite aggressive resuscitation efforts and
remain in a persistent vegetative state or die. Survivors with severe neurologic limitations necessitate neurorehabilitation to restore function
and facilitate psychomotor development and prevent long-­term damage caused by contractures, deformities, or scoliosis.

PREVENTION

The most effective way to decrease the injury burden of drowning is
prevention. Drowning is a multifaceted problem, but several evidence-­
based preventive strategies are effective. The pediatrician has a prime
opportunity to identify and inform families at risk of these strategies
through anticipatory guidance. Advocacy should focus on anticipatory guidance regarding the appropriate supervision of children, access
to swim lessons, presence of lifeguards, barriers to swimming pools,
and use of PFDs. A family-­centered approach to anticipatory guidance
for water safety helps explore and identify the water hazards that each
family is exposed to in their environment. The practitioner can then
discuss the best tools and strategies for prevention that are relevant for
the family. It is important to identify the risk both in and around the
home and in other locations they may frequent, often when vacationing, such as vacation or relatives’ homes. If the family recreates near or
on open water, they also need to learn about safety around boats and
open water. In a rural environment, water collection systems and natural bodies of water may pose great risk.
Parents must build layers of water protection around their children.
Table 88.1 provides an approach to the hazards and preventive strategies
relevant to the most common sources of water involved in childhood
drowning. A common preventive strategy for exposure to all water
types and all ages is ensuring appropriate supervision. Pediatricians
should define for parents what constitutes appropriate supervision at
the various developmental levels of childhood. Many parents either
underestimate the importance of adequate supervision or are simply
unaware of the risks associated with water. Even parents who say that
constant supervision is necessary will often admit to brief lapses while
their child is alone near water. Parents also overestimate the supervisory abilities of older siblings; many bathtub drownings occur when an
infant or toddler is left with a child <5 years old.
Drowning most often occurs quickly and quietly during periods of
inadequate supervision. Supervisory behavior is composed of three components: proximity, attention, and continuity. The caregiver must be alert,
must not be consuming alcohol or other drugs or socializing, and must
be attentive and focused entirely on watching the child. If the child cannot swim independently, touch supervision is required, meaning that the
caregiver should always be within arm’s reach. Adolescents require active
adult supervision and avoidance of alcohol or drug use during water
activities.
Learning to swim offers another layer of protection. Children may
start swim lessons at an early age that are developmentally appropriate
and aimed at the individual child’s readiness and skill level. Swim lessons are beneficial and provide some level of protection to young children. A study from Bangladesh, where drowning accounts for 20% of
all deaths in children age 1-­4 years, showed that swim lessons and water
safety curricula are cost-­effective and led to a decrease in mortality from
drowning. As with any other water safety intervention, parents need to
know that swimming lessons and acquisition of swim skills cannot be
solely relied on to prevent drowning. No child can be drown-­proof. A
supervising caretaker should be aware of where and how to get help and
know how to safely rescue a child in trouble. Because only those trained
in water rescue can safely attempt it, families should be encouraged to
swim in designated areas only when and where a lifeguard is on duty.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88 u Drowning and ­Submersion Injury

645

Table 88.1  Approach to Prevention Strategies for Drowning
HOME

RECREATION

NEIGHBORHOOD

Water hazards

• Swimming pools
• Ponds
• Bathtubs
• Large buckets
• Drain entrapment

• Playing in water (swimming, wading)
• Playing near water
• Being on water (boating)

• Irrigation ditches
• Watering holes
• Water drainage

Common risks

• Lapse in supervision
• Unexpected toddler exposure
• Delayed discovery of child
• Reliance on water wings or pool toys
• Reliance on sibling or bath seat for
bathing supervision
• Epilepsy
• Autism
• ADHD
• LQTS

• Lapse in supervision
• Change in weather
• Unfamiliarity with or change(s) in
water conditions:

• Lapse in supervision,
particularly when caregiver is
socializing
• Risky behavior when with peers

• Recognize hazards and risks
• Provide constant adult supervision
around water
• Install 4-­sided, isolation locked fencing
of pools
• Install rescue equipment and phone at
poolside
• Learn swimming and water survival
skills
• Avoid unsupervised baths in older
child/teen with seizure disorder; instead,
shower
• Learn first aid and CPR

• Provide constant adult supervision
• Swim in lifeguarded areas
• Know when and how to wear US
Coast Guard–approved PFDs
• Avoid alcohol and other drugs
• Learn swimming and water survival
skills
• Teach children about water safety
• Be aware of current weather and
water conditions
• Buddy system
• Learn first aid and CPR

Prevention strategies

• Steep drop-­off
• Current/tide
• Low temperature

• Alcohol and other drug use
• Peer pressure
• Identify hazardous bodies of
water
• Prevent access to water with
barriers
• Provide fenced-­in “safe area”
for water recreation
• Provide lifeguarded swim sites
• Provide access to low-­cost
swim/water survival lessons

ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; LQTS, long QT syndrome; PFDs, personal floatation devices.

Children and adolescents should never swim alone regardless of
their swimming abilities. Even as they become more independent
and participate in recreational activities without their parents, they
should be encouraged to seek areas that are watched by lifeguards. The
United States Lifesaving Association (USLA) reports that more than
75% of drownings at USLA sites occurred at times when the beaches
were unguarded. It is important to emphasize that even if the child is
considered a strong swimmer, the ability to swim in a pool does not
translate to being safe in open water, where water temperature, currents, and underwater obstacles can present additional and unfamiliar
challenges. For swimmers, supervision by lifeguards reduces drowning
risk, because lifeguards monitor risk behaviors and are trained in the
difficult and potentially dangerous task of rescuing drowning victims.
Two of the preventive strategies listed in Table 88.1 deserve special
mention. The most vigorously evaluated and effective drowning intervention applies to swimming pools. Compared with no fencing, installation of four-­
sided isolation fencing surrounding in-­
ground and
aboveground pools with a secure, self-­locking gate decreases the
number of pool immersion injuries among young children by more
than 50%. Guidelines for appropriate fencing, provided by the U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), are very specific; they
were developed through testing of active toddlers in a gymnastics program on their ability to climb barriers of different materials and heights,
and recent studies show them to be effective in preventing drowning in
young children. In families who have a pool on their property, caregivers
often erroneously believe that if a child falls into the water, there will be a
loud noise or splash to alert them. Unfortunately, these events are usually
silent, delaying timely rescue. This finding highlights the need for a fence
that separates the pool from the house, not just surrounds the entire
property. The CPSC recommends power safety covers be installed on
pools, as well as door alarms if the pool is not completely separated from
the house and the yard by a fence. Entrapment and hair entanglement in
open drains or pipes are other risks commonly associated with drowning
in the pediatric population; special drain covers, safety vacuum release
systems, and filter pumps with multiple drains can help prevent this.

The use of U.S. Coast Guard–approved lifejackets or PFDs should
be advised with all families spending time around open water, not just
those who consider themselves boaters. A PFD should be chosen with
respect to the weight of the child and the proposed activity. Young children should wear PFDs that will float their head up. Parents should
be urged to wear PFDs as well, because their use of PFDs is associated
with greater use by their children. Toys such as water wings and “floaties” should not be relied on as drowning prevention measures. The use
of life jackets decreases boat-­related drowning morbidity and mortality
by 50%; unfortunately, their use remains low.
Effective preventive efforts must also consider cultural practices.
Different ethnic groups may have certain attitudes, beliefs, dress, or
other customs that may affect their water safety. The higher drowning
risk of minority children needs to be addressed by community-­based
prevention programs.
In addition to anticipatory guidance, pediatricians can play an active
role in drowning prevention by participating in advocacy efforts to
improve legislation for pool fencing, PFD use, and alcohol consumption in various water activities. Several counties in the United States,
Australia, and New Zealand have laws requiring isolation fencing for
pools. Their effectiveness has been limited by a lack of enforcement.
Similarly, all states have boating-­under-­the-­influence laws but, similarly, rarely enforce them. Furthermore, efforts at the community level
may be needed to ensure the availability of swimming lessons for
underserved populations and lifeguarded swim areas.
The Drowning Chain of Survival refers to a series of steps that, when
followed, attempt to reduce mortality associated with drowning. The steps
of the chain include prevent drowning, recognize distress, provide flotation,
remove from water, and provide care as needed. These interventions may
be used by the drowning victim for self-­rescue or via bystanders who recognize child distress, initiate rescue, and provide resuscitation. The timeline
shows that rescue and resuscitation must occur within minutes to save lives,
and care should be taken by rescuers to not become victims themselves.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

646 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Chapter 89

Burn Injuries
Tina L. Palmieri
Burns are among the top five leading causes of unintentional injury in
children, after motor vehicle crashes, suffocation, drowning, and poisoning. There has been a decline in the incidence of burn injury requiring
medical care that has coincided with a stronger focus on burn treatment
and prevention, increased fire and burn prevention education, greater
availability of regional treatment centers, widespread use of smoke detectors, greater regulation of consumer products and occupational safety,
and societal changes such as reductions in smoking and alcohol abuse.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Approximately 1.1 million people in the United States require medical
care for burn injuries each year, with over 100,000 children admitted to
a hospital or treated in the emergency department (ED). Fires remain
a major cause of mortality in children, but children <14 years old have
a lower relative risk of dying in a fire than the general population.
Thermal burns are caused when an external heat source comes in
contact with the skin and tissues causing injury; thermal burns may
occur from contact with hot surfaces, hot liquids, steam, or flame.
Scald burns are most prevalent in children ≤4 years old and account
for 65% of burn-­related admissions in this age-­group. Although the
incidence of hot water scalding has been reduced by legislation requiring water heaters to be preset at 48.9°C (120°F), scald injury remains
the leading cause of hospitalization for burns in this age-­group. Steam
inhalation used as a home remedy to treat respiratory infections is a
rare potential cause of burns. Flame burns are the most common cause
of burn injury in all age-­groups ≥5 years old. Electrical and chemical burns are also more common in older children and adults than in
young children. Clothing ignition events have declined since passage
of the Federal Flammable Fabric Act requiring sleepwear to be flame-­
retardant. Polyester is the fabric most resistant to ignition by a small
flame source. Polyester burns deeply as it melts, but it self-­extinguishes
when the flame source is removed. Cotton, on the other hand, continues to burn after the flame source has been removed, resulting in large,
deep burns. Polyester melts downward, sparing the face and respiratory tract; cotton burns upward toward the face. Pellet stoves, glass
front stoves, and flat top stoves are frequent sources of hand burns in
children, as is contact with hot hair appliances, such as curling irons
and hair straighteners. Approximately 18% of burns are the result of
child abuse (usually scalds), making it important to assess the pattern
and site of injury and their consistency with the patient’s history (see
Chapter 17). Friction burns from treadmills are also a problem. Hands
are the most commonly injured sites, with burns ranging from deep
second-­degree to fourth-­degree with tendon disruption and fractures
from the friction injury. Anoxia, not the actual burn, is a major cause
of morbidity and mortality in house fires.
Review of the history usually shows a common pattern: a v-­shaped
distribution of the scald burns to the chest and abdomen if liquid
is pulled from a table or stove, burns in the pant leg area if clothing
ignites, burns in a splash pattern from a hot liquid spill, and burns on
the palm of the hand from contact with a hot stove or curling iron.
However, glove or stocking burns of the hands and feet; single-­area
deep burns on the trunk, buttocks, or back; and small, full-­thickness
burns (e.g., cigarette burns) in young children should raise the suspicion of child abuse.
Burn care involves a range of activities: prevention, acute care and
resuscitation, wound management, pain relief, reconstruction, rehabilitation, and psychosocial adjustment. Children with massive burns
require early and appropriate psychologic and social support as well as
resuscitation. Surgical debridement, wound closure, and rehabilitative

efforts should be instituted concurrently to promote optimal outcomes.
To maximize survival, the clinical approach includes aggressive surgical removal of devitalized tissue with timely skin closure via grafting,
infection control, and judicious use of antibiotics; life support with
endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation; and use of early
enteral nutrition. Children who have sustained burn injuries differ in
appearance from their peers, necessitating supportive efforts for reentry to school and social and sporting activities.

PREVENTION

The aim of burn prevention is a continuing reduction in the number
of serious burn injuries (Table 89.1). Effective first aid and triage can
decrease both the extent (area) and the severity (depth) of injuries. The
use of flame-­retardant clothing and smoke detectors, control of hot
water temperature (thermostat settings) to 48.9°C (120°F) within buildings, and prohibition of cigarette smoking have been partially successful
in reducing the incidence of burn injuries. Treatment of children with
significant burn injuries in dedicated burn centers facilitates medically
effective care, improves survival, and leads to greater cost efficiency.
Survival of at least 80% of patients with burns of 90% of the total body
surface area (TBSA) is possible for children and young adults. Death is
more likely in children with irreversible anoxic brain injury sustained at
the time of the burn. Some burns occur on a seasonal basis, including:
Winter:
• Glass-­front fireplaces/pellet stoves and radiators increase hand burns
• Treadmill injuries as more people exercise inside—child imitates
adults or young child touches belt
• Soup scald burns from spilling liquid while removing bowl from microwave
Summer:
• Fireworks, sparklers—temperatures reach 537.8°C (1,000°F)
• Burn contact with hot grill; hand/feet burn from hot embers
• Burns from children walking or falling into a campfire
• Lawnmowers
Spring/Fall:
• Burning leaves
• Gasoline burns
• Tap water scalds
• House fires from propane heater explosion
Pediatricians can play a major role in preventing the most common burns by educating parents and healthcare providers. Simple,
effective, efficient, and cost-­effective preventive measures include the
use of appropriate clothing and smoke detectors and the planning of
routes for emergency exit from the home. The National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) recommends replacing smoke detector batteries

Table 89.1  Burn Prophylaxis
PREVENT FIRES
Install and use smoke detectors.
Control the hot water thermostat; maximum water temperature
should be 48.9°C (120°F).
Keep fire, matches, and lighters out of the reach of children.
Avoid cigarette smoking, especially in bed.
Do not leave lit candles unattended.
Keep hair appliances such as curling irons and straighteners out of
the reach of children.
Use caution when cooking, especially with oil.
Keep cloth items off heaters.
PREVENT INJURY
Stop, drop, and roll (do not run) if clothing catches fire; wrap in a
blanket.
Practice escape procedures.
Crawl beneath smoke if a fire occurs indoors.
Use educational materials.*
*National Fire Protection Association pamphlets and videos.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89 u Burn Injuries

647

Table 89.2  Indications for Referral to a Burn Center

Table 89.3  Acute Treatment of Burns

Partial-­thickness burns affecting >10% TBSA
Full-­thickness burn affecting >5% TBSA
Third-­degree burns
Electrical burns caused by high-­tension wires or lightning
Chemical burns
Inhalation injury, regardless of the amount of TBSA burned
Inadequate home or social environment
Suspected child abuse or neglect
Burns to the face, hands, feet, perineum, genitals, or major joints
Burns in patients with preexisting medical conditions that may
complicate the acute recovery phase
Associated injuries (fractures)

First aid, including washing of wounds and removal of devitalized
tissue
Fluid resuscitation
Provision of energy requirements
Control of pain
Prevention of infection
Early excision and grafting
Prevention of excessive metabolic expenditures
Control of bacterial wound flora
Early mobility, range of motion, and strength exercises

TBSA, Total body surface area.
Adapted from American Burn Association/American College of Surgeons. Guidelines
for the operation of burn centers. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):134–141 and Bettencourt
AP, Romanowski KS, Joe V, et al. Updating the Burn Center Referral Criteria: Results
from the 2018 eDelphi Consensus Study. J Burn Care Res. 2020;41(5):1052–1062.

a.	Start 100% oxygen and measure carboxyhemoglobin (CO) levels as well as a blood gas, because cutaneous oxygen saturations
are not accurate in CO poisoning (see Chapters 79 and 86).
b.	Assess for laryngeal edema (examine mouth; assess for stridor,
retractions) and intubate for evidence of significant airway compromise.
c.	Assess oxygenation to evaluate for lung damage from smoke inhalation. Bronchoscopy may be helpful in the intubated child
to further delineate the extent of smoke inhalation injury. Use a
humidified ventilator circuit to prevent dry secretions that can
obstruct an airway.
3. Children with burns >15% TBSA require intravenous (IV) fluid
resuscitation to maintain adequate perfusion. IV access is preferably obtained in a nonburned area, but if none is readily available,
placing the initial line through a burn may be necessary. Monitor
peripheral IV sites closely for infiltration, as extremities will become edematous after burn injury. In an emergency situation in
which IV access is unattainable, an intraosseous (IO) line may be
placed. The IO line should be replaced in a timely fashion with a
central line, as IO needles may be unable to sustain the large fluid
volume needed for major burn resuscitation. Patients with inhalation injury, regardless of the extent of TBSA burn, require large
volumes of fluid for resuscitation due to insensible losses from the
injured airway epithelium. Significant high-­tension and electrical
injuries require venous access to ensure sufficient fluid resuscitation volumes, as forced alkaline diuresis may be needed in fluid-­
refractory myoglobinuria to avoid renal damage. Lactated Ringer
solution, 10-­20 mL/kg/hr (normal saline may be used if lactated
Ringer solution is not available), is initially infused until proper fluid replacement can be calculated. Consultation with a specialized
burn unit should be made to coordinate fluid therapy, including
the type of fluid, the preferred formula for calculation, and preferences for the use of colloid agents, particularly if transfer to a burn
center is anticipated.
4.	For patients with circumferential burns of the extremities, elevate
the extremities and monitor perfusion (capillary refill, pulses), as
compartment syndrome (see Chapter 80) may develop and require
escharotomy.
5.	Evaluate the child for associated injuries. Children with burns may
have associated accidental traumatic injuries (fall) or nonaccidental injuries (child abuse). In cases of high-­voltage electrical burn
(>1,000 volts), especially if there has also been a fall from a height,
injuries to the spine, bones, and thoracic or intraabdominal organs
may occur (see Chapter 80). Cervical spine precautions should be
observed until this injury is ruled out. If ventricular fibrillation occurs at the scene of an electrocution, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be instituted promptly, and cardiac monitoring
started on the patient’s arrival at the ED (see Chapter 79).
6. Children with burns of >15% TBSA should not initially receive oral
fluids because gastric distention may develop. These children may require insertion of a nasogastric tube in the ED to prevent aspiration.
7.	A Foley catheter should be inserted into the bladder to monitor
urine output in children who require IV fluid resuscitation.

annually and the smoke detector alarm every 10 years (or earlier, if
indicated on the device).

ACUTE CARE, RESUSCITATION, AND ASSESSMENT
Indications for Admission

Burns covering >10% TBSA, burns associated with smoke inhalation, burns resulting from high-­tension (voltage) electrical injuries,
and burns associated with suspected child abuse or neglect should
be treated emergently and referred to a burn center for definitive care
(Table 89.2). Small first-­and second-­degree burns of the hands, feet,
face, perineum, and joint surfaces may require admission if close follow-­up care is difficult to provide. Children who have been in enclosed-­
space fires and those who have significant face and neck burns should
be evaluated carefully for airway or neurologic compromise, including
monitoring for 24 hours in the hospital for potential central nervous
system (CNS) effects of anoxia from carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning
or pulmonary effects from smoke inhalation.

First Aid Measures

Acute care should include the following measures:
1.	Extinguish flames by rolling the child on the ground; cover the child
with a blanket, coat, or carpet.
2.	Remove smoldering clothing or clothing saturated with hot liquid.
Jewelry, particularly rings and bracelets, should be removed or cut
away to prevent constriction and vascular compromise during the
edema phase in the first 24-­72 hours after burn injury.
3.	In cases of chemical injury, brush off any remaining chemical, if
powdered or solid; then use copious irrigation or wash the affected
area with water. Call the local poison control center for the neutralizing agent to treat a chemical ingestion.
4.	Wash the burned area with soap and cool running water. For burns
on less than 10% of the body, irrigate with cool tap water for 10-­20
minutes. Significant large-­burn injury (>15% TBSA) decreases body
temperature control so the use of cold water is contraindicated.
5.	Cover the burned area with clean, dry sheeting or dressing. Avoid
using tape.
6.	If the burn is caused by hot tar, cool the burn and then use mineral
oil to remove the tar.
7.	Administer analgesic medications.

Emergency Care

Supportive measures are as follows (Table 89.3 and Table 89.4):
1.	Rapidly review the cardiovascular and pulmonary status and document preexisting or physiologic lesions (asthma, congenital heart
disease, renal or hepatic disease).
2.	Ensure and maintain an adequate airway (Fig. 89.1). For any child
with a facial burn or suspected inhalation of smoke, the following
actions are indicated:

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

648 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 89.4  Phases of Burn Care
PHASE AND TIMING

PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES

OBJECTIVES

1: Resuscitation, 0-­72 hours

Massive capillary leak, edema, and burn
shock

Airway, breathing, and circulation optimization via
accurate fluid resuscitation and thorough evaluation

2: Acute treatment phase, day 3 through
discharge

Hyperdynamic and catabolic state,
immunosuppression, risk of infection

Enteral nutrition to optimize wound healing; excision
and biologic wound closure of full-­thickness wounds
with excision and grafting within 7 days of injury

3: Rehabilitation, day 1 through discharge

Gradual waning of initial catabolic state,
wounds heal, scars form, and strength
recovers

Maintain and restore range of motion; reduce edema;
strengthen muscles; facilitate return to home, work,
and school

Airway
Compromised or at risk
of compromise?

Yes
Intubate

No
Yes

Breathing
Compromised?
No

Cause:
Mechanical
Carboxyhemoglobin
Smoke inhalation
Blast injury

Escharotomies
Intubate and ventilate; O2
Nebulizers; O2
Noninvasive ventilation
Invasive ventilation
Invasive ventilation
Chest drains

Circulation
Compromised perfusion
to an extremity?
No

Yes

Neurological disability
Impaired score on
Glasgow coma scale?

Escharotomies

Yes

Consider:
Hypoxia (carboxyhemoglobin level?)
Hypovolemia

No
Exposure
Fully assess burn area and depth
Full examination for concomitant injuries
Keep warm

Fig. 89.1 Algorithm for primary survey of a major burn injury. (From Hettiaratchy S, Papini R. Initial management of a major burn. I. Overview. BMJ.
2004;328:1555–1557.)

Fluids
Calculate resuscitation formula based
on surface area and time since burn

8.	In general, wounds should be wrapped with a clean sheet or dressing until it is decided whether to treat the patient on an outpatient
basis or refer to an appropriate facility.
9.	For children trapped in a fire, a CO measurement (carboxyhemoglobin [HbCO]) should be obtained and 100% oxygen administered until the result is known. Pulse oximetry is unreliable in CO
poisoning.
10.	Review child immunizations, including tetanus immunization.
Use diphtheria, tetanus toxoids, and acellular pertussis (DTaP)
for tetanus prophylaxis for children <7 years old, and use tetanus,
diphtheria, and pertussis (TdaP) for children ≥7 years old (see
Chapter 257).

Go back and re-evaluate

Classification of Burns

Proper triage and treatment of burn injury require assessment of the
extent and depth of the injury (Table 89.5 and Fig. 89.2). First-­degree
burns involve only the epidermis and are characterized by swelling,
erythema, and pain (similar to mild sunburn). Tissue damage is usually
minimal, and there is no blistering. Pain resolves in 48-­72 hours; in a
small percentage of patients, the damaged epithelium peels off, leaving
no residual scars.
A second-­degree burn involves injury to the entire epidermis and a
variable portion of the dermal layer (vesicle and blister formation are
characteristic). A superficial second-­degree burn is extremely painful
because many remaining viable nerve endings are exposed. Superficial

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89 u Burn Injuries

649

Table 89.5  Categories of Burn Depth
FIRST-­DEGREE BURN

SECOND-­DEGREE BURN
(PARTIAL THICKNESS)

THIRD-­DEGREE BURN
(FULL-­THICKNESS)

Surface appearance

Dry, no blisters
Minimal or no edema
Erythematous
Blanches, bleeds

Moist blebs, blisters
Underlying tissue is mottled pink and white,
with fair capillary refill
Bleeds

Dry, leathery eschar
Mixed white, waxy, khaki, mahogany,
soot-­stained
No blanching or bleeding

Pain

Very painful

Very painful

Insensate centrally, edges (usually less
deep) may still have sensation

Histologic depth

Epidermal layers only

Epidermis, papillary, and reticular layers of
dermis
May include domes of subcutaneous layers

Through all layers of the skin to
subcutaneous tissue (loss of muscle,
bone is fourth-­degree burn)

Healing time

2-­5 days with no scarring

Superficial: 5-­21 days with no grafting
Deep partial: 21-­35 days with no infection, but
scar is expected; if infected, converts to
full-­thickness burn

Large areas require grafting, but small
areas may heal from the edges after
weeks

Superficial

Superficial
dermal

Deep
dermal

Fullthickness

of laser Doppler imaging for burn depth determination is not clearly
established.

Estimation of Total Body Surface Area for a Burn

Epidermis

Dermis

Subcutaneous

Fig. 89.2 Diagram of different burn depths. (From Hettiaratchy S,

Papini R. Initial management of a major burn. II. Assessment and resuscitation. BMJ. 2004;329:101–103.)

second-­degree burns heal in 7-­14 days as the epithelium regenerates
in the absence of infection. Mid-­level to deep second-­degree burns will
generally heal in 14-­21 days, but often result in significant scarring.
Deep second-­degree burns tend to be dry, pale, and white (flame) or
red (scald); they are often grafted to mitigate scarring (Fig. 89.3). Pain
may be less with these burns than in more superficial burns because
fewer nerve endings remain viable; however, the edge of the burn,
which will be less deep, will still cause pain. Fluid losses and metabolic
effects of deep dermal (second-­degree) burns are essentially the same
as those of third-­degree burns. If a blister is intact in a burned area, the
burn is at least second-­degree but may be deeper. Definitive diagnosis
of burn depth is not possible because the blister blocks visualization of
the burned tissue under the blister.
Full-­thickness, or third-­degree burns, involve destruction of the
entire epidermis and dermis, leaving no residual epidermal cells to
repopulate the damaged area. The wound heals by wound contraction
or skin grafting. Wounds are either white or leathery (flame burn) or
mottled, nonblanching, and cherry red (scald) (Fig. 89.4). The absence
of painful sensation and capillary filling demonstrates the loss of nerve
and capillary elements. Pain exists at the edges of the burn. Hence,
using pain to determine burn depth is not accurate.
Technologies can help accurately determine the depth of burns.
Laser Doppler imaging can be used from 25 days after the burn. It produces a color map of the affected tissue; yellow indicates second-­degree
burns, reflecting the presence of capillaries, arterioles, and venules, and
blue reflects very low or absence of blood flow, which indicates third-­
degree burns. Although early reports are promising, the clinical utility

Appropriate burn charts for different childhood age-­groups should be
used to accurately estimate the extent of TBSA burned. The extent and
depth of the burn are the largest determinants of fluid resuscitation
requirements. Mortality and morbidity also depend on the extent and
depth of the burn. Children have a larger surface area to mass ratio than
adults, and the variable growth rate of the child’s head and extremities
makes it necessary to use body surface area (BSA) charts, such as that
modified by Lund and Brower, to accurately calculate burn size (Fig.
89.5). Another method of estimating burn size is to employ the palm
rule. The palm of the child’s hand (from base of palm to fingertip) is
1% of the child’s TBSA. A quick method of estimating burn size is to
hold your hand up to the child’s hand to gauge the area and use that to
determine burn size. The rule of nines used in adults should only be
used in children >14 years old or >20 kg as a rough estimate to institute
therapy before transfer to a burn center. The rule of nines divides body
regions by 9% BSA: head and neck, chest and upper back, each arm,
abdomen, lower back, upper leg, and lower leg; hand or genitals (1%).

TREATMENT
Outpatient Management of Minor Burns

A patient with first-­  and second-­degree burns <10% TBSA may be
treated on an outpatient basis unless pain is uncontrolled on oral
agents, the family cannot successfully complete wound care, or there
are issues of child neglect or abuse. These outpatients do not require
prophylactic antibiotics. Blisters should be left intact and dressed with
a nonstick dressing such as Telfa or Xeroform. Topical creams do not
penetrate the blister and are not indicated unless the blister ruptures.
Dressings should be changed once daily, after the wound is washed with
lukewarm water. Very small wounds, especially those on the face, may
be treated with bacitracin ointment and left open. Debridement (i.e.,
removal) of the devitalized skin is indicated when the blisters rupture.
A variety of wound dressings are available for application to second-­
degree burns; the affected area should be subsequently wrapped with
a dry, clean dressing. Silver dressings are popular because they provide
pain relief, prevent wound desiccation, reduce wound colonization, and
can be left in place for 5-­7 days (Table 89.6). Although silver dressings
are antimicrobial, wound infections can occur beneath these dressings.
Patients should be instructed to seek immediate medical care for signs
and symptoms of infection (elevated temperature, malaise, pain) and
should be reevaluated at least weekly by the medical team. The great
majority of superficial burns heal in 7-­10 days, with deep second-­
degree burns taking longer to heal. Burns that have not healed within
2 weeks (or clearly will not be healed in 2 weeks) have a >97% chance
of developing a significant scar and should be referred to a burn center.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

650 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

A

B

Fig. 89.3 Second-­degree burns. A, Superficial partial-­thickness (second-­degree) burn, which is pink and glistening. B, Deep partial-­thickness
(second-­degree) burn. The white-­appearing area over the dorsum of the hand is a deep partial-­thickness burn. (From Singer AJ, Lee CC. Thermal
burns. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche-­Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Figs. 56.1 and
56.2, p. 717.)

Table 89.6  Select Silver Antimicrobial Dressings for Burns
DRESSING

Fig. 89.4 Full-­thickness (third-­degree) burn over both feet. The cen-

tral area is depressed and has a yellowish color indicating it is full thickness. (Modified from Singer AJ, Lee CC. Thermal burns. In: Walls RM,
Hockberger RS, Gausche-­Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 56.3, p. 717.)

Date Burned
Date of Evaluation
1
2 3

4

5

6

7

8
%

A

1°

B
C

2°

D

3°

E
F

CHARACTERISTIC(S)

Mepitel Ag

Silicone mesh dressing

Mepilex Ag

Foam dressing

ACTICOAT

Polyethylene nonadherent net dressing

AQUACEL Ag

Absorptive Hydrofiber

Silverlon

Knitted nylon nonadherent dressing

The palm of the hand is one of the most frequently burned areas
in children, particularly toddlers. Because the skin on the palm of the
hand is thicker than other parts of the body, burns to the palm often
heal. Generally, blisters of the palm can be left intact unless they are
already open, or they are so large that they will likely rupture (usually
about 1-­2 cm in height), or purulence is draining from the blister. If
leaving a blister intact, inform the family to either return to the office
if the blister ruptures or instruct them on how to remove the blister
and apply bacitracin to the wound. If a palm burn has not healed in 2
weeks (or it is clear that it will not be healed), referral to a burn center
is needed.
The depth of scald injuries is difficult to assess early, as the wounds
are often reddish in color. Nonoperative treatment is appropriate initially. Generally, third-­degree scald burns will become increasingly
pale and white by 4-­5 days post injury, whereas those that heal will be
a lighter pink color. A wound that has not healed in 2 weeks will likely
need grafting (Fig. 89.6). This conservative approach obviates the risk
of anesthesia and unnecessary grafting.

Fluid Resuscitation
%BURNED
ANT POST

G
HEAD
TRUNK
R. ARM
L. ARM
R. LEG
L. LEG
TOTAL

H

I
J
HEAD
TRUNK
ARMS
LEGS

NEWBORN 3 YR
18%
15%
40%
40%
16%
16%
26%
29%

6 YR
12%
40%
16%
32%

12+ YR
6%
38%
18%
38%

Fig. 89.5 Chart to determine developmentally related percentage of

body surface area affected by burn injury. ANT, Anterior; POST, posterior; R., right; L., left. (Courtesy Shriners Hospital, Burn Institute, Boston
Unit.)

Fluid resuscitation, if required, should begin as soon as possible (at
the scene, in the ED, or before transfer) after the injury has occurred
because delays of as little as 30 minutes affect outcomes. Numerous
formulas exist to help guide practitioners in calculating fluid resuscitation needs in patients with burns. For most children, the Parkland formula is an appropriate guideline to determine starting IV fluid
resuscitation rate; however, fluids should be adjusted hourly based on
the patient’s response. The steps in calculating the starting rate are as
follows:
1.	Calculate the 24-­hour fluid requirement: 4 mL lactated Ringer solution per (times) weight in kg per (times) % TBSA burned. The TBSA
burned is a whole number, NOT a percentage.
2.	Determine the volume of fluid to be given in the first 8 hours: for the
Parkland formula, that is half of the 24-­hour requirement.
3.	Calculate the starting hourly infusion rate: divide the volume to be
given in the first 8 hours by 8 to determine the starting rate. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89 u Burn Injuries

D

I

S

Fig. 89.6 Tea scald over the chest and shoulder of a child showing

heterogeneity of burn depth. D, Deep; I, intermediate; S, superficial.
(From Enoch S, Roshan A, Shah M. Emergency and early management
of burns and scalds. BMJ. 2009;338:937–941.)

infusion rate is adjusted hourly based on urine output goals of 0.8-­1
mL/hour in children <20 kg or <12 years of age and 0.4-­0.5 mL/kg/
hr (maximum of 30 mL/hr) in children >12 years or >20 kg.
Providers should increase the fluid rate by 10% if urine output is
below the hourly target and decrease the fluids by 10% if over the target. Because major burns have a hypermetabolic response, tachycardia
is NOT an accurate measure of resuscitation in a child with a major
burn. Acid-­base balance, mental status, serum lactate, and noninvasive
monitoring are useful adjuncts to evaluate the adequacy of resuscitation. Because of interstitial edema and sequestration of fluid in muscle
cells, patients may gain up to 20% over baseline (preburn) body weight.
Patients with burns of >20% TBSA often require a large venous access
(central venous line) to deliver the fluid required over the critical first
24 hours; these patients are best cared for in a specialized pediatric
burn unit. In addition to fluid resuscitation, children <20 kg should
receive standard maintenance fluids (see Chapter 74).
During the second 24 hours after the burn, patients begin to reabsorb edema fluid and to experience diuresis. IV fluid requirements
after resuscitation will consist of isotonic crystalloid infusion for insensible losses (see Chapter 73) plus the fluid losses from the burn wound.
Controversy surrounds whether colloid should be provided in the early
period of burn resuscitation. One preference is to administer albumin
if a patient is not responding to crystalloid resuscitation. In children
<12 months old, sodium tolerance is limited; the volume and sodium
concentration of the resuscitation solution should be decreased if the
urinary sodium level is rising. The adequacy of resuscitation should
be constantly reassessed by integrating vital signs with urine output,
blood gas, serum lactate, base deficit, hematocrit, and serum protein
measurements. Some patients require arterial and central venous lines,
particularly those undergoing multiple excision and grafting procedures, for monitoring and fluid replacement purposes. Central venous
pressure monitoring may be indicated to assess circulation in patients
with hemodynamic or cardiopulmonary instability. Femoral vein cannulation is a safe access for fluid resuscitation, especially in infants and
children. Burn patients who require frequent blood gas monitoring
benefit from radial or femoral arterial catheterization.
Oral supplementation may start as soon as enteral access is obtained.
Early nutrition helps to minimize effects of the hypermetabolic
response. Milk formula, artificial feedings, homogenized milk, or soy-­
based products can be given by bolus or constant infusion through a
nasogastric or small bowel feeding tube. These feedings are not part of
the initial 24-­hour fluid resuscitation, as absorption may be variable.
When oral fluids are tolerated after several days, IV fluids are decreased
proportionately to keep the total fluid intake constant, particularly if
pulmonary dysfunction is present.
Colloids such as albumin are lost through the burn wound. To
maintain oncotic pressure and protein binding, a 5% or 25% albumin

651

infusion may be used to maintain the serum albumin levels at a
desired 2 g/dL. Infusion of packed red blood cells is recommended if
the hematocrit falls to <20% (hemoglobin = 7 g/dL). Most patients are
hemoconcentrated during resuscitation; thus transfusion in the first
24-­48 hours is rare unless there is accompanying trauma. Fresh-­frozen
plasma (FFP) is indicated if clinical and laboratory assessment shows
a deficiency of clotting factors, a prothrombin level >1.5 times control,
or a partial thromboplastin time >1.2 times control in children who are
bleeding or are scheduled for an invasive procedure or a grafting procedure that could result in an estimated blood loss of more than half of
blood volume. Although FFP use for volume resuscitation during the
first 24 hours of injury is advocated by some, this strategy has not yet
undergone rigorous evaluation through randomized prospective trials.
Sodium supplementation may be required for children with burns
of >20% TBSA, particularly if 0.5% silver nitrate solution is used as the
topical antibacterial burn dressing. Sodium losses with silver nitrate
therapy are regularly as high as 350 mEq/m2 burn surface area. The aim
is to maintain serum sodium levels >130 mEq/L and urinary sodium
concentration >30 mEq/L. Young children <5 years are especially susceptible to hyponatremia and cerebral edema. IV potassium supplementation is supplied to maintain a serum potassium level >3 mEq/
dL. Potassium losses may be significantly increased when 0.5% silver
nitrate solution is used as the topical antibacterial agent or when aminoglycoside, diuretic, or amphotericin therapy is required. Magnesium
and ionized calcium can also become rapidly depleted and should be
assessed at least daily for the first week and weekly thereafter in major
burns.

Prevention of Infection and Surgical Management of
the Burn Wound

In general, prophylactic antibiotic administration is not indicated for
burn injuries because it predisposes patients to development of resistant pathogens. Topical antimicrobial creams or silver agents reduce
wound colonization; systemic antibiotics do not reach the nonviable
tissue in the burn wound. There is conflicting evidence as to whether
relocation of the IV catheter every 48-­72 hours decreases or increases
the incidence of catheter-­related sepsis in burn injury. Central venous
catheters should be monitored closely for infection. Many burn units
replace or relocate central lines every 5-­7 days, even if the site is not
inflamed and there is no suspicion of catheter-­related sepsis, particularly if the line is near a burn wound. The incidence of central line–
associated bloodstream infection is directly related to the distance
between the catheter and the burn wound. The fragile tissue and frequency of patient turning and movement, combined with the moisture of the burn wound, make it imperative to securely attach central
venous catheters with sutures placed securely in at least three locations
to prevent catheter movement, kinking, or accidental removal.
Mortality related to burn injury is associated not with the toxic effect
of thermally injured skin, but with the metabolic and bacterial consequences of a large open wound, reduction of the patient’s immune
response, and malnutrition. These abnormalities set the stage for
life-­threatening bacterial infection originating from the burn wound.
Thorough early wound cleaning, application of topical antimicrobial
creams, and early wound excision and grafting promote wound healing
and improve aesthetic and functional outcomes. Topical antimicrobial
agents for burn wound treatment include bacitracin (second-­degree
burns or burns that will heal in a week), silver sulfadiazine cream
(third-­degree burns), mafenide acetate (Sulfamylon) cream (third-­
degree burns on ears, cartilage), or 0.5% silver nitrate solution (third-­
degree burns with sulfa allergy) (Table 89.7). Regardless of the choice
of topical antimicrobial agent, it is essential that all third-­degree burn
tissue be fully excised and grafted before bacterial colonization progresses to systemic infection. Children with a burn of >20% TBSA
should be housed in reverse isolation with all personnel required to
wear gown, gloves, mask, and hat to prevent cross-­contamination and
to provide a temperature-­and humidity-­controlled environment that
minimizes hypermetabolism.
Deep third-­degree burns of >10% TBSA benefit from early excision
and grafting. To improve outcome, sequential excision and grafting of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

652 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 89.7  Topical Agents Used for Burns
AGENT

EFFECTIVENESS

SIDE EFFECTS

EASE OF USE

Bacitracin

Gram-­positive organisms; good for
wounds that will heal in 7-­10 days

May cause yeast overgrowth rash or
pustules if on intact skin; resolves
with discontinuation

Clear ointment, 1-­2 times daily,
easy to clean off

Silver sulfadiazine cream
(Silvadene)

Broad spectrum including gram-­
positive and -­negative organisms,
some fungus; may cause leukopenia

Leukopenia, self-­limited; may be
painful

Changed twice daily

Leaves adherent residue

Residue must be washed off with
each dressing change

Targets resistant gram-­negative
organisms, particularly Pseudomonas,
some gram-­positive coverage

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, may
cause metabolic acidosis

Changed twice daily; application
may be painful

Mafenide acetate cream*
(Sulfamylon)

Rapid and deep wound penetration;
used on cartilage (ears) and deep
wound infection
0.5% Silver nitrate solution

Bacteriostatic

Residue must be washed off with
each dressing change
Permanent staining of surfaces
from silver oxidation;
electrolyte disturbances from
hypotonic solution, potential
methemoglobinemia

Closed bulky dressing soaked
every 2 hr and changed 1-­2 times
daily

Broad spectrum, including some fungi
Superficial penetration
*Mafenide acetate solution at concentrations of 2.5% or 5% for use on heavily colonized, multidrug-­resistant organisms to be used for 5 days only.

third-­degree and deep second-­degree burns may be required in children with large burns. Prompt excision with immediate wound closure is achieved with autografts, skin obtained from another part of
the patient’s body, which may be meshed to increase the efficiency of
coverings. Alternatives for wound closure, such as allografts, dermal
substitutes, and other biologic dressings, may be important for wound
coverage in patients with extensive injury to limit fluid, electrolyte, and
protein losses and to reduce pain and minimize temperature loss. Cultured epidermal cells (autologous keratinocytes), grown from a skin
biopsy from the patient, are a costly alternative and are not always
successful. Another approach employs an autologous cell spray (theoretically containing stem cells) as an adjunct to meshed skin for wound
closure. An experienced burn team can safely perform early stage or
total excision while burn fluid resuscitation continues. Important keys
to success are (1) accurate preoperative and intraoperative determination of burn depth, (2) the choice of excision area and appropriate
timing, (3) control of intraoperative blood loss, (4) specific instrumentation, and (5) the type of wound coverage chosen.

Nutritional Support

Supporting the increased energy requirements of a patient with a burn
is a high priority. The burn injury produces a hypermetabolic response
characterized by both protein and fat catabolism. Depending on the
time lapse since the burn, children with a burn of 40% TBSA require
basal energy expenditure (oxygen consumption) approximately
50–100% higher than predicted for their age. Early excision and grafting
can decrease the energy requirement. Pain, anxiety, and immobilization increase the physiologic demands. Additional energy expenditure
is caused by cold stress if environmental humidity and temperature
are not controlled; this is especially true in young infants, in whom
the large BSA:mass ratio allows proportionately greater heat loss than
in adolescents and adults. Providing environmental temperatures of
28–33°C (82.4–91.4°F), adequate covering during transport, and liberal use of analgesics and anxiolytics can decrease caloric demands.
Appropriate sleep intervals are necessary and should be part of the regimen. Early enteral nutrition, initially with high-­carbohydrate, high-­
protein caloric content (1,800 kcal/m2/24-­hr maintenance plus 2,200
kcal/m2 of burn/24 hr) reduces metabolic stress.
The objective of nutrition supplementation programs is to maintain
body weight and minimize weight loss by meeting metabolic demands.

This reduces the loss of lean body mass. Calories are provided at
approximately 1.5 times the basal metabolic rate, with 3-­4 g/kg of protein/day. The focus of nutritional therapy is to support and compensate for the metabolic needs. Multivitamins, particularly the B vitamin
group, vitamin C, vitamin A, vitamin D, vitamin E, copper, selenium,
and zinc, are also necessary.
Alimentation should be started as soon as is practical, preferably
enterally, to meet all caloric needs and maintain gastrointestinal (GI)
tract function throughout treatment. Patients with burns of >40% of
TBSA need a flexible nasogastric or small bowel feeding tube to facilitate continuous delivery of calories without the risk of aspiration at
the time of admission. To decrease the risk of infectious complications, parenteral nutrition should be avoided or discontinued as soon
as is practical after delivery of sufficient enteral calories is established.
Continuous GI feeding is essential, even if feeding is interrupted for
frequent visits to the operating room, until full grafting takes place.
In third-­degree burns >20% the use of anabolic agents such as oxandrolone to improve wound healing and promote protein synthesis or
anticatabolic agents (propranolol) to reduce metabolic stress is common practice. It is vital to continue enteral feeding while using these
agents to obtain maximal response. Liver function studies should be
monitored weekly when giving oxandrolone, and oxandrolone should
be discontinued if liver function deteriorates.

Topical Therapy

Topical therapy is widely used to decrease wound colonization from
a wide variety of wound pathogens (see Table 89.7). Preferences vary
among burn units. Each topical agent has advantages and disadvantages in application, comfort, and bacteriostatic spectrum. However,
all agents impair wound healing. The type of organism on a wound
varies with the age of the wound. In the first week, gram-­positive
organisms predominate. During weeks 2-­4, gram-­negative organisms
are frequently found in burn wounds. Prolonged open burn wounds
eventually tend to develop resistant gram-­negative organisms, fungus, or mold. The choice of topical antimicrobial depends on wound
age and depth. Bacitracin is a clear ointment effective against gram-­
positive organisms and is often used in wounds that will heal within
a week. If placed on nonburned skin, it may cause a yeast rash or
pimples that resolve with discontinuation. Silver sulfadiazine is a white
cream containing silver with a broad spectrum of coverage, including

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89 u Burn Injuries
gram-­positive and gram-­negative organisms and some fungi. It is used
commonly in deep third-­degree burns that require grafting and may
cause transient self-­limiting leukopenia if applied over large areas.
Mafenide acetate is a white cream with the ability to diffuse through
the burn eschar; it is the treatment of choice for injury to cartilaginous surfaces, such as the ear. Mafenide acetate solution at a concentration of 5% is useful for the treatment of burn wounds that are heavily
colonized with multidrug-­resistant gram-­negative bacteria and is often
used postoperatively to keep grafts moist. The carbonic anhydrase
inhibition activity of mafenide acetate may cause metabolic acidosis
if large surface areas are treated in a small child. No sulfa-­containing
agent should be used if the child has a history of sulfa allergies. Silver
nitrate solution may be used in children with sulfa allergy because of
its broad spectrum of coverage. However, it causes gray staining of the
environment and wound from silver oxidation as well as electrolyte
disturbances because of the hypotonic nature of the solution.

Inhalation Injury

Inhalation injury is serious in the infant and child, particularly if preexisting pulmonary conditions are present (see Chapter 86). Inhalation
injury should be suspected based on history of sustained exposure to
smoke in association with the burn injury, such as being confined in a
closed space or from an indoor explosion, with decreased level of consciousness or with evidence of carbon deposits in the oropharynx or
nose, singed facial hair, or carbonaceous sputum. Mortality estimates
vary, depending on the type of inhalation injury and the extent of exposure. Each of the three types of inhalation injury (toxic gases, upper airway edema, and lower airway injury) has a different treatment.

Toxic Gases

Carbon monoxide poisoning from the burning of organic materials is
caused by displacement of oxygen from the hemoglobin molecule by
CO, leading to tissue hypoxia (see Chapter 94). CO poisoning should
be treated with 100% oxygen until carboxyhemoglobin levels drop
below 10%. Toxic fumes, including cyanides from combustible plastics as well as sulfur and nitrogen oxides and alkalis formed during the
combustion of synthetic fabrics, produce corrosive chemicals that may
erode the mucosa and cause significant tissue sloughing. Exposure to
smoke may cause degradation of surfactant and decrease its production, resulting in atelectasis. Inhalation injury and burn injury are synergistic, and the combined effect can increase morbidity and mortality.
Injury from gases generally manifests early in the course of treatment. Acute asphyxia is the leading cause of death at the fire scene and
can cause anoxic brain injury, particularly in children. Signs of CNS
injury from hypoxemia caused by asphyxia or CO poisoning vary from
irritability to depression. CO poisoning may be mild, with slight dyspnea, headache, nausea, and decreased visual acuity and higher cerebral functions; moderate, with irritability, agitation, nausea, dimness
of vision, impaired judgment, and rapid fatigue; or severe, producing
confusion, hallucination, ataxia, cardiovascular collapse, acidosis, and
coma. Measurement of HbCO is important for diagnosis and treatment. Pulse oximetry is NOT a reliable marker of oxygenation in CO
poisoning. If significant CO exposure is suspected, a blood gas with
co-­oximetry and a HbCO level should be obtained to determine Pao2
and CO toxicity extent. CO poisoning and hypoxia are assumed to be
present until the tests are performed, and patients should receive 100%
oxygen until the HbCO level is <10% and adequate oxygenation is confirmed. Significant CO poisoning (level >25%) may require hyperbaric
oxygen therapy; the risk of transporting a burn patient to the hyperbaric chamber needs to be carefully considered. Cyanide poisoning
should be suspected if a metabolic acidosis persists despite adequate
fluid resuscitation and in environments containing synthetic polymers
(see Chapter 94). Unless specifically suspected, most burn centers do
not routinely screen for cyanide poisoning.

Upper Airway Edema

The treatment priority for edema of the upper airway caused by inhalation injury focuses on establishing and maintaining a patent airway.
If airway obstruction is apparent, prompt and early nasotracheal or

653

orotracheal intubation is indicated to maintain airway patency and
assure adequate ventilation and oxygenation. The most experienced
provider should perform the intubation, as edema may allow only
one attempt. The endotracheal tube size should be chosen carefully, as
replacement during the first 1-­3 days is often not possible. Endotracheal tubes should not be secured with tape if a facial burn is present, as
the tape will not adhere to the moist surface. The endotracheal tube can
be secured to a tooth, to the maxilla, or tied in two planes. Monitoring
the security of the endotracheal tube and assuring it remains in the
same location at the level of the teeth is essential, as edema may alter
tube position.

Parenchymal Injury

Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be required in patients who
have significant hypoxia, hypercarbia, or mental status changes caused
by smoke inhalation. Wheezing and bronchospasm are common,
and use of inhaled bronchodilators is often helpful. Smoke inhalation
injury is gauged via clinical progression and bronchoscopy. Aggressive
pulmonary toilet and chest physiotherapy are necessary, as casts and
airway obstruction from debris are common. Extubation should be
delayed until the patient has adequate oxygenation and ventilation, is
able to sustain the increased minute ventilation and work of breathing
that accompanies burn injury, and edema has resolved. A spontaneous breathing trial and a cuff leak test are often used to gauge readiness for extubation. Children with an anticipated need for mechanical
ventilation >2 weeks may benefit from tracheostomy, as it provides a
secure, comfortable airway with decreased sedation requirements.
Tracheostomy should only be performed under general anesthesia by
experienced surgeons using optimal positioning, proper tracheostomy
tube size, and hemostatic conditions. In children with deep burns of
the face, tracheostomy provides a secure airway that facilitates excision
and grafting yet allows for oral movement, including a pacifier.
Patients with severe inhalation injury or with other causes of respiratory deterioration that lead to pediatric acute respiratory distress
syndrome who do not improve with conventional pressure-­controlled
ventilation (progressive oxygenation failure, as manifested by oxygen
saturation <90% while receiving Fio2 of 0.9-­1.0 and positive end-­
expiratory pressure of at least 12 cm H2O) may benefit from high-­
frequency ventilation or nitric oxide inhalation treatment. Nitric oxide
usually is administered through the ventilator at 5 parts per million
(ppm) and increased to 30 ppm. This method of therapy reduces the
need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO; see Chapter 86). ECMO may be indicated for failure of these conventional
techniques.

Pain Relief and Psychologic Adjustment

See Chapter 93.
It is important to provide adequate analgesia, anxiolysis, sedation,
and psychologic support to reduce early metabolic stress, decrease the
potential for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and allow future
stabilization as well as physical and psychologic rehabilitation. Patients
and family members require team support to work through the grieving process and accept long-­term changes in appearance.
Children with burn injury have frequent and wide fluctuations in
pain intensity. Appreciation of pain depends on the depth of the burn;
the stage of healing; the patient’s age, stage of emotional development,
and cognition; the experience and efficiency of the treating team; the
use of analgesics and other drugs; the patient’s pain threshold; and
interpersonal and cultural factors. From the onset of treatment, preemptive pain control during dressing changes is crucial. The use of a
variety of nonpharmacologic interventions and pharmacologic agents
must be reviewed throughout the treatment period. Opioid analgesia,
prescribed in an adequate dose and timed to cover dressing changes,
is essential to comfort management. A supportive person who is
consistently present and knows the patient profile can integrate and
encourage patient participation in burn care. The problem of undermedication is most prevalent in adolescents, in whom fear of drug
dependence may inappropriately influence treatment. A related problem is that the child’s specific pain experience may be misinterpreted;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

654 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
for anxious patients, those who are confused and alone, or those with
preexisting emotional disorders, even small wounds may illicit intense
pain. Anxiolytic medication added to the analgesic is usually helpful
and has more than a synergistic effect. Equal attention is necessary to
decrease stress in the intubated patient. Other modalities of pain and
anxiety relief (relaxation techniques) can decrease the physiologic
stress response.
A multimodal pain strategy is recommended for burns, as burn
pain is a combination of background, acute, procedural, neuropathic,
and inflammatory pain. The specific agents used will vary by institution and provider training. Background pain, which exists primarily in burns >20%, should be addressed with long-­acting oral agents
administered twice daily, such as methadone or long-­acting morphine.
This helps to maintain a steady state of pain relief. Acute pain from the
injury (all burn sizes) is generally treated initially with oral acetaminophen, escalating to a short-­acting opioid such as morphine, hydromorphone, oxycodone, or similar agents orally. If oral administration is not
sufficient (a common scenario in major burn injury), intermittent IV
opioids are used. The use of codeine is not recommended because of
the possibility of ultrarapid metabolism of codeine. Procedural pain,
such as for dressing changes, is short-­lived but severe. Potent IV opioids such as fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone are effective but
require appropriate monitoring. Naloxone is rarely needed but should
be immediately available to reverse the effect of IV narcotics. Ketamine
1-­4 mg/kg IV can be employed for children with high opioid requirements; however, continuous cardiovascular monitoring is mandatory, and ketamine should be administered by a provider trained in
advanced airway techniques. Neuropathic pain (pins and needles sensation) should be addressed with scheduled oral gabapentin given 4
times daily. Inflammatory pain can be effectively treated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents unless the patient has upcoming surgery, as this may increase surgical complications. Midazolam is very
useful for conscious sedation at a dose of 0.01-­0.02 mg/kg for nonintubated patients and 0.05-­0.1 mg/kg for intubated patients as an IV bolus
and may be repeated in 10 minutes; if used with an opioid, continuous
cardiovascular monitoring is warranted. Oral midazolam for premedication before a dressing change at 0.5 mg/kg can be highly effective in
reducing anxiety surrounding dressings. Dexmedetomidine infusion
may be required for children with high levels of anxiety or who are
refractory to benzodiazepine therapy, but this requires monitoring in
an intensive care unit (ICU) setting. Postoperative pain after burn surgery, which is severe because of the combination of donor sites and the
wound itself, is often treated with a multimodal continuous infusion
of an opioid (hydromorphone or morphine) and sedative (dexmedetomidine and/or ketamine). This combination decreases opioid requirements and improves pain but requires monitoring in an ICU. Regional
blocks by a trained anesthesiologist can mitigate donor site pain.
During the process of weaning from IV analgesics, the dose of opiates is reduced by 25% over 1-­3 days, sometimes with the addition of
oral opioids and then acetaminophen as opioids are tapered. When
weaning off antianxiety medications, the approach involves reducing
the dose of benzodiazepines, at 25–50% per dose, daily over 1-­3 days.
Regular evaluation of burned children during hospitalization by
a trained psychologist or psychiatrist is necessary, as PTSD, anxiety,
depression, acute stress disorder, and other psychiatric issues are common after burn injury. Early recognition and treatment of the patient
and family improve psychosocial outcomes. As a result, there is a growing use of psychotropic medication in the care of children with burns,
including prescription of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors as
antidepressants, the use of neuroleptic agents in the critical care setting, and the treatment of PTSD with prazosin.

Reconstruction and Rehabilitation

To ensure maximum cosmetic and functional outcome, occupational
and physical therapy must begin on the day of admission, continue
throughout hospitalization, and for many patients, continue after discharge. Physical rehabilitation involves body and limb positioning,
splinting, exercises (active and passive movement), assistance with
activities of daily living, and gradual ambulation. These measures

maintain adequate joint and muscle activity with as normal a range
of movement as possible after healing or reconstruction. Pressure
therapy is necessary to reduce hypertrophic scar formation; a variety
of prefabricated and custom-­made garments are available for use in
different body areas. These custom-­made garments deliver consistent
pressure on scarred areas; shorten the time of scar maturation; and
decrease scar thickness, redness, and associated itching. Continued
adjustments to scarred areas (scar release, grafting, rearrangement)
and multiple minor cosmetic surgical procedures are necessary to
optimize long-­term function and improve appearance. Replacement
of areas of alopecia and scarring has been achieved with the use of
tissue-­expander techniques. The use of ultrapulse laser for reduction
of scarring is an adjunct in scar management. Pruritis can be a severe
issue in the rehabilitative phase. Commonly used oral agents include
antihistamines such as loratadine, hydroxyzine, and diphenhydramine,
as well as gabapentin or H2 blockers. Topical agents include moisturizers, topical steroid creams, or colloidal oatmeal baths. Refractory
itching may be treated with desensitization therapy or laser treatment,
although literature supporting these therapies is scarce.

School Reentry and Long-­Term Outcome

Optimally the child will return to school immediately after discharge.
Occasionally, a child may need to attend on an altered schedule because
of rehabilitation needs. It is important for the child to return to the
normal routine of attending school and being with peers to begin the
resocialization process. Planning for a return to home and school often
requires a school reentry program that is individualized to each child’s
needs. For a school-­age child, planning for the return to school occurs
simultaneously with planning for discharge. The hospital schoolteacher
contacts the local school and plans the program with the school faculty,
nurses, social workers, recreational/child-­life therapists, and rehabilitation therapists. This team should work with students and staff to ease
anxiety, answer questions, and provide information. Burns and scars
evoke fears in those who are not familiar with this type of injury and
can result in a tendency to withdraw from or reject the burned child.
A school reentry program designed based on the child’s developmental
and educational needs can alleviate these fears and facilitate the child’s
reintegration into the school environment.
Major medical advances have made it possible to save the lives of
children with massive burns. Although some children have lingering
physical difficulties, most have a satisfactory quality of life. The comprehensive burn care that includes experienced multidisciplinary aftercare plays an important role in recovery. Table 89.8 lists the long-­term
disabilities and complications of burns.

ELECTRICAL BURNS

Three types of burns are caused by electricity: electrical burns, caused
by electricity passing through the body; arc burns, caused by the heat
released from high-­amperage currents discharging through the air;
and thermal contact burns, from touching a hot electrical device.
Electrical burns are divided into high voltage (>1,000 volts) and low
voltage (<1,000 volts). Electricity is delivered via alternating current
(AC), which is generally used in households, or direct current (DC),
often used in industry or car batteries. The majority of pediatric electrical burns involve 110 volts AC electricity and occur in the household.
Minor electrical burns in children usually occur as a result of biting
on an extension cord or inserting an object in an electrical outlet. These
injuries produce localized burns to the mouth or finger. Children who
chew electrical cords usually sustain burns to portions of the upper and
lower lips that come in contact with the extension cord, particularly the
corners of the mouth. Because these are nonconductive injuries (do not
extend beyond the site of injury), hospital admission is not necessary.
Care is focused on the area of the injury visible in the mouth, ensuring
it is low voltage and does not cause entry or exit wounds or cardiac
issues. Treatment with topical antibiotic creams is sufficient until the
patient is seen in a burn unit outpatient department or by a plastic surgeon for potential reconstruction or excision of the burn site.
A more serious category of electrical burn is the high-­voltage electrical burn, for which children must be admitted for observation,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89 u Burn Injuries

655

Table 89.8  Common Long-­Term Complications and Disabilities in Patients with Burn Injuries
COMPLICATIONS AFFECTING THE SKIN AND SOFT TISSUE
Hypertrophic scars
Susceptibility to minor trauma
Dry skin
Contractures
Itching and neuropathic pain
Alopecia
Chronic open wounds
Skin cancers
Epidermal inclusion cysts
Cutaneous abscesses
ORTHOPEDIC DISABILITIES
Amputations
Contractures
Heterotopic ossification
Temporary reduction in bone density
Decreased endurance and weakness
METABOLIC DISABILITIES
Heat sensitivity
Obesity
Glucose intolerance
Hypertension

PSYCHIATRIC AND NEUROLOGIC DISABILITIES
Sleep disorders
Adjustment disorders
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Depression
Body image issues
Neuropathy and neuropathic pain
Long-­term neurologic effects of carbon monoxide poisoning
Anoxic brain injury
LONG-­TERM COMPLICATIONS OF CRITICAL CARE
Deep vein thrombosis, venous insufficiency, or varicose veins
Tracheal stenosis, vocal cord disorders, or swallowing disorders
Renal or adrenal dysfunction
Hepatobiliary or pancreatic disease
Cardiovascular disease
Reactive airway disease or bronchial polyposis
PREEXISTING DISABILITIES THAT CONTRIBUTED TO THE
INJURIES
Risk-­taking behavior
Untreated or poorly treated psychiatric disorder

Modified from Sheridan RL, Schultz JT, Ryan CM, et al. Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Weekly clinicopathological exercises. Case 6-­2004: A 35-­year-­old woman
with extensive, deep burns from a nightclub fire. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:810–821.

regardless of the extent of the surface area burn. Deep muscle injury is
typical and cannot be readily assessed initially. These injuries occur in
high-­voltage installations, such as electric power stations or railroads;
children climb an electric pole and touch an electric box out of curiosity or accidentally touch a high-­tension electrical wire. Such injuries
have a mortality rate of 3–15% for children who arrive at the hospital for treatment. Survivors have a high rate of morbidity, including
major limb amputations. Points of entry of current through the skin
and the exit site show characteristic features consistent with current
density and heat. The majority of entrance wounds involve the upper
extremity, with small exit wounds in the lower extremity. The current
is conducted throughout the body, regardless of entry and exit points.
Virtually any structure in the body is at risk (Table 89.9). Damage to
the abdominal viscera, thoracic structures, and nervous system (confusion, coma, paralysis) in areas remote from obvious extremity injury
occurs and must be sought, particularly in injuries with multiple current pathways or those in which the victim falls from a high pole.
Cardiac abnormalities, manifested as ventricular fibrillation or cardiac arrest, are common; patients with high-­tension electrical injury
need an initial electrocardiogram (ECG) and cardiac monitoring until
they are stable and have been fully assessed. Higher-­risk patients have
abnormal ECG findings and a history of loss of consciousness. Renal
damage from deep muscle necrosis and subsequent myoglobinuria is
another complication; such patients need forced alkaline diuresis to
minimize renal damage. Soft tissue (muscle) injury of an extremity
may produce a compartment syndrome (see Chapter 80). Aggressive
removal of all dead and devitalized tissue, even with the risk of functional loss, remains the key to effective management of the electrically
damaged extremity. Early debridement facilitates early closure of the
wound. Damaged major vessels must be isolated and buried in a viable
muscle to prevent exposure. Survival depends on immediate intensive
care; functional result depends on long-­term care and delayed reconstructive surgery. The incidence of cataract formation is also increased
in patients who have sustained electrical injuries; patients should be
referred to an ophthalmologist for regular examinations.
Arc burns generally are caused by clothing ignition from the superheated arc that can be emitted from high-­amperage current discharge.
The hallmark of this injury is a large cutaneous burn following clothing

lines and covered in thick soot. Discreet entrance and exit points are
not generally seen. Muscle injury is rare, as current does not actually
traverse the skin. Treatment should follow the principles for major
flame burn injury treatment.
Contact burns, in which tissue destruction is localized to a small
area of contact with an electrical box with no evidence of electricity
conducted through the body, are generally treated as any other burn
injury. Careful history and physical examination should be performed
to assure that there was no transmission of electricity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

89.1 Lightning Burns
Tina L. Palmieri
Worldwide, lightning occurs approximately 50 times per second, primarily via ground strikes involving 30,000-­100,000 amperes at 30,000
Kelvin temperature. Fortunately, the incidence of lightning burns is low,
with 400 injuries and 40 deaths per year attributed to lightning. Lightning injury occurs via (1) direct strike (electrical current), (2) thermal
burns from conversion of electrical energy to heat, or (3) mechanical
trauma from the acoustic shock wave, flying debris, fall, or muscle contraction. The most common form of lightning burn, accounting for
approximately half of lightning injuries, is ground current, in which
lightning strikes the ground or an object near an individual and travels through the ground to the individual. Side splash injuries constitute ∼30% of lightning injuries and occurs when current jumps from a
nearby object, then follows the path of least resistance to an individual.
Direct strikes account for 5% of lightning injuries. Sudden death after a
direct strike is due to simultaneous cardiac and respiratory arrest from
depolarization of cardiac muscle cells and paralysis of the medullary
respiratory center.
Lightning cutaneous burns depend on the current path, the type of
clothing worn, the presence of metal, and cutaneous moisture. Entry,
exit, and path lesions are possible; the prognosis is poorest for lesions
of the head or legs. Internal organ injury along the path is common

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

656 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 89.9  Electrical Injury: Clinical Considerations
SYSTEM

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

MANAGEMENT

General

—

• Extricate the patient
• Perform ABCs of resuscitation; immobilize the spine
• Obtain history: voltage, type of current
• Obtain complete blood count with platelets, electrolytes, BUN,
creatinine, and glucose

Cardiac

Dysrhythmias: asystole, ventricular fibrillation,
sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, premature
atrial contractions, premature ventricular
contractions, conduction defects, atrial
fibrillation, ST- and T-wave changes

• Treat dysrhythmias
• Provide cardiac monitor, electrocardiogram, and radiographs with
suspected thoracic injury
• Perform creatinine phosphokinase with isoenzyme measurements if
indicated

Pulmonary

Respiratory arrest, acute respiratory distress,
aspiration syndrome

• Protect and maintain the airway
• Provide mechanical ventilation if indicated, chest radiograph, and
arterial blood gas levels

Renal

Acute kidney injury, myoglobinuria

• Provide aggressive fluid management unless central nervous system
injury is present
• Maintain adequate urine output, >1 mL/kg/hr if myoglobinuria;
addition of HCO3−, mannitol may be needed to alkalinize urine and
stimulate diuresis, respectively
• Consider central venous or pulmonary artery pressure monitoring
• Measure urine myoglobin; perform urinalysis; measure BUN, creatinine

Neurologic

Immediate: loss of consciousness, motor
paralysis, visual disturbances, amnesia,
agitation; intracranial hematoma

• Treat seizures
• Provide fluid restriction if indicated

Secondary: pain, paraplegia, brachial plexus
injury, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone secretion, autonomic disturbances,
cerebral edema

• Consider spine radiographs and MRI, especially cervical

Delayed: paralysis, seizures, headache, peripheral
neuropathy

• Perform CT or MRI scan of the brain if indicated

Oral commissure burns, tongue and dental
injuries; skin burns resulting from ignition of
clothes, entrance and exit burns, and arc burns

• Document entrance and exit wounds
• Treat cutaneous burns; determine patient’s tetanus status
• Obtain consultation for plastic surgery of ear, nose, and throat, if indicated

Electrical burns to mouth could include oral
commissures and lips; low-­voltage electrical
burns secondary to high conductivity of saliva

• Ensure no entry or exit wounds and no cardiac involvement
• Confirm all injuries are localized
• Management is observation until eschar sloughs off and granulation
tissue fills in
• If bleeding at corner of mouth from labial artery, pinch lower lip to stop
bleeding and consult surgeon
• High risk for scarring; refer to burn center for long-­term management

Abdominal

Viscus perforation and solid-­organ damage; ileus;
abdominal injury rare without visible abdominal
burns

• Place nasogastric tube if patient has airway compromise or ileus
• Obtain serum ALT, AST, amylase, BUN, and creatinine measurements
and CT scans as indicated

Musculoskeletal

Compartment syndrome from subcutaneous
necrosis limb edema and deep burns

• Monitor patient for possible compartment syndrome

Long-­bone fractures, spine injuries

• Obtain radiographs and orthopedic/general surgery consultations as
indicated

Visual changes, optic neuritis, cataracts,
extraocular muscle paresis

• Obtain an ophthalmology consultation to document and follow for
cataract formation

Cutaneous/oral

Ocular

AST, Aspartate transaminase; ALT, alanine transaminase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen.
Adapted from Hall ML, Sills RM. Electrical and lightning injuries. In: Barkin RM, ed. Pediatric Emergency Medicine. St Louis: Mosby; 1997: p. 484.

and does not relate to the severity of the cutaneous burn. Linear burns,
usually first-­or second-­degree, are in the locations where sweat is present. Feathering, also called Lichtenberg figures, is an arborescent pattern appearing on the skin and is pathognomonic for lightning injury
(Fig. 89.7). The feathering skin appearance, thought to be caused by
changes in cutaneous blood flow, is transient and disappears within
several hours. Lightning may ignite clothing or produce serious cutaneous burns from heated metal in the clothing. Internal complications
of lightning burns include cardiac arrest caused by asystole, transient
hypertension, premature ventricular contractions, ventricular fibrillation, and myocardial ischemia. Most severe cardiac complications

resolve if the patient is supported with CPR (see Chapter 79). CNS
complications include cerebral edema, hemorrhage, seizures, mood
changes, depression, and paralysis of the lower extremities. Rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria (with possible renal failure) also occur but
are rare. Ocular manifestations include vitreous hemorrhage, iridocyclitis, retinal tearing, or retinal detachment. Rupture of the tympanic
membrane occurs in 50–80% of those sustaining a direct strike.
Treatment of lightning injury generally follows traditional trauma
management with one exception: In the event of multiple lighting injuries (mass casualty), a “reverse triage” system is employed, in which
initial treatment is focused on those who appear to be in cardiac arrest,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90 u Cold Injuries

Fig. 89.7 Lightning burn: Lichtenberg feathering. (Courtesy Dr. Mary
Ann Cooper.)

which is often reversible. Early attention to ventilation after restoration
of cardiac rhythm in lightning-­injured patients is crucial to prevent
recurrent cardiovascular collapse and hypoxic brain injury. This triage
algorithm is employed because those who have cardiorespiratory function immediately after the strike rarely succumb to their injury before
hospital arrival. Ultimate outcomes depend on injury severity, mental
status, organ involvement, cardiac arrest presence, and arrhythmias.
Lightning survivors who have a normal ECG and normal vital signs and
no obvious injury can be discharged home if they do not have history of
a direct strike, loss of consciousness, focal neurologic complaint, major
trauma, significant burns, or chest pain or dyspnea. However, they should
be referred for ophthalmologic evaluation and audio-­vestibular evaluation should there be ocular or otic injury. Neurologic effects of lightning
injury may be significant. CNS dysfunction can be immediate or delayed
and includes spinal cord injury, ischemic stroke, or keraunoparalysis
(temporary condition that mimics spinal cord injury) as well as trauma-­
related injuries such as skull fractures or spinal cord injury. Personality
alterations and sleep disorders may develop over time post injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 90

Cold Injuries
Jennifer Dow
Children and youth are exposed to cold environments through outdoor recreation, occupational activities, or housing crises. Although
cold injuries are commonly attributed to subfreezing temperatures, it
is a misnomer that it must be below 0°C (32°F) for systemic injury or
local tissue damage to occur. Injury from cold occurs when the body’s
ability to generate heat is overwhelmed by environmental loss.

MECHANISMS OF HEAT TRANSFER

Environmental heat or cold injury occurs when the metabolic capacity
for thermoregulation cannot maintain core body temperature in the
setting of extreme environmental temperatures. The hypothalamus

657

controls the production and conservation of heat, responding to
central and peripheral receptors. Local skin temperature is partially
responsible for the regulation of peripheral blood flow. Heat production is a product of cellular metabolism and by both voluntary (exercise) and involuntary (shivering) muscle use, while vasoconstriction
and behavioral action influence conservation. Heat is transferred to the
environment by five mechanisms: radiation, conduction, convection,
respiration, and evaporation.
Radiation is the transfer of heat from one object to another without
physical contact. This type of heat loss is moderated by vasoconstriction, diminishing warm blood flow to the periphery, and behavioral
adaptation of wearing insulating layers. Medications or conditions that
prohibit the vasoconstrictive response contribute to heat loss by radiation. Children may not have the knowledge or experience to recognize
when additional clothing is necessary; adults are obliged to ensure that
appropriate clothing is available. In a dry environment, radiation is the
predominant method of heat transfer. Conduction is the direct transfer of heat to another object and is the primary mechanism of heat
loss when a body is immersed, as water has up to 30 times more thermal conductivity than air. Heat is also conducted when an individual
touches a cold object (e.g., a cold rock, snow, metal chair). Behavioral
adaptations include avoidance and placement of insulation between
the individual and the surface. Convective loss of body heat to cooler
circulating air or water can be mitigated by clothing and vasoconstriction. Convection is a method of rewarming, using hot air as a delivery
method. Evaporative heat loss results from the conversion of water
(sweat) to vapor; like respiratory loss, it is a small but obligate contribution to thermal balance.

HYPOTHERMIA

Accidental hypothermia is the unintentional drop in core temperature
below 35°C (95°F), occurring when the combination of physiologic
and behavioral mechanisms to maintain core temperature are overwhelmed by environmental losses. Although cold and wet environments pose the most significant risk, accidental hypothermia can occur
in any season and in most climates. The predominant clinical manifestations are reflective of disruptions of the cardiopulmonary and central
nervous systems (Table 90.1). Cerebral function begins to diminish at a
core temperature of 33–34°C (91.4–93.2°F), with early manifestations
being irritability, confusion, and poor decision-­making, progressing
to lethargy, somnolence, and coma. Cerebral oxygen requirements
are decreased by cooling, affording transient protection in cardiac
standstill or cold-­water drowning events. The initial cardiopulmonary
response to cold is an increase in cardiac output and ventilation to support the metabolic demand of shivering. Further cardiac cooling manifests as bradycardia and abnormalities of cardiac conduction (atrial
and ventricular dysrhythmias, including fibrillation) (Fig. 90.1). The
crucial factors for reducing morbidity and mortality due to hypothermia are prevention, prompt recognition, and rapid treatment.

Risk Factors and Prevention of Hypothermia

The risk factors associated with hypothermia are extensive. Illnesses, medications, and substance use can disrupt the normal physiologic responses to cold. Vasoconstriction is disrupted by ethanol,
vasodilatory medications, and infections. Central nervous system
(CNS) trauma, stroke, medications (antidepressants, mood stabilizers, anxiolytics), and endocrine disorders (hypothyroid, adrenal
insufficiency, diabetes, hypoglycemia, hypopituitarism) disrupt the
hypothalamic response to cold. Mental illness, intoxication (opiates, organophosphates, barbiturates, carbon monoxide), and lack
of awareness, as seen in the extremes of age, may impair the ability
to recognize cold. General conditions of malnutrition and inability to move make it such that the patient does not have the caloric
reserves to shiver or cannot move safely out of the cold. Autonomic
dysfunction may produce hypothermia. Knowledge of these conditions ideally results in a heightened attentiveness to the potential for
hypothermia. Active prevention includes awareness of the weather
conditions and the utilization of appropriate clothing. Insulation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

658 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 90.1  Physiologic Characteristics of the Four Zones of Hypothermia
STATE

CORE TEMPERATURE °C (°F)

Mild

35 (95)

Urine temperature, 34.8°C (94.6°F); increased shivering thermogenesis; increase in metabolic
rate

34 (93.2)

Amnesia and dysarthria develop; normal blood pressure; maximum respiratory stimulation

33 (91.4)

Ataxia, apathy develop

32 (89.6)

Stupor; 25% decrease in oxygen consumption

31 (87.8)

Decreased shivering thermogenesis

30 (86)

Atrial fibrillation and other dysrhythmias; poikilothermia; pulse and cardiac output two-­thirds
normal; insulin ineffective

29 (85.2)

Progressive decrease in level of consciousness, pulse, and respiration; pupils dilated

28 (82.4)

Ventricular fibrillation susceptibility; 50% decrease in oxygen consumption and pulse

27 (80.6)

Losing reflexes and voluntary motion

26 (78.8)

Major acid-­base disturbances; no reflexes or response to pain

25 (77)

Cerebral blood flow one-­third normal; cardiac output 45% normal; pulmonary edema may
develop

24 (75.2)

Significant hypotension

23 (73.4)

No corneal or oculocephalic reflexes

22 (71.6)

Maximum risk of ventricular fibrillation; 75% decrease in oxygen consumption

20 (68)

Lowest resumption of cardiac electromechanical activity; pulse 20% of normal

19 (66.2)

Flat electroencephalogram

18 (64.4)

Asystole develops

14.2 (57.6)

Lowest accidental hypothermia survival in an infant

13.7 (56.7)

Lowest accidental hypothermia survival in an adult

9 (48.2)

Lowest therapeutic hypothermia survival

Moderate

Severe

Profound

CHARACTERISTICS

From Zafren K, Danzl DF. Accidental hypothermia. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche-­Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, Table
132.1, p. 1744.

J

and ease of layering are factors to be considered when choosing
clothing. Removing a layer while engaging in aerobic activity helps
prevent sweating and subsequent evaporative heat loss; replacing
it when activity slows prevents loss by radiation through the inadequate insulation. Socks and gloves should fit properly, without
circulatory impingement, and be constructed of materials other
than cotton. Covering the head and face prevents losses through
these exposed areas. Infants and young children will lose more heat
by radiation through the head than adults because of its relatively
increased surface area. The utilization of wind-­blocking materials
mitigates loss due to convection, and waterproofing keeps clothing
dry and minimizes losses resulting from convection and radiation.
Additional preventative measures are ensuring adequate nutrition
for the activity, recognizing an increased metabolic demand in the
cold, and having access to shelter for warmth.

Clinical Presentation of Hypothermia

Fig. 90.1 Characteristic J or Osborne wave of hypothermia (temp

<32°C) closely follows QRS. It may be mistaken for a T wave with narrow
QT interval if the true T wave is not appreciated. The slightly rounded
peak distinguishes it from R′ of bundle branch block. (From Gunnarsson
B, Heard CMB. Accidental hypothermia. In: Zimmerman JJ, Clark RSB,
Fuhrman BP, et al., eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care,
6th ed. Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022: Fig. 114.1, p. 1333.)

Hypothermia is a cold injury syndrome with progressive signs and
symptoms (see Table 90.1 and Fig. 90.2). The differential diagnosis is broad, and the clinician must be aware of the environment
from which the patient presents. It is also essential that the clinician
recognize that each patient is unique and presents with subtle differences. A patient may continue to shiver below the 30°C (86°F)
“cut-­off ” but manifest all other signs of moderate to severe hypothermia. Standard classification is based on measured core temperature, whereas field classification is based on signs and symptoms
(see Fig. 90.2). Treatment of all stages includes preventing further
heat loss and initiating rewarming (Fig. 90.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90 u Cold Injuries
Prehospital Assessment of a Cold Patient
1. From outside ring to center assess Consciousness,
Movement, Shivering, Alertness
2. Assess whether normal function, or impaired or no function
3. Treat according to appropriate result-quadrant

1. Reduce heat
loss (e.g., add
dry clothing)
2. Provide
high-calorie
food or drink

3. Increase heat
production
(e.g., exercise)

1. Treat as Moderate Hypothermia, and
a) IF no obvious vital signs,
THEN 60-second breathing /
pulse check
b) IF no breathing / pulse,
THEN Start CPR
2. Evacuate carefully ASAP

1. Handle gently
2. Keep horizontal
3. No standing/
walking for at
least 30 min.

4. lnsulate/
vapour barrier
5. Heat applied to
upper trunk
6. High-calorie
food/drink
7. Monitor until
improvement
(at least 30 min.)
8. Evacuate if no
improvement

1. Handle gently
6. Heat applied to
2. Keep horizontal
upper trunk
3. No standing/walking 7. Volume
4. No drink or food
replacement
5. Insulate/
with warm
vapor barrier
intravenous fluid
8. Evacuate carefully

Fig. 90.2 Algorithm for field assessment and treatment of a cold pa-

tient. (Sources: BICOrescue.com; Zafren K, Giesbrecht GG, Danzl DF, et
al. Wilderness Medical Society practice guidelines for the out-of-hospital evaluation and treatment of accidental hypothermia: 2014 update.
Wilderness Environ Med. 2014;25(4 Suppl):S66-S85.)

Cold Stress

Cold stress is marked by shivering and a core temperature >35°C
(95°F). Measures to prevent further heat loss and increase heat production are all that are necessary for reversal. This may entail increasing
physical activity to generate warmth, relocating to a warm environment, or adding clothing layers.

Mild Hypothermia

Patients with mild hypothermia are conscious and alert with measured
core temperatures of 32–35°C (89.6–95°F). Most will shiver, even violently, if there are enough energy reserves. As the core temperature
drops, the patient may begin to demonstrate discoordination or loss
of fine motor control. Hemodynamic parameters are generally stable,
with tachycardia and tachypnea observed due, in part, to the increased
catecholamine response and support of the metabolic demands of shivering. Protection from further heat loss, removal and replacement of
wet clothing, and calorie replacement should be initiated simultaneously. Application of insulation (e.g., sleeping bag) and a vapor barrier will optimize passive rewarming. Active external rewarming can
be initiated using hot water bottles or rewarming heat packs applied
to the neck, chest, upper torso, axilla, and groin. Try to avoid burns to
exposed skin. Patients with mild hypothermia retain consciousness but
may demonstrate diminished alertness. Transport for further evaluation and observation is recommended if they do not return to full alertness and function in the field.

Moderate Hypothermia

Moderate hypothermia, with core temperatures of 28–32°C (82.4–
89.6°F), is the slowing phase of symptom progression. Patients present with bradycardia, respiratory depression, and altered mental status,
manifesting as depressed level of consciousness, often stuporous, and
hyporeflexia. Shivering generally stops at 30°C (86°F), but there is
variation among patients. Active external rewarming should be initiated with heat applied to the upper torso, chest, axilla, and back. Fluid

659

replacement is initiated with intravenous fluids, ideally containing glucose, warmed to 40–42°C (104–107.6°F). Cardiac monitoring is indicated, as a cold heart and hypothermia-­associated acidosis increases
the risk of unstable arrhythmias. Hemodynamically stable patients may
be transported to any hospital; however, if unstable, a hospital with
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is recommended.

Severe/Profound Hypothermia

Core temperatures <28°C (82.4°F) are characterized by stupor, leading to coma with loss of cerebrovascular autoregulation. Further cardiovascular instability manifests as bradycardia, hypotension, and
a significant risk for unstable tachycardias, often beginning as atrial
fibrillation with progression to ventricular dysrhythmias. There is no
coordinated musculoskeletal activity. Patients with severe hypothermia
may appear dead. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be initiated if there is no cardiac activity, as determined by a pulse check of
at least 1 minute duration or the absence of organized electrical activity
on a monitor. Bedside echocardiography may also be used to identify
cardiac activity. Vasoactive medications should be held until the core
temperature is >30°C (86°F) and then administered at twice the dosing
interval until 35°C (95°F). Defibrillation or cardioversion, if indicated,
is attempted once, at maximum power, then held until the core temperature is above 30°C (86°F).
In hypothermic cardiac arrest, rescuers should initiate CPR regardless of the patient’s temperature. Contraindications to initiation of CPR
include if there is obvious fatal injury, ice or snow is visualized in the
airway, chest wall compression is impossible, or rescuers are at risk. The
usual signs of death—rigor, pupillary dilation, and lividity—are unreliable in the hypothermic patient.
Complications of hypothermia include compartment syndrome,
rhabdomyolysis, hyperkalemia or hypokalemia, hemoconcentration,
hypercoagulability, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
confusion (paradoxical undressing), Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, and
mydriasis. Core temperature afterdrop is a decrease in core temperature after removal from the cold and/or when external rewarming
begins; external rewarming extremities with frostbite is another risk
factor.
Hypothermia is fatal if not treated. Prevention and risk mitigation through awareness of weather conditions, appropriate clothing and layering systems, and breaks for rewarming during outdoor
activities will limit its incidence. Adults supervising children and
adolescents participating in outdoor activities must be aware that
behavior changes and apparent clumsiness might signal the onset of
hypothermia.

SOFT TISSUE COLD INJURY

Soft tissue injuries caused by cold are divided into freezing and nonfreezing injuries. Frostbite is a freezing injury, whereas frostnip, chilblains (pernio), cold immersion, and cold-­induced fat necrosis are
nonfreezing injuries.

FROSTBITE

Frostbite is an injury occurring at or below freezing temperatures.
It can have devastating effects with tissue loss leading to functional
debility. It is preventable. Frostbite, like hypothermia, is a condition
occurring when tissue heat loss is greater than the warmth delivered
by peripheral perfusion. Minimizing exposure to cold, either by
avoidance, use of appropriate clothing, and responding to changing
conditions appropriately, are keys to frostbite prevention. Clothing,
especially hand and footwear, should insulate well and not be constricting. Vasoconstriction inhibits peripheral cutaneous warming.
Inhibitors of peripheral perfusion, such as vasoconstricting medications, circulatory disorders (e.g., Raynaud syndrome), and chronic
skin conditions (e.g., psoriasis), increase frostbite risk. Emollients
applied to the skin do not protect from the cold. Any complaints of
numbness are to be taken seriously, and the child should be assessed
for signs of cold injury in a protected environment. Frostnip, although
not a freezing injury, does indicate that the temperature and exposure
conditions may promote frostbite.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

660 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Ensure Scene Safety
Handle gently. Keep horizontal.
Stabilize injuries. Consider causes of altered mental status other than hypothermia.
Not Hypothermic
Suspect
hypothermia
Normal mental
status?
No

No
Cold Stressed - Not Hypothermic >35°C
Reduce heat loss, increase heat production.
Mild Hypothermia 32–35°C

Yes
Yes
Shivering?
Yes
Functioning
normally/able
to care for self?

No

Shivering?

Moderate Hypothermia 28–32°C

Yes

Treat as above
Active warming: apply heat to upper torso: chest, axilla
and back. Use large heat pads, HPMK, Norwegian Heat
Pac, forced-air.
Monitor. Circulatory access: peripheral IV or IO or femoral
line.
Volume replacement: 40–42°C saline boluses. IV or IO
glucose.
No standing or walking.

No

Conscious?
Yes
No

Signs of life or
organized rhythm
on ECG?
Respiration/pulse
check for up to 1 min

Severe/Profound Hypothermia <28°C
Treat as above
Yes

No

Lethal injury? or
Chest too stiff for
CPR? or
Avalanche burial
>35 min and airway
obstructed by snow?

Yes

Death
Do not resuscitate.

Protect from further cooling using insulation and vapor
barrier.
Seek shelter. Remove (cut off) wet clothing only with
shelter.
Measure temperature if possible.
Passive warming: Support shivering with calorie
replacement.
After protected from heat loss: No standing or walking for
30 min.
Active warming is beneficial. (See moderate hypothermia,
below.)

No

Intubate or use supraglottic device.
Anesthetic and paralytic drugs: Lower dosage and extend
dosing interval below 30°C.
• Ventilation: With advanced airway, ventilate at half
standard (normothermic) rate.
• Without advanced airway, ventilate at standard rate or use
ETCO2 to guide ventilation.
• Use supplemental O2, especially above 2500 m.
• Naso/orogastric tube if advanced airway in place.
CPR if no signs of life. (Can use cardiac monitor, ETCO2,
US to confirm)
• Chest compressions at standard normothermic rate.
• If 30°C VT or VF or AED advises shock: one shock at
max power.
• Warm 1–2°C or 30°C prior to additional shocks.
• No vasoactive drugs until 30°C or above. From 30–35°C,
increase dosing interval to twice as long as normal.
• CPR may be delayed or given intermittently if necessary to
accomplish evacuation.
• No temperature cut-off for CPR.
No CPR if signs of life or perfusing rhythm (unless no
cardiac activity on US).
Consider transcutaneous pacing if bradycardic with
hypotension.
Terminate CPR if potassium >12.

Uninjured, alert
and shivering:
may not need
hospital.
Trauma patients:
active rewarming,
trauma center.
Asphyxiated
patients: closest
hospital for
observation.

Hemodynamically
stable: closest
hospital.
Otherwise:
hospital with ICU.
Hospital with ICU
and ECC
capabilities if
possible.

Hospital with ICU
and ECC
capabilities if
possible.

During Transport
Handle gently.
Keep horizontal.
Continue
rewarming. Warm
ambulance or
helicopter to 24°C if
possible.

Fig. 90.3 Recommendations for out-­of-­hospital evaluation and treatment of accidental hypothermia. AED, Automatic external defibrillator; CPR,

cardiopulmonary resuscitation; ECC, extracorporeal circulation; ECG, electrocardiogram; ETCO2, end-­tidal carbon dioxide; HPMK, Hypothermia
Prevention Management Kit; ICU, intensive care unit; IO, intraosseous; IV, intravenous; US, ultrasound; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular
tachycardia. (From Zafren K, Giesbrecht GG, Danzl DF, et al. Wilderness Medical Society practice guidelines for the out-­of-­hospital evaluation and
treatment of accidental hypothermia: 2014 update. Wilderness Environ Med. 2014;25:S66–S85, Fig. 2.)

Table 90.2  Different Degrees of Frostbite and Their Physiologic Characteristics
GRADE I INJURY

GRADE II INJURY

• Superficial
• Edema and redness without tissue
necrosis in the affected area
• Numbness, firm white-­yellow
plaque
• No blisters or necrosis
• Occasional skin desquamation
(5-­10 days later)

• Blister formation
• Erythema, substantial edema
• Vesicles with clear or milky
fluid
• Blisters
• Desquamation and black
eschar formed

GRADE III INJURY
• Tissue necrosis
• Hemorrhagic deeper
blisters
• Skin necrosis
• Blue-­gray discoloration

GRADE IV INJURY
• Development of gangrene,
requiring amputation
• Full-­thickness skin, subcutaneous
tissue, muscle, tendon, and bone
freezing
• Little edema
• Initially mottled, deep red or
eventually dry, black, and mummified

Modified from Joshi K, Goyary D, Mazumder B, et al. Frostbite: Current status and advancements in therapeutics. J Therm Biol. 2020;93:102716, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90 u Cold Injuries
Pathophysiology of Frostbite

Frostbite is a freezing injury with four phases: prefreeze, freeze-­thaw,
vascular stasis, and late ischemic. The degree of cold, duration of
exposure, and physiologic compromise caused by medications and

661

underlying illness determine how severe the injury will be. The tissue
cooling of prefreeze is marked by local vasoconstriction and ischemia
without the formation of ice crystals. Intracellular and extracellular ice
crystal development causes cellular damage during the freeze-­thaw
phase. Reperfusion leads to ischemic-­reperfusion injury and initiation
of the inflammatory cascade. Vascular stasis is characterized by both
blood leaking from vessels and the formation of thrombi. Progressive
tissue ischemia from micro-­emboli, local thrombosis, and persistent

A
Fig. 90.4 Frostbite with clear vesiculations. (Courtesy Dr. Bill Mills.)

B
Fig. 90.7 A, Perniosis (chilblains). Edematous, red, painful nodules ap-

Fig. 90.5 Early appearance of severe frostbite of the hand after thawing. A purple color and absence of blisters are very unfavorable prognostic signs. (Courtesy Dr. Ken Zafren.)

On-field medical care

peared on the fingers after exposure to cold. B, Perniosis (chilblains).
Note the inflamed nodules on the toes of this adolescent girl. Although
nodules resolved, painful nodules continued to develop on an annual
basis beginning in January and lasting until April. She was otherwise
healthy. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022, Figs. 20.48 and 20.49, p. 566.)

Immediate medical care

Rewarming
• Rapid rewarming in 37–39°C water
bath for 30 minutes (should be done
if no further refreezing is ensured)
• Tetanus prophylaxis

Passive rewarming
Preserve body heat
Eg. Using blankets

Active rewarming

Wound care
• Do not break blisters and do not
aspirate hemorrhagic bullae
• Broken blisters should be debrided,
cleaned and covered with an
antimicrobial
• Pain control medication should be
administered (aspirin/ibuprofen)

External
• Heated jacket systems
• Forced air systems

Internal
Non-invasive:
• Administration of
warm IV fluid

Special medical procedures
• Sympathetic nerve block for
vasodilatation and increased blood flow

Therapeutic treatment
Thrombolytic therapy in frostbite
• Intra-arterial thrombolysis using tissue
plasminogen activator within 24 hours of injury

Invasive:
• Extracorporeal blood
warming
• Arteriovenous
rewarming
• Hemodialysis

Synthetic analogue of prostacyclin PGI2
• Iloprost
(used when thrombolytics are contraindicated
or ineffective)
Anticoagulant therapy
• Heparin
Adjuvant therapy
• Vasodilator such as papaverine to reduce
vasospasm
• Antiplatelet drug: Pentoxifylline
• Aloe vera (topical)

Fig. 90.6 Treatment protocol for the management of frostbite. (Modified from Joshi K, Goyary D, Mazumder B, et al. Frostbite: Current status and
advancements in therapeutics. J Therm Biol. 2020;93:102716, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

662 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
reperfusion injury marks the late-­ischemic phase. Compromise of
microcirculation and cellular destruction from crystal formation are
the main factors contributing to cellular death.

Clinical Presentation of Frostbite

The depth of injury is the basis for the classification of frostbite
injury. In the field, frostbite is classified as superficial or deep. Upon
arrival to a healthcare facility, a degree or grade of injury is assigned
after the tissue has thawed and any advanced imaging is performed
(Table 90.2).
First-­degree frostbite is marked by numbness and local erythema
with a pale raised plaque in the area of injury. Only mild tissue sloughing occurs, and there is no infarction. Second-­degree injury presents
with clear, fluid-­filled blisters and surrounding erythema (Fig. 90.4).
Local edema may be present. First-­and second-­degree frostbite injury
results in minimal tissue loss and is considered superficial in the field.
Third-­degree frostbite extends into the dermis and dermal vascular
plexus. The resulting blisters are hemorrhagic. Fourth-­degree injury
involves the dermis and underlying tissues, extending into muscle and
bone (Fig. 90.5). Third-­and fourth-­degree frostbite has anticipated tissue loss and is field classified as deep.

Treatment of Frostbite

Prevention is preferred for any environmental injury, but rapid recognition and treatment will mitigate the long-­term impact. Once
frostbite is suspected, the patient should be assessed for concomitant hypothermia. The injury must be protected from the cold and
prevented from refreezing if spontaneous thawing has begun. Any
constricting items, such as jewelry, are removed. Thawing should be
initiated with a circulating water bath at 37–39°C (98.6–102.2°F).
Pain medication should be administered. There are numerous combined therapies for frostbite, including anticoagulants, thrombolytics, and vasodilators (Fig. 90.6). The indications for each therapy
depend on the extent of injury, length of time since tissue thaw, local
availability, and individual national regulatory decisions. It is recommended that the clinician be aware of their local resources and protocols. Regardless, treatment with these agents must be initiated within
12-­72 hours of tissue thaw.

NONFREEZING COLD INJURY

Nonfreezing cold injuries include but are not limited to frostnip, chilblains (pernio), cold-­immersion foot, and cold-­induced fat necrosis.
Frostnip is associated with vasoconstriction of skin exposed to the
cold with ice crystals, or frost, forming on the skin surface. The tissue
may be numb, and local pallor is present. There is no cellular damage, and the condition resolves rapidly upon warming. Frostnip does
indicate that conditions are appropriate for frostbite, and preventative
measures should be taken.
Chilblains, also called pernio, is an idiopathic condition suspected
to be a vasculopathy. Typically occurring in cold, damp conditions,
vasculitic-­appearing lesions develop on the fingers and toes, ears, and
exposed areas of the legs after environmental exposure (Fig. 90.7). It is
suspected that vasoconstriction and inflammatory reaction are responsible for the lesions. Recognition and prevention of further cold exposure is key to treatment. The lesions are self-­limiting, and symptoms
may be addressed with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
and topical soothing creams. Continued exposure to cold can cause
persistent lesions. Lesions similar to chilblains have been noted in children with COVID-­19 infection. Familial chilblain lupus, an autosomal dominant variant of lupus, is caused by variants in the TREX1 and
SAMHD1 genes (see Chapter 90.1). Patients develop cold-­induced erythematous peripheral skin lesions and manifest systemic disease typical of lupus. In addition, fever and arthralgias may be present.
Immersion foot or trench foot occurs with continuous immersion
in warm or cold water. The injury occurs more rapidly in cold water.
Continuous exposure to the wet environment, whether through actual
immersion in water or saturated footwear, causes hyperemia, edema,
and ultimately blister formation with skin sloughing. The condition
can progress to ischemia and gangrene. Awareness of wet footwear and

subsequent changing, or drying, of shoes and socks is the method of
prevention. Vapor barrier socks or boots do not prevent sweat from
accumulating and creating a wet environment. Like other cold injuries,
treatment consists of thoroughly drying and warming the tissue. Antibiotics are not necessary unless signs of infection are present.
Cold-­induced fat necrosis is secondary to local cold injury to
the superficial adipose tissue. It presents with raised, erythematous
nodules or plaques, evolving over 12-­72 hours after exposure to cold.
Distribution in children is predominantly on the face, specifically
the cheeks and forehead. Obese children and adolescents may have
lesions on areas poorly protected from the cold, including the buttocks, thighs, abdominal pannus, and under the chin. Lesions are
self-­limiting and typically resolve in 10-­20 days. Treatment consists
of rewarming, avoidance of the cold, and NSAIDs as necessary for
discomfort.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

90.1 Cold-­Induced Autoinflammatory and
Other Genetic Disorders
James J. Nocton and James W. Verbsky
A number of autoinflammatory and other genetic disorders have
been identified that are characterized by an exacerbation of symptoms
upon exposure to cold temperatures. These disorders differ from cold
injury, cold urticaria, and problems related primarily to vasoconstriction because they typically manifest very early in life and are associated with a wider spectrum of signs and symptoms, reflecting either
underlying systemic inflammation or the protean effects of specific
genetic variants. A relatively lower ambient temperature or rapid cooling and evaporation from the skin are often sufficient to produce the
signs and symptoms of these disorders; therefore the relationship to
cold temperature is not always obvious. The genetic variants associated
with most of these disorders impact cellular signaling pathways that
lead to the expression of proinflammatory cytokines in the absence of
an extrinsic trigger; therefore most of these diseases are classified as
autoinflammatory.
These conditions should be suspected primarily in infants or very
young children who develop persistent, recurrent, or periodic fevers
associated with rashes or arthralgias that cannot be explained by an
infectious disease or another chronic inflammatory or rheumatic disease. Signs and symptoms associated with these diseases may begin as
early as the first week of life. The very early onset distinguishes these
genetic diseases from acquired conditions such as Raynaud phenomenon, pernio, cryoglobulinemia, cold urticaria, and other cold-­induced
problems potentially related to acquired autoimmunity. The rashes are
most often evanescent and appear similar to urticaria; however, they
are usually not pruritic and are histologically different from urticaria.
Laboratory evidence of chronic inflammation is often present, including elevations of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-­reactive
protein. The association with cold exposure may be subtle and not initially apparent.
The diagnostic algorithm for these disorders should begin with a
thorough history and a careful examination, paying particular attention
to potential additional signs of conjunctivitis, a frequent accompanying feature, decreased limb movement that might indicate arthralgia or
arthritis, the morphology of any cutaneous lesions, and the association
of symptoms and signs with cooling or colder temperatures. Unlike
cold urticaria, the hivelike lesions often associated with these disorders
cannot be precipitated by a cold stimulation test using the application
of an ice cube to the skin. Measurement of serum inflammatory markers may help distinguish autoinflammatory disease from more benign
conditions; infectious diseases may need to be excluded with appropriate testing. A skin biopsy may provide information that will help
narrow the differential diagnosis by identifying either a neutrophilic
dermatosis, granulomatous inflammation, or vasculitis characteristic
of one of these diseases. Ultimately, focused genetic sequencing can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90 u Cold Injuries
be performed, searching for specific genetic variants that will confirm
a diagnosis.
Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS), along with
neonatal-­
onset multisystem inflammatory disorder (NOMID) and
Muckle-­Wells syndrome (MWS), constitute the cryopyrin-­associated
periodic syndromes (CAPS) (see Chapter 204). These diseases are all
the result of pathogenic variants in NLRP3 which encodes the protein
cryopyrin, a component of the inflammasome complex, which is critical in the production of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin
(IL)-­1β and IL-­18. Although each of these diseases may be exacerbated
by cold exposure or cooling, the association with cold is most consistent in those with FCAS. FCAS should be considered in infants who
develop episodes of a hivelike rash, often beginning in the neonatal
period, accompanied by fever, conjunctivitis, joint pain, neutrophilia,
thrombocytosis, and elevated inflammatory markers, and triggered by
exposure to cold or low ambient temperatures. The rash is typically
not pruritic and histologically consists of a neutrophilic perivascular
and perieccrine inflammatory infiltrate. Episodes are short and generally last less than 24 hours. MWS is more severe than FCAS, causing
more frequent hivelike rashes and fevers, along with arthralgias, conjunctivitis, and aseptic meningitis, and with potential eventual progression to hearing loss. Like FCAS, the onset of symptoms is most often
in infancy, and the histology of skin lesions in these two disorders is
similar. NOMID is the most severe form of CAPS and is associated
with a nonpruritic urticarial rash often present at birth and more profound neurologic and bone disease. CAPS are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, and the diagnosis is made based on clinical
features and the identification of a variant in the NLRP3 gene. Variants
in NLRP12 and in NLRC4 have also been associated with similar clinical syndromes sometimes referred to as FCAS2 and FCAS4, respectively. Treatment with the IL-­1 inhibitors anakinra and canakinumab
has been effective in most individuals with CAPS.
PLCG2-­associated antibody deficiency and immune dysregulation (PLAID) (sometimes referred to as FCAS3) is an autosomal dominant disease resulting from a pathogenic variant of
PLCG2, which encodes a transmembrane enzyme expressed primarily in myeloid and lymphoid cells that regulates inflammasome activity and proinflammatory cytokine production. PLAID
causes pruritic urticaria from birth induced by ambient cold temperatures or cooling and lasting for minutes to hours. In some
individuals, acral blistering lesions resembling a burn may also be
present during infancy on the ears, nose, and fingers. Histology of
urticarial lesions reveals increased mast cells. Because PLCG2 is
expressed in mast cells and affects mast cell degranulation, these
subjects can have more classic hives as compared with other FCAS
syndromes. Other lesions reveal noncaseating granulomas. Older
individuals may develop syncope induced by cold exposure and
a burning sensation in the throat when eating cold foods. Hypogammaglobulinemia may lead to frequent sinopulmonary and
other infections. The diagnosis is made based on clinical features
and the identification of variants in the PLCG2 gene. Treatment
of PLAID includes avoiding evaporative cooling and minimizing cold exposure, antihistamines, and for those with evidence
of immunodeficiency, intravenous immunoglobulin infusions to
prevent frequent infections.
STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI) is
an autosomal dominant disease resulting from a pathogenic variant in
TMEM173, which encodes stimulator of interferon genes (STING),
an activator of interferon gene transcription (see Chapter 205). Signs

663

and symptoms usually appear in infancy but may also appear later and
include fever and a variety of cutaneous lesions. Violaceous nodules
and plaques on the cheeks, ears, and nose and telangiectasias, pustules,
or blisters, often most noticeable on the extremities, may occur. The
skin lesions are exacerbated by cold temperatures, and some develop
ulcerative or gangrenous lesions. In time, interstitial lung disease progressing to fibrosis has been described. Histology reveals vasculitis of
medium and small vessels. The diagnosis is made based on clinical
features and the identification of the variant in the TMEM173 gene.
Responses to treatment with corticosteroids and immunomodulators,
including cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate mofetil, have been
variable and inconsistent. Janus kinase inhibitors, which inhibit interferon receptor signaling, have shown promise in treatment of these
disorders.
Familial chilblain lupus is a rare condition triggered by cold exposure that presents with painful, bluish-­red, papular or nodular lesions
of the skin in acral locations. Ulceration can occur, but deep ulceration
and necrosis are infrequent, and the lesions tend to heal without scarring. This is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by heterozygous
variants in TREX1 or SAMHD1, the same genes containing variants
associated with Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome (AGS). AGS is a syndrome characterized by developmental delay, abnormal neurologic
signs, microcephaly with brain calcifications, and CNS pleocytosis, as
well as skin lesions resembling chilblains. Both TREX1 and SAMHD1
are involved in DNA degradation, and their deficiencies result in intracellular nucleic acid that stimulates interferon production. AGS and
familial chilblain lupus can be considered a spectrum of severity of the
same genetic defect.
Factor XII–associated cold autoinflammatory syndrome is an
autosomal dominant disease resulting from a pathogenic variant in
F12 encoding the coagulation factor XII. The variant leads to spontaneous activation of factor XII, which in turn increases bradykinin
and IL-­1 levels. Individuals with this mutation develop an urticarial-­
like rash that begins in the first few weeks of life precipitated by cold.
The rash is nonpruritic and evanescent, and as individuals age it is
accompanied by more severe systemic symptoms of chills, headaches,
arthralgias, and fatigue. Serum inflammatory markers are elevated,
and skin histology reveals perivascular macrophage and neutrophilic
infiltrates. The diagnosis is made by identifying a variant in F12.
Treatment with the IL-­1 receptor antagonist anakinra or the bradykinin B2 receptor antagonist icatibant has shown promise in a small
number of individuals.
Crisponi syndrome/cold-­induced sweating syndrome (CS/CISS)
is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from variants in CRLF1 or
CLCF1. These genes encode proteins involved in neurologic development, including facial motor neurons and the sympathetic nervous system; therefore this syndrome is not classified as an autoinflammatory
syndrome. Symptoms and signs are typically apparent in the neonatal period and include fever, camptodactyly, and involuntary episodic
contractions of facial and pharyngeal muscles resulting in breathing
and feeding difficulties. There is high neonatal mortality, and those that
survive develop cold-­induced profuse sweating in childhood. Scoliosis
and other dysmorphic features (depressed nasal bridge, high arched
palate) are also common. The diagnosis is made by identifying a variant most commonly in CRLF1. Treatment of the neonatal symptoms
is supportive. The cold-­induced sweating is managed with clonidine,
amitriptyline, or moxonidine.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

664 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Chapter 91

Anesthesia and
­Perioperative Care

increased controller medication administration (β-­adrenergic agonist
and corticosteroids). Active wheezing may be an indication to delay elective surgery. Chronic respiratory conditions such as bronchopulmonary
dysplasia and cystic fibrosis are also associated with significant intraoperative risks. Every effort should be made to ensure that children with
such disorders achieve optimal respiratory status before surgery.

Airway Evaluation

The continuum of anesthesia includes varying degrees of sedation (i.e.,
mild, moderate, or deep) and general anesthesia. All forms of sedation
are characterized by some preservation of purposeful movement (see
Chapter 92), whereas general anesthesia is defined by the complete
loss of consciousness. Potent pharmacologic agents are required to suppress the perception and physiologic response to noxious stimuli. Perioperatively, the anesthesiologist is responsible for providing hypnosis
and analgesia while preserving physiologic homeostasis (Table 91.1).
This begins with the performance of a comprehensive preanesthesia
history (Table 91.2). Although anesthetic risk has greatly decreased
with advancements in pharmacology and monitoring technology, the
persistent risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality demands vigilance. The risk is elevated in certain disease states (Table 91.3).

Induction of general anesthesia is associated with reduced spontaneous
ventilation and airway reflexes. Prediction of difficult bag-­mask ventilation and/or intubation before anesthesia is critical. Congenital anomalies
associated with airway compromise include micrognathia, macroglossia, and thoracic anomalies (Table 91.5). Conditions that impair mouth
opening (e.g., temporomandibular joint disease) should be noted. A history of wheezing or stridor may indicate postoperative airway complications and difficult intraoperative airway management. It is imperative to
ask about a history of sleep-­disordered breathing, including obstructive
and central sleep apnea, as this may lead to increased risk of perianesthetic respiratory complications in children. Polysomnography is the
gold standard for diagnosis and grading of sleep disordered breathing.
The STBUR (snoring, trouble breathing, unrefreshed) questionnaire is
used to identify patients with sleep-­disordered breathing who may be at
risk for perioperative respiratory complications. Postoperative admission for monitoring may be indicated for patients with moderate and
severe forms of sleep-­disordered breathing.

PREANESTHETIC EVALUATION

Cardiovascular System

John P. Scott

All children presenting for surgery should undergo a preanesthetic history and multiorgan system assessment with assignment of American
Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status (ASA-­PS) (Table 91.4).
Children of ASA-­PS I-­II generally require a brief focused history and
physical examination with no additional testing. Patients with a complex medical history of ASA-­PS ≥III require a more comprehensive
preanesthetic assessment, often with ancillary preoperative testing.
Every patient should be screened for anesthetic risks, including drug
allergies, previous reactions to anesthetics, and family history of problems with anesthesia (e.g., sudden perioperative death, hyperthermia
after surgery), which may indicate risk of malignant hyperthermia.

Respiratory System

Recent respiratory tract infections should be noted. Clear rhinorrhea
without fever or evidence of lower respiratory disease is not associated
with increased anesthetic risk. Respiratory illnesses associated with
fever, mucopurulent nasal discharge, productive cough, or lower
respiratory symptoms (wheezing, rales) are associated with increased
airway reactivity and anesthetic complications (laryngospasm, bronchospasm, reduced mucociliary clearance, atelectasis, and hypoxemia)
for up to 6 weeks thereafter. Thus elective procedures requiring general
anesthesia should be postponed 4-­6 weeks in this setting.
Children with reactive airway disease require a thorough preanesthetic
assessment. Acute, potentially fatal bronchospasm can occur during
induction of anesthesia and endotracheal intubation for routine, minor
surgery in children with asthma. Risk factors for anesthetic complications
include previous asthma exacerbations requiring (1) hospital admission
within the previous year, (2) emergency department (ED) care within the
last 6 months, (3) previous intensive care unit (ICU) admission, or (4) previous parenteral systemic corticosteroids. Ideally, children should be free
of wheezing for least several days before surgery, even if this necessitates

Table 91.1  Goals of Anesthesia
Analgesia
Amnesia
Hypnosis
Akinesia
Maintenance of physiologic homeostasis
Vigilance

Most anesthetic agents possess myocardial depressant properties. All
patients should be screened for the presence of heart disease. Important cardiovascular considerations include history of congenital heart
disease (CHD), cyanosis, arrhythmias, or cardiomyopathy. Room-­air
pulse oximetry should be performed as part of the preanesthetic evaluation. Accurate diagnosis of cardiac murmurs in neonates is essential.
A history of cardiac dysrhythmias should be investigated because inhalational anesthetics may be arrhythmogenic. A pediatric cardiologist
should evaluate children with known CHD undergoing surgery. Preoperative ancillary studies may include chest x-­ray, electrocardiogram
(ECG), echocardiogram, or cardiac catheterization. Lesions associated
with increased anesthetic risk include single-­ventricle heart disease,
fixed obstructive outflow tract lesions (aortic valve and pulmonary
valve stenosis), and cardiomyopathy. Children with these conditions
should be cared for by a cardiac anesthesia service. Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of bacterial endocarditis should be administered when appropriate in accordance with the American Heart
Association (AHA) guidelines.

Hematologic System

Evidence of coagulopathy should be sought. Easy bruising, familial
bleeding disorders, and anticoagulant (e.g., aspirin, heparin, direct oral
anticoagulant [DOAC], warfarin) use should be discussed. Preoperative
adequacy of hemostatic function (e.g., platelet count, fibrinogen, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time) and correction of coagulopathic disorders may be indicated for complex procedures associated
with significant risk of perioperative hemorrhage. In neonates, assurance of vitamin K prophylaxis and adequate coagulation status is critical before any major surgery. Although anemia may be well tolerated
in healthy children, anesthesia and surgery increase oxygen consumption. Preoperative anemia should be corrected when oxygen delivery
is limited or blood loss is expected. In the patient with life-­threatening
hemorrhage (trauma), massive transfusion protocols of 1:1:1 replacement of packed red blood cells:fresh-­frozen plasma:platelets should be
used. Initiation of early antifibrinolytic therapy in the setting of life-­
threatening hemorrhage has been linked to reduced early morality.

Neurologic System

A history of neurologic and neuromuscular disorders should be
sought. Preoperative developmental assessments may be helpful in
interpreting age-­dependent variation in the response to pain. Maintenance of appropriate perioperative anticonvulsant therapy is essential

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91 u Anesthesia and ­Perioperative Care

665

Table 91.2  The Preanesthetic History
Child’s Previous Anesthetic and Surgical Procedures
• Review previous anesthetic records:
Ease of mask ventilation
Grade of laryngoscopy; type and size of laryngoscope;
endotracheal tube size
Issues during emergence (awakening) from anesthesia
(postoperative vomiting, emergence delirium)
History of hyperthermia or acidosis in the child or family members
Perinatal Problems (Especially for Infants)
• Prematurity
• Need for supplemental oxygen or intubation and ventilation
• History of apnea and bradycardia
• History of cardiovascular compromise
• Other major illnesses and hospitalizations
• Family history of anesthetic complications, malignant
hyperthermia, or pseudocholinesterase deficiency
Respiratory Problems
• Long-­term exposure to environmental tobacco smoke
• Obstructive breathing score
• STBUR (snoring, trouble breathing, unrefreshed)
• Cyanosis (especially in infants <6 mo of age)
• Recurrent respiratory infections
• Recent lower respiratory tract infection
• Previous laryngotracheitis (croup) or laryngomalacia
• Reactive airway disease
• Airway abnormalities, facial anomalies, mucopolysaccharidosis
Cardiac Problems
• Murmur or history of congenital heart disease
• Dysrhythmia
• Exercise intolerance
• Syncope
• Cyanosis
Gastrointestinal Problems
• Reflux and vomiting
• Feeding difficulties
• Failure to thrive
• Liver disease
• Exposure to infectious pathogens

in children with seizure disorders because the seizure threshold may
be lowered perioperatively. Children with obstructive hydrocephalus
typically require ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt insertion to divert
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and to prevent intracranial hypertension
(ICH). Repeated shunt malfunction is common, and these children
may present for shunt revision with signs of ICH (vomiting, altered
mentation, sundowning). Similarly, shunt patency and function should
be ensured preoperatively in children with VP shunts presenting for
non-­neurosurgical procedures.

Psychologic Assessment

Surgery and painful medical procedures are psychologically traumatic
events for children and families. Children who require anesthesia
may experience fear and anxiety. They may also sense stressful signals from parents and caregivers. Children undergoing surgery may
exhibit negative behavioral changes postoperatively. These maladaptive behavioral responses may include enuresis, separation anxiety,
temper tantrums, and nighttime crying, as well as fear of strangers,
medical providers, and hospitals. Sleep quality may be altered postoperatively, resulting in further behavioral compromise. Preoperative
psychologic preparation programs have been developed to reduce
the incidence of perioperative behavioral changes. Parental presence
during induction (PPI) has not been shown to improve postoperative behavior. Oral preoperative midazolam (0.5 mg/kg) produces

Neuromuscular Problems
• Neuromuscular diseases
• Developmental delay
• Myopathy
• Seizure disorder
Hematologic Problems
• Anemia
• Bleeding diathesis
• Tumor
• Immunocompromise
• Prior blood transfusions and reactions
Renal Problems
• Renal insufficiency, oliguria, anuria
• Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities
Psychosocial Considerations
• Drug abuse, use of cigarettes or alcohol
• Physical or sexual abuse
• Family dysfunction
• Previous traumatic medical or surgical experience
• Psychosis, anxiety, depression
Gynecologic Considerations
• Sexual history (sexually transmitted infections)
• Possibility of pregnancy
Current Medications
• Prior administration of corticosteroids
Allergies
• Drugs
• Iodine
• Latex products
• Surgical tape
• Food (especially soy and egg albumin)
Other
• Dental condition (loose or cracked teeth)
• When and what the child last ate (especially in emergency
procedures)

rapid-­onset anxiolysis and amnesia and may decrease negative behavioral changes.

Genetic Evaluation

Children with genetic conditions may have syndrome-­specific anesthetic considerations. For example, children with trisomy 21 may
have cardiac anomalies, macroglossia, upper airway obstruction,
and hypothyroidism (see Chapter 99.2). Atlantoaxial instability,
common in trisomy 21, has been linked to cervical dislocation and
spinal cord trauma with neck extension during intubation. Some
anesthesiologists recommend extension and flexion lateral neck
films to detect instability before surgery. For children with other
known genetic disorders, it is essential to review specific anesthetic
considerations.

PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION
Preoperative Fasting

Preoperative fasting guidelines have been developed to reduce the incidence of aspiration of gastric contents during anesthesia. Aspiration
may lead to laryngospasm, bronchospasm, and postoperative pneumonitis. Aspiration of gastric contents may be a potentially lethal complication in children with chronic lung disease or critical illness. Table
91.6 lists preoperative fasting guidelines (e.g., nothing by mouth, or nil
per os [NPO] status). Clear, sweet liquids (e.g., Pedialyte, 5% dextrose

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

666 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 91.3  Specific Pediatric Diseases and Their Anesthetic Implications
DISEASE

IMPLICATIONS

RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Asthma
Intraoperative bronchospasm that may be life
threatening
Pneumothorax or atelectasis
Optimal preoperative medical management is
essential
Difficult airway
Special equipment and personnel may be
required
Should be anticipated with dysmorphic
features or storage diseases
Patients with trisomy 21 may require
atlantooccipital joint evaluation
Increased risk with acute airway obstruction,
epiglottitis, laryngotracheobronchitis, or
airway foreign body
Bronchopulmonary Barotrauma with positive pressure ventilation
dysplasia
Oxygen toxicity, pneumothorax a risk
Cystic fibrosis
Airway reactivity, bronchorrhea, increased
intraoperative pulmonary shunt and hypoxia
Risk of pneumothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage
Atelectasis, risk of prolonged postoperative
ventilation
Patient should be assessed for cor pulmonale
Sleep apnea
Pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale
must be excluded
Careful postoperative observation for
obstruction required
CARDIAC
Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis as indicated
Use of air filters; careful purging of air from the
intravenous equipment
Physician must understand the effects of
various anesthetics on the hemodynamics
of specific lesions
Possible need for preoperative evaluation of
myocardial function and pulmonary vascular
resistance
Provide information about pacemaker function
and ventricular device function
HEMATOLOGIC
Sickle cell disease

Oncology

Possible need for simple or exchange
transfusion based on preoperative
hemoglobin concentration and percentage
of hemoglobin S
Avoid hypoxemia, hypothermia, dehydration,
and hyperviscosity states
Pulmonary evaluation of patients who have
received bleomycin, bis-­chloroethyl-­nitrosourea,
chloroethyl-­cyclohexyl-­nitrosourea,
methotrexate, or radiation to the chest
Avoidance of high oxygen concentration
Cardiac evaluation of patients who have
received anthracyclines; risk of severe
myocardial depression with volatile agents
Potential for coagulopathy

DISEASE

RENAL
Altered electrolyte and acid-­base status
Altered clearance of many anesthetic drugs
Need for preoperative dialysis in selected cases
Succinylcholine to be used with extreme
caution and only when the serum potassium
level has recently been shown to be normal
NEUROLOGIC
Seizure disorder

Increased
intracranial
pressure
Neuromuscular
disease
Developmental
delay
Psychiatric

ENDOCRINE
Diabetes

SKIN
Burns

in water [D5W]) facilitate gastric emptying, prevent hypoglycemia,
and may be given up to 2 hours before anesthesia. Breast milk may be
given to infants up to 4 hours before surgery. Solids should be avoided
for 6-­8 hours before surgery. Conditions associated with delayed gastric emptying may require prolonged periods of fasting. The optimal

Avoidance of anesthetics that may lower the
seizure threshold
Optimal control ascertained preoperatively
Preoperative serum anticonvulsant
measurements
Avoidance of agents that increase cerebral
blood flow
Maintain cerebral perfusion pressure.
Avoidance of depolarizing relaxants; at risk for
hyperkalemia
Patient may be at risk for malignant hyperthermia;
avoid volatile anesthetics in myopathies
Patient may be uncooperative during induction
and emergence
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor (or cocaine)
may interact with meperidine, resulting in
hyperthermia and seizures
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may
induce or inhibit various hepatic enzymes that
may alter anesthetic drug clearance
Illicit drugs may have adverse effects on
cardiorespiratory homeostasis and may
potentiate the action of anesthetics
Greatest risk is unrecognized intraoperative
hypoglycemia; intraoperative blood glucose
level monitoring needed especially when
insulin is administered
Difficult airway
Fluid shifts
Bleeding
Risk of rhabdomyolysis and hyperkalemia from
succinylcholine after burns for many months

IMMUNOLOGIC
Retroviral drugs may inhibit benzodiazepine
clearance
Immunodeficiency requires careful infection
control practices
Cytomegalovirus-­negative blood products,
irradiation, or leukofiltration may be required

RHEUMATOLOGIC
Limited mobility of the temporomandibular
joint, cervical spine, arytenoid cartilages
Careful preoperative evaluation required
Possible difficult airway

IMPLICATIONS

GASTROINTESTINAL
Esophageal,
Potential for reflux and aspiration
gastric
Liver
Altered metabolism of many anesthetic drugs
Potential for coagulopathy and uncontrollable
intraoperative bleeding

METABOLIC
Careful assessment of glucose homeostasis in
infants

duration of preoperative fasting in otherwise well patients without risk
factors for delayed gastric emptying remains a source of controversy.
Many efforts have sought to shorten NPO duration for clear liquids
from 2 hours to 1 hour in order to preserve fluid and glycemic balance
in children presenting for surgery.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91 u Anesthesia and ­Perioperative Care
Table 91.4  American Society of Anesthesiology Physical
Status Classification

Table 91.6  Guidelines for Preoperative Fasting
(“2-­4-­6-­8 Rule”)*

Class 1: Healthy patient, no systemic disease
Class 2: Mild systemic disease with no functional limitations (mild
chronic renal failure, iron-­deficiency anemia, mild asthma)
Class 3: Severe systemic disease with functional limitations
(hypertension, poorly controlled asthma or diabetes, congenital
heart disease, cystic fibrosis)
Class 4: Severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life
(critically and/or acutely ill patients with major systemic disease)
Class 5: Moribund patients not expected to survive 24 hr, with or
without surgery
Additional classification: “E”—emergency surgery

TIME BEFORE SURGERY (hr)

Copyright American Society of Anesthesiology, http://www.asahq.org.

Table 91.5  Common Difficult Airway Syndromes
Achondroplasia
Airway tumors, hemangiomas
Apert syndrome
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Choanal atresia
Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Cystic hygroma/teratoma
DiGeorge syndrome
Fractured mandible
Goldenhar syndrome
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Pierre Robin syndrome
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
Treacher-­Collins syndrome
Trisomy 21
Turner syndrome

The Full Stomach

Gastric emptying may be delayed for up to 96 hours after an acute episode of trauma or surgical illness. To mitigate risk of aspiration, it is
desirable to secure the airway as rapidly as possible during induction of
anesthesia in patients at risk for having a full stomach. Under these circumstances, rapid sequence induction of anesthesia is indicated (rapid
sequence induction; see Chapter 86).

Parental Presence During Induction of Anesthesia

Parents or guardians may expect to be with their child during the
induction of anesthesia. Removing a fearful child from a parent is
stressful for the child and caregivers. Premedication with an oral
benzodiazepine (e.g., midazolam) frequently provides calm, smooth
parental separation conditions. When parental separation cannot be
achieved comfortably with premedication and behavioral modification
(patient education and desensitization to the operative environment),
PPI may be indicated. Although PPI in the hands of a confident, competent anesthesia practitioner may replace the need for preoperative
medication, it does not reliably predict smooth induction. PPI has not
been shown to decrease emergence delirium or postoperative behavioral changes, and it does not appear to be superior to premedication
with oral midazolam.

GENERAL ANESTHESIA
Analgesia

Pediatric anesthesiologists are responsible for providing analgesia to
children for procedures within operating room (OR) and non-­OR settings (Table 91.7). Multimodal techniques exist to provide pain relief
during operative procedures for children of all ages, including critically
ill infants. Effective analgesia is essential to blunt physiologic responses

667

ORAL INTAKE

2

Clear, sweet liquids

4

Breast milk

6

Infant formula, fruit juices, gelatin

8

Solid food

*These are general guidelines and may differ among hospitals.

to painful stimuli (surgery) and modulate the deleterious physiologic
and metabolic consequences. The response to painful and stressful
stimuli may provoke systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS), which has been linked to increased catabolism, physiologic
instability, and mortality (see Chapter 85).

Hypnosis and Amnesia

The attenuation of both consciousness (hypnosis) and conscious
recall (amnesia) is critical during pediatric anesthesia care. Awareness during procedures may be as physically and psychologically
deleterious as the experience of pain. A primary goal of anesthetic
management is to minimize fear and anxiety during both painful and
nonpainful procedures. Many drugs provide anxiolysis and amnesia
for such events (Table 91.8). However, it is important to remember that
sedative-­hypnotic agents may alter consciousness without producing
analgesia; analgesia and hypnosis are not synonymous. It is also possible to provide analgesia (local, spinal, or epidural) without altering
consciousness.
Sedation describes a medically induced state in the continuum
between wakefulness and general anesthesia in which patients maintain
the ability to respond purposefully to varying degrees of stimulation
(see Table 91.7). Light (minimal) sedation is defined as anxiolysis with
minimally reduced reflexes or airway patency with normal response
to verbal commands. In moderate sedation, the patient continues to
respond purposefully to verbal commands, either alone or with light
touch. Deep sedation is defined by preservation of purposeful movement with repeated or painful stimulation. General anesthesia is
characterized by unconsciousness, amnesia, and reduced physiologic
reflexes, including cardiorespiratory reflexes (airway-­protective and
vasomotor reflexes). It is common to transition between states of sedation and general anesthesia with loss of consciousness, airway patency,
and airway-­protective reflexes; in this scenario, loss of cardiovascular
stability may occur. Individuals providing sedation and anesthesia for
children must be able to identify the anesthetic state of the patient and
support cardiorespiratory insufficiency.

Akinesia (Immobility or Muscular Relaxation)

Akinesia, the absence of movement, is commonly indicated to ensure
safe and adequate operative conditions. Neuromuscular blocking
agents (NMBAs) may be used to produce akinesia (see Table 91.8).
However, the absence of movement is not indicative of hypnosis,
amnesia, or analgesia. Whenever NMBAs are used, sedation and analgesia must be provided.

Monitoring

Administration of anesthesia increases the need to monitor and support physiologic integrity and homeostasis because of potentially
life-­threatening physiologic consequences (see Tables 91.7 and 91.8).
Consequently, the ASA mandates routine monitoring of oxygenation,
ventilation, and circulation during the provision of anesthesia. This
includes assessment of continuous pulse oximetry, capnography, electrocardiography, intermittent blood pressure measurements (every 5
minutes), and temperature when temperature instability is anticipated.
The use of advanced invasive (arterial and central venous pressure) or
noninvasive (near-­infrared spectroscopy) monitoring varies based on
procedural complexity and ASA-­PS.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

668 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 91.7  Definitions of Anesthesia Care
MONITORED ANESTHESIA CARE
A designated anesthesia service in which an anesthesiologist has
been requested to participate in the care of a patient undergoing a
diagnostic or therapeutic procedure.
Monitored anesthesia care includes all aspects of anesthesia care: a
preprocedure assessment, intraprocedure care, and postprocedure
anesthesia management.
During monitored anesthesia care, the anesthesiologist or a member
of the anesthesia care team provides a number of specific services,
which may include but are not limited to the following:
• Discussing anesthesia care with the family and child, obtaining consent
for anesthesia, allaying anxiety and answering questions—family-­
centered anesthesia care.
• Monitoring of vital signs, maintenance of the patient’s airway, and
continual evaluation of vital functions.
• Diagnosing and treating clinical problems that occur during the
procedure.
• Administering sedatives, analgesics, hypnotics, anesthetic agents, or
other medications as necessary to ensure patient safety and comfort.
• Providing other medical services as needed to accomplish the safe
completion of the procedure.

Anesthesia care often includes the administration of medications
for which the loss of normal protective reflexes or loss of
consciousness is likely.
Monitored anesthesia care refers to those clinical situations in which
the patient remains able to protect the airway for the majority of
the procedure.
If the patient is rendered unconscious and/or loses normal protective
reflexes for an extended period, this is considered a general
anesthetic.
LIGHT SEDATION
Administration of anxiolysis or analgesia that obtunds consciousness
but does not obtund normal protective reflexes (cough, gag,
swallow, hemodynamic) or spontaneous ventilation; patient
responds normally to verbal commands.

Specific Medications
Inhalational Anesthetics

Inhalational anesthetics are frequently used for the induction and
maintenance of general anesthesia in children. Pediatric inhalational
anesthetics include sevoflurane, isoflurane, and desflurane. Although
halothane is the prototypical pediatric inhalational anesthetic and may
be used in other parts of the world, it has been replaced by sevoflurane
and is no longer used in the United States and Europe.
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of an inhalational
anesthetic is the alveolar concentration (expressed as percent at 1
atmosphere) that provides sufficient depth of anesthesia for surgery
in 50% of patients. For potent inhalational agents, the alveolar concentration of an anesthetic reflects the arterial concentration of anesthetic in the blood perfusing the brain. MAC is a measure of anesthetic
potency analogous to the ED50 (effective dose in 50% of recipients) of a
drug. MAC is age dependent; it is lower in premature than in full-­term
infants and decreases from term through infancy to preadolescence. In
adolescence, MAC again increases, falling thereafter.
Respiratory Effects. The advantages of inhalational anesthesia are
rapid onset and offset with the convenient route of delivery and respiratory excretion. These agents provide profound analgesia and amnesia. Inhalational volatile anesthetic agents are poorly soluble in blood
but rapidly equilibrate between alveolar gas and blood. They may irritate the airway and provoke laryngospasm. All inhalational anesthetics
depress ventilation in a dose-­dependent manner. Thus expired carbon
dioxide (CO2) and Paco2 (arterial partial pressure of CO2) will increase
in spontaneously breathing children. Volatile anesthetics shift the
CO2 response curve to the right, thus decreasing the normal increase
in minute ventilation with increasing Paco2. Inhalational anesthesia
decreases end-­expiratory lung volume (functional residual capacity).
Small lung volumes are associated with reduced lung compliance,

MODERATE SEDATION
No interventions are required to maintain a patent airway or
spontaneous ventilation; patient responds purposefully to verbal
commands either on their own or with light touch.
DEEP SEDATION
Sedation that obtunds consciousness and normal protective reflexes
or possesses a significant risk of blunting normal protective
reflexes (cough, gag, swallow, hemodynamic); hemodynamic and
respiratory insufficiency may occur.
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
Administration of hypnosis, sedation, and analgesia that results in
the loss of normal protective reflexes.
REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
Induction of neural blockade (either central, neuraxial, epidural, or
spinal; or peripheral nerve block, e.g., digital nerve block, brachial
plexus block), which provides analgesia and is associated with
regional motor blockade.
Consciousness is not obtunded.
Special expertise is required.
Frequently, in children, anxiolysis and sedation are also necessary for
this technique to be successful.
Regional anesthesia (e.g., caudal epidural blockade) is used to
supplement general anesthesia and provide postoperative
analgesia.
LOCAL ANESTHESIA
Provision of analgesia by local infiltration of an appropriate
anesthetic agent.
Does not require the presence or involvement of an anesthesiologist,
although an anesthesiologist may provide local anesthesia services.

increased pulmonary vascular resistance, and restrictive lung defects.
Volatile agents depress normal hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
increasing intrapulmonary arteriovenous shunting and hypoxemia.
Cardiovascular Effects. All volatile anesthetics reduce cardiac
output and peripheral vascular resistance; hypotension is common.
This is accentuated in hypovolemic patients and more pronounced in
neonates. Inhalational anesthetics also depress baroreceptor and heart
rate responses. The administration of inhalational anesthesia may result
in decreased tissue oxygen delivery. Perioperatively, cellular metabolism increases, creating a potential imbalance between oxygen demand
and oxygen delivery. Development of intraoperative dysoxia is a sign of
this imbalance. All volatile inhalational anesthetic agents cause cerebrovasodilation and uncouple cerebral blow flow with cerebral metabolic rate. Although inhalational anesthetics decrease cerebral oxygen
consumption, they may disproportionately increase cerebral oxygen
blood flow. Thus inhalational anesthetics should be used with caution
in children who have elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) or impaired
cerebral perfusion (i.e., traumatic brain injury).

Sevoflurane

Sevoflurane is the most commonly used inhalational agent for induction and maintenance of general anesthesia in children. Sevoflurane
possesses minimal airway irritant properties and is a useful induction
agent when co-­administered with nitrous oxide. Emergence from sevoflurane anesthesia is rapid; however, there is a significant incidence of
emergence delirium, especially with inadequate pain control. This
effect may be attenuated with adequate analgesia and supplemental hypnotic agents (e.g., midazolam, dexmedetomidine, propofol).
Metabolism of sevoflurane by cytochrome P450 (CYP) yields free
fluoride, which may be nephrotoxic. Sevoflurane degradation by desiccated CO2 absorbents at low fresh gas flows (<2 L/min) may produce

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91 u Anesthesia and ­Perioperative Care

669

Table 91.8  Selected Drugs Used in Anesthesia
DRUG

USES AND IMPLICATIONS

MUSCLE RELAXANTS
Succinylcholine

Vecuronium, rocuronium,
cisatracurium, all
aminosteroids

HYPNOTICS
Propofol

A depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent with rapid onset and offset properties
Used to facilitate endotracheal intubation and maintain muscle relaxation in emergency situations; rarely used
Associated with the development of malignant hyperthermia in susceptible patients
Degraded by plasma cholinesterase, which may be deficient in some individuals; such a deficiency may result in
prolonged effect
Fasciculations may be associated with immediate increases in intracranial and intraocular pressures and
postoperative muscle pain
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers
Have less rapid onset than succinylcholine but are longer acting
Prolonged ICU use may lead to profound muscle weakness
Vecuronium and rocuronium are metabolized by the liver and excreted in bile; they are the most commonly used
neuromuscular blocking agents
Cisatracurium is metabolized by plasma cholinesterase and therefore may be of benefit in patients with hepatic or
renal disease
Rapid-­acting hypnotic amnestic agent
No analgesic properties
Respiratory depressant
Increases seizure threshold
Antiemetic
Propofol infusion syndrome may occur with prolonged intravenous infusion (>24 hr)
Cardiovascular stability on induction
Inhibits corticosteroid synthesis
Increases ICU mortality after use
Associated with myoclonus and pain on injection
Hypnotic analgesic
Causes sialorrhea and may be co-­administered with an antisialagogue, such as atropine or glycopyrrolate
Induces endogenous catecholamine release and tachycardia
Bronchodilator
Increases intracranial and intraocular pressures
Decreases the seizure threshold

Etomidate

Ketamine

SEDATIVE-­ANXIOLYTICS
Benzodiazepines

Dexmedetomidine

ANALGESIC-­SEDATIVES
Opioids

INHALATIONAL AGENTS
Nitrous oxide
Potent vapors,
sevoflurane, desflurane,
isoflurane

Produce sedation, anxiolysis, amnesia, and hypnosis
All agents raise the seizure threshold, are metabolized by the liver, and depress respiration, especially when
administered with opioids
Effective as premedication
Diazepam may be painful on injection and has active metabolites
Midazolam can be administered by various routes
Lorazepam has no active metabolites
Reversed with flumazenil
Produces anxiolysis, sedation, and sympatholysis by α2-­receptor stimulation centrally; has mild analgesic properties
Side effects include hypertension, hypotension, and bradycardia
Commonly used for procedural sedation; IV, IN, and IM dosing available
Continuous infusion useful for ICU sedation
Gold standard for providing analgesia
All cause respiratory depression
Morphine and, to a lesser extent, hydromorphone may cause histamine release
The synthetic opioids fentanyl, sufentanil, and short-­acting alfentanil may have a greater propensity to cause chest wall
rigidity when administered rapidly or in high doses and are also associated with the rapid development of tolerance;
these drugs have particular utility in cardiac surgery because of the hemodynamic stability associated with their use
Remifentanil is an ultrashort-­acting synthetic opioid that is metabolized by plasma cholinesterase; it may have
particular utility when deep sedation and analgesia are required along with the ability to assess neurologic status
intermittently
Produces amnesia and analgesia at low concentrations
Danger of hypoxic gas mixture if the oxygen concentration is not monitored and preventive safety mechanisms are
not in place
“Complete anesthetics”—induce hypnosis, analgesia, and amnesia
All are myocardial depressants, and some are vasodilators
May trigger malignant hyperthermia in susceptible individuals
Sevoflurane is used for induction of anesthesia in children
All bronchodilate at equipotent concentrations
Isoflurane and desflurane are associated with laryngospasm and should not be used for anesthesia induction

IV, Intravenous; IN, intranasal; IM, intramuscular.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

670 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the nephrotoxin Compound A. Large-­scale studies of sevoflurane-­
associated renal injury in humans are lacking. However, the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has recommended maintenance of
fresh gas flow rates >2 L/min for surgical cases lasting more than 2
hours of monitored anesthesia care.

Isoflurane

Isoflurane is a pungent volatile anesthetic and airway irritant and is not
suitable for induction because of the high incidence of complications,
such as laryngospasm. However, maintenance of anesthesia with isoflurane is common after induction with sevoflurane or an intravenous
(IV) hypnotic. Emergence from anesthesia with isoflurane is slower
than for sevoflurane. Isoflurane administration in the setting of desiccated CO2 absorbents may yield the production of carbon monoxide.

Desflurane

Etomidate

Etomidate is an imidazole derivative used for the induction of anesthesia, frequently in emergent situations. Its onset of action is slower
than propofol. Etomidate lacks significant cardiovascular depressant
effects, making it a popular induction agent in patients with hemodynamic compromise and cardiac disease. However, etomidate inhibits
11β-­hydroxylase, thereby suppressing mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid synthesis for up to 72 hours after a single induction dose.
Etomidate is associated with increased mortality when used as a sedative in the ICU (for which it is contraindicated); the effect of a single
induction dose on mortality remains controversial. Any decision to use
etomidate must weigh the short-­term benefits of hemodynamic stability with the serious risks of adrenal suppression.

Ketamine

IV anesthetics may be administered for induction and maintenance
of anesthesia in bolus form or as continuous infusions. Common IV
agents include propofol, opioids, benzodiazepines, ketamine, dexmedetomidine, and barbiturates. For children with vascular access, IV
induction should be routine. All IV agents affect cardiorespiratory
function.

Ketamine (1-­3 mg/kg IV) produces rapid induction of general anesthesia that lasts for 15-­30 minutes. Ketamine is effective when given
intramuscularly (IM), subcutaneously (SC), intranasally (IN), or orally
(PO). However, the dose must be increased for alternative routes. Ketamine dissociates connections between the cerebral cortex and limbic
system (dissociative anesthesia) through inhibition of N-­methyl-­d-­
aspartate receptors. Ketamine is also an analgesic and may be used as
a sole IV agent to provide general anesthesia. It has few side effects
and generally preserves blood pressure and cardiac output. However,
ketamine increases myocardial oxygen demand and should be used
cautiously in patients with impaired myocardial oxygen delivery or
ventricular outflow tract obstruction. With low-­
dose (1-­
2 mg/kg)
ketamine, airway reflexes and spontaneous ventilation may be maintained; at higher doses (3-­5 mg/kg), loss of airway reflexes, apnea, and
respiratory depression occur. Aspiration of gastric contents remains a
risk during deep sedation with ketamine. IV ketamine is a useful general anesthetic agent for short procedures.
Ketamine has been linked to disturbing postanesthetic dreams and
hallucinations after emergence from anesthesia. In adults the incidence
of this effect is 30–50%; in prepubertal children it may be 5–10%.
Benzodiazepines (e.g., midazolam) reduce these sequelae and may be
given to children receiving ketamine. Ketamine is also a potent secretagogue, enhancing oral and bronchial secretions. An antisialagogue,
such as atropine or glycopyrrolate, should also be considered before
the administration of ketamine. Ketamine is a bronchodilator and is
a useful agent for sedating patients with asthma in the ICU. Ketamine
has been reported to increase ICP and therefore is contraindicated in
patients with elevated ICP.

Propofol

Opioids

Desflurane is a potent airway irritant associated with coughing, breath
holding, and laryngospasm and is not useful for induction. Desflurane
has the lowest solubility and potency of all commonly used volatile
agents. It is frequently administered for maintenance of anesthesia.
Emergence from desflurane anesthesia is rapid because of its low tissue
solubility.

Nitrous Oxide

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a tasteless, colorless, odorless gas with potent
analgesic properties. It produces a state of euphoria (thus its nickname,
“laughing gas”). The MAC of N2O is >100; consequently, it may not be
used as a sole agent to maintain anesthesia. N2O produces little hemodynamic or respiratory depression. It is typically used in combination
with volatile and IV anesthetic agents during maintenance of general
anesthesia. The deleterious effects of N2O include postoperative nausea
and vomiting (PONV) and, with long-­term use (i.e., days), bone marrow suppression. N2O diffuses out of blood rapidly and is contraindicated in patients with closed gas-­filled body cavities (pneumothorax,
lung cysts, bowel injury).

Intravenous Anesthetic Agents

Propofol is the most commonly administered IV induction agent.
Administered in doses of 2-­5 mg/kg, propofol rapidly produces
unconsciousness. Propofol may burn and itch on injection. After
induction of anesthesia, propofol is a useful agent for maintaining
hypnosis and amnesia and may be used as a sole anesthetic agent
for nonpainful procedures (e.g., radiation therapy) and imaging
studies. When combined with opioids, propofol provides excellent
anesthesia for brief painful procedures, such as lumbar puncture
and bone marrow aspiration. Although hemodynamic stability, and
even spontaneous respirations, may be maintained during propofol
administration, it remains a potent anesthetic that can obtund airway reflexes, respiration, and hemodynamic function. As such, some
hospitals have limited its use to anesthesia professionals. Propofol
may produce both respiratory depression and hypotension. Extrapyramidal symptoms are a rarer complication. Prolonged use may
cause hemodynamic collapse, bradycardia, metabolic acidosis, cardiac failure, rhabdomyolysis, hyperlipidemia, profound shock, and
death (propofol infusion syndrome). Prolonged propofol administration (>24-­48 hours) in the ICU in children is not recommended.
Propofol is formulated in 10% soy emulsion with egg emulsifiers and
was once thought to be contraindicated in patients with soy or egg
allergy. According to the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and
Immunology, patients with soy and egg allergies may safely receive
propofol for anesthesia.

Opioids are superb analgesics for painful procedures and postprocedural pain (see Chapters 92 and 93). Opioids are respiratory depressants that suppress CO2 responsiveness and can produce apnea.
Importantly, in equianalgesic doses, all opioids are equally potent
respiratory depressants. Other inhalational or IV anesthetics generally
potentiate opioid-­induced respiratory depression.
Morphine is a long-­acting opioid analgesic with important age-­
dependent pharmacokinetics. Equivalent doses of morphine per kilogram are associated with higher blood levels in neonates than in older
children, with plasma concentrations approximating three times those
of adults. Morphine exhibits a longer elimination half-­life (14 hours)
in young children than in adults (2 hours). The immature blood-­brain
barrier of neonates is more permeable to morphine. Morphine is
often associated with hypotension and bronchospasm from histamine
release and should be used with caution in children with asthma. Morphine has renally excreted active metabolites and is relatively contraindicated in renal failure. Because of morphine’s prolonged duration of
action and cardiorespiratory side effects, the fentanyl class of synthetic
opioids has increased in popularity for perioperative analgesia.
Fentanyl is a potent synthetic opioid with a shorter duration of
action and a more stable hemodynamic profile than morphine. Fentanyl attenuates the hemodynamic response to surgery and provides
stable operating conditions. Effective analgesia and anesthesia may be
provided with IV fentanyl administered as a 2-­3 μg/kg bolus followed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91 u Anesthesia and ­Perioperative Care

671

by a 1-­3 μg/kg/hr continuous infusion. Nitrous-­narcotic anesthetic
techniques that incorporate fentanyl are effective for maintenance
of stable hemodynamics while still providing adequate hypnosis and
analgesia. Fentanyl is the most commonly used synthetic opioid, but
other formulations of varying potency are available (alfentanil < fentanyl < sufentanil). Sufentanil is ten times more potent than fentanyl
and is frequently used during pediatric cardiac anesthesia. Alfentanil
is approximately 25% as potent as fentanyl. Remifentanil has very rapid
onset and offset of action. In doses of 0.25 μg/kg/min, surgical anesthesia can be maintained with this agent. Remifentanil is metabolized
through nonspecific ester hydrolysis and has a short elimination half-­
life (<10 minutes), advantageous for rapid emergence from anesthesia.
Unfortunately, this short duration of action has been linked to inadequate postprocedural analgesia and increased need for postprocedural
opioid analgesic supplementation, limiting remifentanil’s use.

cisatracurium). Succinylcholine has a high-­risk profile in children. Its
use is associated with postoperative pain from muscle spasms; hyperkalemia; elevated intracranial, intraocular, and intragastric pressures;
malignant hyperthermia; myoglobinuria; and renal damage. Consequently, succinylcholine is rarely used, except to provide rapid relief
of laryngospasm. Endotracheal intubation is most often facilitated
with nondepolarizing NMBAs. Rocuronium is most commonly used
for intubation because of its rapid onset of action. For procedures that
last >40 minutes, vecuronium and cisatracurium are also suitable
to induce muscle relaxation for intubation. After intubation, repeat
administration of NMBAs may be indicated to maintain muscle relaxation to facilitate surgery. Prolonged use of nondepolarizing NMBAs in
critical illness may contribute to myopathy, especially when combined
with high-­dose corticosteroids.

Benzodiazepines

The goal of induction of general anesthesia is the safe transition to a state
of unconsciousness. Induction in children is typically achieved with
inhalational anesthetics, although IV agents are indicated when patients
have IV access. Many children will not tolerate the establishment of vascular access before induction of anesthesia, and it is routine to induce
anesthesia by face mask with inhaled anesthetics. Before the induction
of anesthesia, monitors applied may include pulse oximetry, ECG, and
noninvasive blood pressure cuff. The child is then cautiously introduced
to the face mask, which contains a high gas flow (5-­7 L/min O2), frequently mixed with N2O. Inhalation of N2O and O2 for 60-­90 seconds
induces a state of euphoria. Nitrous oxide blunts the airway responses to
potent volatile inhalational agents, and sevoflurane may then be safely
introduced into the inhaled gas mixture. This leads to unconsciousness
within 30-­60 seconds while the child continues to breathe spontaneously.
After induction, IV access is obtained and standard intraoperative monitoring initiated. Thereafter, definitive airway management is performed.
Airway management for short procedures (i.e., myringotomy tubes) frequently includes a mask airway and spontaneous ventilation; this is safe
when the airway is secure and patent and aspiration risk is low. Longer
procedures (>30-­60 minutes) are not usually performed with mask airways. Definitive artificial airways include laryngeal mask airways and
endotracheal tubes (ETTs). The laryngeal mask is a supraglottic airway
generally reserved for procedures in spontaneously ventilating patients
and does not effectively prevent the aspiration of gastric contents.
For complex surgical procedures, endotracheal intubation is generally required (e.g., intraabdominal, intrathoracic, airway procedures).
Although endotracheal intubation may be performed under deep inhalational anesthesia, the depth of anesthesia required to attenuate airway reflexes may produce hemodynamic instability. Therefore NMBAs
are frequently administered to facilitate intubation. The depolarizing
NMBA succinylcholine is rarely used, and nondepolarizing NMBAs
such as rocuronium and vecuronium are most frequently used (see
earlier). After muscle relaxation, direct laryngoscopy and endotracheal
intubation can be performed. Correct ETT placement is confirmed by
direct laryngoscopy, end-­tidal CO2 measurement, and assessment of
bilaterally equal breath sounds. Additional confirmatory tests include
chest radiograph and fiberoptic bronchoscopy. After endotracheal
intubation, controlled mechanical ventilation is required in the setting
of neuromuscular blockade (see Chapter 86).
Children with full stomach precautions may require rapid sequence
induction. Before performing a rapid sequence induction, preoxygenation with 100% oxygen for 2-­5 minutes increases alveolar oxygen
content and delays hypoxemia if intubation is difficult. Rapid sequence
induction involves concurrent administration of hypnotic agents and
NMBAs. Assisted ventilation before or after drug administration is
avoided because of the risk of gastric distention, regurgitation, and
aspiration. Traditionally, after administering a sedative and NMBA, the
Sellick maneuver (cricoid pressure) was performed by applying firm
pressure in a posterior direction against the cricoid cartilage. This displaces the cricoid cartilage into the esophagus and was thought to form
an artificial sphincter to prevent reflux of the gastroesophageal contents. However, evidence suggests that cricoid pressure may be counterproductive, as it does not appear to prevent pulmonary aspiration

Benzodiazepines induce hypnosis, anxiolysis, sedation, and amnesia
and have anticonvulsant properties. In high doses, benzodiazepines
cause respiratory depression and are synergistic with opioids and barbiturates in their respiratory depressant effects. Benzodiazepines are
γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonists.
Midazolam is the most commonly used benzodiazepine in pediatric
anesthesia. Short acting and water soluble, it can be injected without pain.
It is a potent hypnotic-­anxiolytic-­anticonvulsant and is approximately four
times more potent than diazepam. Midazolam may be administered orally,
nasally, rectally, intravenously, or intramuscularly. Midazolam (0.10-­0.15
mg/kg IV) has minimal effect on respiratory rate, heart rate, or blood
pressure and provides excellent preoperative anxiolysis and amnesia. Premedication with oral midazolam (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg) mixed in sweet-­flavored
syrup induces anxiolysis in approximately 90% of children without hemodynamic or respiratory depressant effects. However, children may experience loss of coordination (head control), blurred vision, and rarely,
dysphoria. A child sedated with midazolam should not be left unattended.
Most children readily accept an inhalational anesthetic by face mask after
oral midazolam premedication. The widespread use of preoperative oral
midazolam has decreased the practice of PPI.

Dexmedetomidine

Dexmedetomidine is a central α2 adrenergic receptor agonist similar
to clonidine. Dexmedetomidine lacks respiratory depressant effects
and produces anxiolysis, sedation, mild analgesia, and sympatholysis. Rapid administration may produce hypertension and bradycardia,
whereas continuous infusions may produce hypotension and bradycardia. Dexmedetomidine is frequently used for sedation in ICU patients
and for procedures. Dexmedetomidine has become a popular adjuvant
for general anesthesia during pediatric cardiac surgery.

Barbiturates

Sodium thiopental is the classic barbiturate IV induction agent,
although it is now rarely used. Side effects of thiopental include respiratory depression, apnea, and hypotension. Induction with 3-­5 mg/kg
of thiopental produces unconsciousness within seconds, lasting 5-­10
minutes. Thiopental is not useful for maintenance of anesthesia, which
requires other IV or inhalational anesthetics. Pentobarbital is a barbiturate traditionally administered IV for sedation in children during
imaging procedures of intermediate duration (e.g., diagnostic studies)
that require akinesia. Pentobarbital is a potent respiratory depressant,
particularly when combined with opioids and benzodiazepines. Pentobarbital has a prolonged duration of action. Pentobarbital sedation for
nonpainful procedures generally results in delayed emergence. Sodium
methohexital (Brevital) is another IV induction agent, similar to sodium
thiopental in respiratory depressant effects. Barbiturates lack analgesic
properties, and painful procedures require supplemental analgesia.

Neuromuscular Blocking Agents

Neuromuscular blockade is performed to facilitate endotracheal intubation and akinesia during surgery. NMBAs may be depolarizing (e.g.,
succinylcholine) or nondepolarizing (e.g., vecuronium, rocuronium,

INDUCTION OF GENERAL ANESTHESIA

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

672 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
and may increase time to intubation. Because of this controversy, the
clinician must consider the risks and benefits of cricoid pressure in
each case.
The major risk of rapid sequence induction is intubation failure. In
this situation the child is paralyzed without a protected airway, and
ventilation may be hazardous or impossible. Only experienced airway specialists should undertake rapid sequence induction. It should
be avoided in patients with a history of failed endotracheal intubation or features (micrognathia) associated with difficult intubation.
Under these circumstances, bronchoscopic awake intubation may be
indicated.

Complications During Induction

During induction of anesthesia, the transition between full wakefulness to unconsciousness is fraught with potential complications,
including laryngospasm, bronchospasm, vomiting, and aspiration.
Concerns for vomiting and aspiration dictate adherence to preanesthetic fasting guidelines and may be an indication for rapid sequence
anesthetic induction.
During induction of anesthesia, especially with inhalational anesthetics, a period of excitement may occur. This period is associated with
heightened airway reflexes, which can lead to coughing, gagging, laryngospasm, and bronchospasm. Laryngospasm is the reflex closure of the
larynx, which prevents spontaneous or assisted ventilation. The child
may make violent inspiratory efforts against a closed glottis, generating significantly negative intrathoracic pressure and resulting in postobstructive pulmonary edema. Laryngospasm can be prolonged, and
hypoxia may ensue. Laryngospasm occurs in up to 2% of all anesthetic
inductions in children <9 years old and is much less common in older
patients. Laryngospasm occurs twice as frequently in children with
active or recent upper respiratory tract infection. A history of tobacco
exposure increases the likelihood of laryngospasm significantly.
Laryngospasm can be relieved by increasing the depth of anesthesia,
either intravenously or through inhalation (although with the glottis closed,
further administration of inhalational anesthesia is not possible). Neuromuscular blockade relieves laryngospasm, and an acute situation may be
an indication for succinylcholine administration. Continuous positive
airway pressure administration may be beneficial in alleviating laryngospasm. Laryngospasm may also occur during emergence from anesthesia
because airway tone is increased during the transition to wakefulness.
Bronchospasm may result from increased airway reactivity during
the hyperexcitable stage of induction or secondary to histamine release
induced by anesthetic agents. Endotracheal intubation may provoke
bronchospasm, especially in patients with asthma, which may be associated with life-­threatening hypoxemia and inability to ventilate. Alternative airway management strategies such as laryngeal mask should
be considered when appropriate in children with severe reactive airway disease. The use of histamine-­releasing anesthetic agents has been
associated with severe bronchospasm and, in rare instances, cardiorespiratory failure. Environmental tobacco smoke is another risk factor.
Hypoxemia during induction may be secondary to reduced
. . functional
residual capacity, atelectasis, and ventilation-­perfusion (V/Q) mismatch.
Volatile anesthetics
. . blunt hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, further
contributing to V/Q abnormalities. Hypersecretion may result in airway
obstruction and should managed with antisialagogues, such as glycopyrrolate and atropine. The newer inhalation agents are less potent secretagogues, and the routine use of atropine premedication is much less
common but often indicated when ketamine is used.
Hemodynamic complications may also develop during induction of
anesthesia. Hypotension is common and may be exaggerated in the
setting of hypervolemia, decreased myocardial function, or congenital
heart disease. Inhalational anesthetics sensitize the myocardium to circulating catecholamines, and induction and excitement are associated
with a hypercatecholaminergic state.

MAINTENANCE OF ANESTHESIA

Maintenance of anesthesia is the period between induction and emergence. The child should be unaware of pain, unresponsive to painful stimuli, and physiologically supported. Anesthesia is typically

maintained with a volatile anesthetic (e.g., isoflurane, sevoflurane)
supplemented with opioid-­based analgesia. IV hypnotic agents (e.g.,
dexmedetomidine, benzodiazepines) may be administered to augment
hypnosis and amnesia. Choice of ventilatory strategy (spontaneous,
assisted, or controlled) varies according to procedure type and patient
condition (see Chapter 86). Surgical trauma may result in hypothermia
and hypovolemia caused by blood loss and significant fluid shifts (third
spacing). Management of these physiologic disturbances is the responsibility of the anesthesiologist during maintenance.

Temperature Management

Thermoregulation is critical during anesthesia. The absence of movement and inhibition of shivering reduce thermogenesis. Although
temperature sensing may remain normal, the autonomic response to
hypothermia is reduced. Anesthetic agents cause vasoparesis, which
further impairs thermoregulation and increases heat loss. In newborns, inhalational anesthetics inhibit nonshivering thermogenesis
from brown fat, increasing the risk for hypothermia. Mechanisms of
heat loss during anesthesia include radiation, convection, evaporation,
and conduction. Radiant and convective heat loss are most common
and may be minimized by preheating the operating room and by use
of radiant heat lamps and forced-­air warming blankets. Humidification
and warming of inspired gases may also be useful.

Fluid Management

Most anesthetics produce vasodilation and increase venous capacitance, effectively reducing myocardial preload. Surgical bleeding and
insensible/third space fluid losses further contribute to intravascular
volume depletion. Volume expansion with isotonic salt-­containing
solutions (normal saline, lactated Ringer, Plasma-­
Lyte) may be
required to maintain cardiac output and organ perfusion. Increased
renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone axis activation and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion further complicate fluid regulation.
Intraoperative fluid management must account for (1) deficits
acquired during preoperative fasting, (2) maintenance fluid requirements, (3) surgical blood loss, and (4) insensible fluid loss. Infants
should receive glucose-­containing isotonic fluid to prevent perioperative hypoglycemia. Table 91.9 is a guideline for determining fluid
deficits and maintenance requirements in the OR. For longer procedures, fluid deficits should be replaced with isotonic fluid over the first
3 hours of intraoperative management. Deficits are generally calculated
as the number of hours of fasting status multiplied by the hourly maintenance rate for the child. Half the deficit is replaced during the first
hour and half during the subsequent 2 hours. If hypotension or tachycardia persists in the early stages of anesthesia, more rapid replacement
of the fluid deficit may be indicated.
Third space interstitial fluid losses should be replaced with isotonic
salt solutions. For smaller operations, such as herniorrhaphy, pyloromyotomy, and minor procedures, fluid replacement at 3-­5 mL/kg/
hr is indicated for insensible losses. Complex abdominal or thoracic
procedures with large insensible losses may require an additional 8-­10
mL/kg/hr of IV fluid replacement. Crystalloid solution is indicated for
blood loss as a 3:1 ratio. Allogenic blood products should be replaced
as a 1:1 ratio. Colloid (albumin) administration also may decrease the
amount of crystalloid replacement needed for blood loss. During large-­
volume transfusions, active fluid warming should be performed to prevent hypothermia. With major surgery and resultant SIRS, capillary

Table 91.9  Intraoperative Pediatric Fluid Replacement
INFUSION RATE

PATIENT WEIGHT

4 mL/kg/hr

1-­10 kg

2 mL/kg/hr

10-­20 kg

1 mL/kg/hr

per kg >20 kg

Example: 22 kg child requires (4 × 10) + (2 × 10) + (1 × 2) = 62 mL/hr

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91 u Anesthesia and ­Perioperative Care
integrity is lost, and third space losses are common. Failure to replace
fluid loss and restore intravascular volume may lead to shock.
Perioperative hypoglycemia may result from preoperative fasting, most often in neonates or in children with metabolic disorders. In neonates, perioperative glucose monitoring is indicated,
and glucose replacement is frequently required. In older children
with normal nutritional status, isotonic salt solutions without glucose are adequate. In patients receiving total parenteral alimentation containing high glucose concentrations (>10%), continuous
glucose administration should be ensured to avoid rebound
hypoglycemia.
Postprocedural care includes supervision of emergence and recovery
from anesthesia and surgery. Emergence describes the transition period
between the anesthetized state and consciousness. During emergence,
patients experience decreased anesthetic effect and increased physiologic
and psychologic responses to painful stimuli (e.g., reactive autonomic
tone, excitement, anxiety). Inhalational anesthetic agents are rapidly
excreted during ventilation, and muscle relaxants can be reversed; however, the effects of opioids, benzodiazepines, and IV hypnotics may be
prolonged. Normal physiologic functions such as spontaneous ventilation
resume, and hemodynamic function improves. Before leaving the OR after
routine elective procedures, the child should be conscious with intact airway reflexes and a patent airway. The effects of muscle relaxants should
be reversed. Ideally, emergence should be as brief as possible, with maintenance of analgesia and anxiolysis and restoration of cardiorespiratory
function. However, critically ill patients scheduled for ICU admission may
require postoperative endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation.
In these patients, deeper levels of sedation and analgesia should be maintained after the procedure.
During emergence, it is essential to assess whether residual neuromuscular blockade (NMB) exists. If weakness or respiratory depression
is observed in the postoperative phase, prolonged NMB should be considered. Reversal of residual NMB is standard anesthetic practice. With the
virtual abandonment of succinylcholine, only nondepolarizing NMBAs
are routinely used for intubation. The termination of NMB depends on
metabolism and elution away from the neuromuscular junction. Classically, nondepolarizing muscle relaxants are reversed by increasing the
acetylcholine concentration at the neuromuscular junction with acetylcholine esterase inhibitors (neostigmine, edrophonium), which work
through competitive antagonism. Vagolytic agents (e.g., atropine, glycopyrrolate) must be co-­administered to prevent bradycardia. This process,
even for the shortest-­acting muscle relaxant, rocuronium, can take several
minutes. An intubating dose of rocuronium to rapidly induce paralysis in
emergency situations may not spontaneously reverse for 20 minutes or
longer (compared with about 3 minutes for succinylcholine). The effects
of long-­acting, nondepolarizing NMBAs (vecuronium, pancuronium) are
invariably reversed. Acetylcholine esterase inhibitor efficacy is dependent
on the degree of NMB at the time of administration, and residual NMB is
common despite reversal with these agents. Sugammadex is an alternative reversal agent that has a very low rate of residual NMB induced by
the aminosteroids rocuronium and vecuronium. Its mechanism of action
involves noncompetitive antagonism through encapsulation of neuromuscular agents.

POSTANESTHESIA CARE UNIT

In the postanesthesia care unit (PACU), the child is observed until
there is adequate recovery from anesthesia. Achievement of spontaneous breathing, adequate pulse oximetry saturation (>95%), and hemodynamic stability are key recovery end-­points. The child should be
arousable, responsive, and oriented before discharge from the PACU.
The amount of time spent in the PACU varies based on disposition
(transfer to acute care or ICU, transfer to day surgery postrecovery
unit, or discharge to home). Parents should be permitted to comfort
their children in the PACU. Discharge from the PACU depends on
the child’s overall functional status, which includes physiologic end-­
points, adequate analgesia, and control of PONV. Various scoring systems have been used for determining readiness for discharge from the
PACU (Table 91.10).

673

Postanesthetic Complications

Respiratory insufficiency after general anesthesia is common. Prolonged emergence from anesthesia and respiratory depression may be
caused by the residual effects of opioids, hypnotic agents, or NMBAs.
Pain may also cause significant hypoventilation, especially after thoracic or abdominal surgery. Delayed emergence from anesthesia may
result from retention of inhaled anesthetics worsened by hypoventilation. Hypothermia, especially in neonates, delays metabolism
and excretion of anesthetics and prolongs neuromuscular blockade.
Hypoventilation after surgery is associated with the development of
atelectasis. Microatelectasis may lead to postoperative infections.
When airway obstruction is present, maintenance of airway patency
may necessitate oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway placement.
In the setting of profound respiratory depression, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation may be indicated.
Opioid reversal with naloxone may be indicated in rare instances
when excessive opioid effect is suspected. However, naloxone reverses
both the respiratory depressant and the analgesic properties. After naloxone administration, a somnolent child with respiratory depression
may experience increased pain. Opioid reversal requires bedside attention by the physician to monitor the child’s behavioral, hemodynamic,
and respiratory status. Importantly, naloxone is shorter acting than
most opioid analgesics, which may result in renarcotization.
Postoperative stridor occurs in up to 2% of all pediatric patients. The
use of appropriately sized ETTs and assurance of an air leak <30 cm H2O

Table 91.10  Postanesthesia Recovery Scores
ALDRETE RECOVERY SCORE

≥9 REQUIRED
FOR DISCHARGE

ACTIVITY—VOLUNTARILY OR ON COMMAND
Moves four extremities
Moves two extremities
No motion

2
1
0

BREATHING
Deep breath, cough, cry
Dyspnea or shallow breathing
Apnea

2
1
0

BLOOD PRESSURE
Within 20% of preanesthetic value
Within 20–50% of preanesthetic value
>50% outside preanesthetic value

2
1
0

COLOR
Pink
Pale, blotchy, dusky
Cyanotic

2
1
0

CONSCIOUSNESS
Fully aware, responds
Arouses to stimulus
Unresponsive

2
1
0

STEWARD RECOVERY SCORE

6 REQUIRED FOR
DISCHARGE

ACTIVITY
Moves limbs purposefully
Nonpurposeful movement
Still

2
1
0

CONSCIOUSNESS
Awake
Responsive
Unresponsive

2
1
0

AIRWAY
Coughing on command or crying
Maintaining patent airway
Requires airway maintenance

2
1
0

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

674 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
pressure decreases the risk of airway trauma or edema. A history of stridor
increases the likelihood of postoperative complications. Stridor may be
severe enough after extubation to require reintubation. Racemic epinephrine aerosols and dexamethasone are commonly employed therapies; their
use requires prolonged observation because of the potential for rebound
stridor. Stridor in infants may be an indication for overnight observation.
Cardiovascular complications are less frequently encountered in the
PACU. Fluid administration may be required to augment cardiac output,
perfusion, and urine output. Large-­volume fluid resuscitation (>30 mL/
kg) in the postoperative period may be an indication of evolving shock
physiology, and sources of hypovolemia (e.g., occult bleeding) or myocardial dysfunction (e.g., tamponade, pneumothorax) should be considered.
Emergence delirium immediately after anesthesia is noted in 5–10%
of children and is more common in those 3-­9 years old. Manifestations
include restlessness, combativeness, disorientation, and inconsolability. Almost all anesthetic agents have been linked to the development of
delirium, especially newer volatile anesthetic agents (e.g., sevoflurane,
desflurane). Potential postoperative complications, such as hypoglycemia and hypoxemia, should also be ruled out. Occasionally, it is necessary to provide additional sedation (e.g., propofol, dexmedetomidine,
benzodiazepines), although these agents prolong postanesthesia recovery time and may not effectively reduce delirium.

Awareness During Anesthesia

A fundamental aim of anesthesia is to prevent recall by inducing hypnosis and amnesia. In adults, certain anesthetic techniques and surgical
procedures have been associated with increased incidence of recall. The
long-­term sequelae of recall in children are unknown. Continuous cerebral
bispectral index (BIS) electroencephalographic monitoring has been used
to assess consciousness and aid in the prevention of intraoperative awareness. Unfortunately, pediatric studies have not confirmed the usefulness of
BIS monitoring as a means of determining anesthetic depth. Existing data
do not support the routine use of BIS monitoring during pediatric anesthesia. Volatile anesthetic agents reliably produce dose-­dependent hypnotic
and amnestic effects and remain a mainstay of general anesthesia.

Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting

After general anesthesia, 40–50% of children may experience PONV
that generally lasts for several hours. This complication prolongs
recovery room times and requires significant nursing attention. The
etiology is not completely understood but is likely multifactorial and
related to the emetic effects of anesthetics, pain, and surgical stress.
Opioid analgesics may also provoke nausea and vomiting. Other risk
factors for PONV include surgery lasting greater than 30 minutes, age
≥3 years, strabismus surgery, and a history of PONV in the patient or
their relatives. Importantly, preoperative fasting does not decrease the
incidence of PONV. Indeed, hydration and glucose supplementation
appear to be important factors in decreasing PONV. Multimodal analgesia with nonopioid agents (e.g., acetaminophen, ibuprofen, ketorolac) and regional or local anesthesia may be associated with reduced
PONV. The serotonin antagonist ondansetron is an effective treatment
of PONV. Ondansetron prophylaxis is recommended for patients at
increased risk of PONV. Serotonin antagonists are contraindicated in
children taking serotonin reuptake inhibitors for migraine headaches.
Dexamethasone may also be used for the treatment of PONV.

Thermoregulation and Malignant Hyperthermia

After anesthesia, thermoregulation remains abnormal for several
hours. Hypothermia, especially in neonates, may be associated with
cardiorespiratory depression and prolongation of the effect of opioids
and NMBAs. Although hypothermia has deleterious effects, active
rewarming should be performed cautiously to avoid hyperthermia and
cutaneous burns. Postoperative shivering is common and may occur
in the absence of hypothermia. Hyperthermia, with temperatures in
excess of 39°C (102.2°F), is of concern in the postoperative period.
When high fevers occur within hours of the use of an inhalational
anesthetic, especially if succinylcholine was used, malignant hyperthermia (MH) must be ruled out.

Malignant hyperthermia is a hypermetabolic syndrome triggered by
volatile anesthetic agents and succinylcholine. The onset of MH may be
acute, fulminant, and lethal without appropriate interventions. The disease
is genetically heterogeneous, with >10 genes contributing to susceptibility, but typically displays an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. A
family history of death or febrile reactions during anesthesia should alert
the anesthesiologist to its potential. Pathogenic variants within the gene
encoding for the ryanodine receptor (the calcium channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum) predispose to MH susceptibility and have been identified
in 20–40% of humans with MH. Certain myopathies are associated with
the risk of MH, including Duchenne muscular dystrophy, central core disease, and King Denborough syndrome.
The pathophysiology of MH involves uncontrolled intracellular calcium release from skeletal muscle sarcolemma, resulting in prolonged
muscle contraction, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) depletion, and muscle
cell death. Rhabdomyolysis results in the release of myoglobin, creatine
phosphokinase (CPK), and potassium into the blood. The clinical course
of MH is characterized by rapid onset of high fever (>38.5°C [101.3°F]),
muscle rigidity, acidosis (metabolic and respiratory), high end-­tidal CO2,
and multiorgan dysfunction. Death may ensue secondary to hemodynamic collapse from shock and cardiac dysrhythmias. Signs of MH generally occur within the first 2 hours of anesthesia but (rarely) can occur up
to 24 hours later.
When MH is suspected, treatment involves discontinuation of all inhalational anesthetics, correction of the metabolic acidosis, and administration of the muscle relaxant dantrolene. The initial dose of dantrolene is 2.5
mg/kg, and repeat doses, up to a maximum of 10 mg/kg, are indicated for
persistent fever, muscle rigidity, acidosis, and tachycardia. Once symptoms
are controlled, the patient should be observed for at least 24 hours, because
recrudescence may occur. The MH mortality rate was once >70% and is
now <5% with standardized treatment algorithms. An MH cart with sufficient supplies of dantrolene should be present at every site where pediatric
anesthesia is provided.
Certain phenomena suggest an increased risk of MH. Masseter spasm
during induction, with rigid clenching of the masseter muscles and an
inability to open the mouth, may signal MH susceptibility. Acute myoglobinuria associated with an MH-­triggering agent is another clue. The child
may not be hypermetabolic or febrile but may have dark urine, high CPK
levels, and risk of myoglobin-­induced renal tubular damage. The finding of
dark urine after administration of an anesthetic requires further investigation, including measurement of electrolytes and CPK. Prevention of MH
in susceptible patients requires the avoidance of triggering agents, which
include inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. IV anesthesia and
nitrous-­opioid techniques are safe. MH-­safe anesthesia machines devoid
of trace concentrations of volatile anesthetic vapors should be used. Dantrolene prophylaxis is not recommended because MH is rapidly treatable,
and the drug causes respiratory depression and muscle weakness. For a
child in whom MH is suspected, the MH hotline, 1-­800-­MHHYPER
(1-­800-­644-­9737), should be used to notify the Malignant Hyperthermia
Association of the United States (MHAUS). MHAUS registers susceptible
patients and provides diagnostic and therapeutic information. Preanesthesia susceptibility testing includes genetic analysis of the ryanodine receptor
gene, muscle biopsies, in vitro contraction studies, and possibly measurement of muscle CO2 production in response to intramuscular caffeine.

Mediastinal Masses

Children with anterior mediastinal masses such as lymphomas, teratomas, and other primary mediastinal tumors are at serious risk for
cardiorespiratory failure during anesthesia secondary to airway compromise, difficult ventilation, cardiac tamponade, vascular obstruction,
and circulatory collapse. These patients generally require surgical tissue diagnosis before treatment is initiated. Significant compression of
vital structures can occur with seemingly mild symptoms. Tachypnea,
orthopnea, wheezing, and avoidance of prone or supine positions are
significant indications of serious risk. Echocardiographic or CT evidence of pericardial tamponade, right ventricular compression, or
compression of the pulmonary artery suggests severe risk. Biopsy with
light sedation under local anesthesia may be indicated. When anesthesia is required, preservation of spontaneous ventilation is critical during

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91 u Anesthesia and ­Perioperative Care
induction of anesthesia. Rigid bronchoscopy may be used to assist with
ventilation in the setting of external airway compression. Provisions
to provide mechanical circulatory support (cardiopulmonary bypass)
should also be available. In high-­risk children, consideration should
be given to initiating treatment with corticosteroids, radiation therapy,
and chemotherapy before obtaining a tissue diagnosis.

Postoperative Apnea

Neonates and infants are at increased risk for the development of postoperative apnea after exposure to potent hypnotic and analgesic medications. Both central and obstructive apnea may occur. Postanesthetic
apnea is most common within the first 12 hours, although apnea has
been reported in premature infants up to 48 hours later. Risk factors for
postoperative apnea include history of apnea, caffeine treatment, chronic
hypoventilation, and anemia. The risk of apnea is inversely proportional
to postconceptual age (PCA) at surgery and is highest in premature neonates less than 36 weeks estimated gestational age. This risk is minimal
by the time premature infants have reached 60 weeks PCA. When surgery is required in early infancy, overnight observation and monitoring
may be indicated. In term infants >44 weeks PCA without risk factors,
management should include observation and monitoring for 6 hours
with at least one sleep-­wake-­feed cycle without hypoxia, bradycardia,
or supplemental oxygen. Premature infants with risk factors <52 weeks
PCA require admission for observation for 12 hours after anesthesia.

POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT

Postprocedural pain management should ensure adequate analgesia
and anxiolysis (see Chapter 93). Preoperative education focusing on
pain management through development of skills designed to decrease
anticipatory anxiety and participation in treatment planning can be
helpful for children and families. Pediatric pain management relies
on multimodal therapy, including opioid and nonopioid analgesics.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, cyclooxygenase-­
2 inhibitors,
acetaminophen, opioids, and regional analgesia all have roles in postoperative pain management. Repeated evaluation is critical to effective
pain management. Adjunctive therapy, such as pet therapy, may also
decrease the need for potent analgesics postoperatively.
Patient-­controlled analgesia (PCA) and parent/nurse-­controlled
analgesia (PNCA) are widely accepted postoperative pain regimens.
PCA/PNCA may be used to administer a low-­dose continuous (basal)
infusion of opioid with intermittent (bolus) supplements as needed. The
practitioner must determine the basal rate, bolus dose, lockout interval, and acceptable number of bolus doses per hour. PCA/PNCA safety
requires appropriate medication dosing and assumes that patients
are unlikely to overdose because somnolence will limit repeated self-­
administration. In young children, proper PCA/PNCA use may be
more difficult to ensure, although children as young as 5 years have
been able to use PNCA successfully. In older children and adolescents,
PCA is a standard modality of postoperative pain management.

Regional Anesthesia

Regional anesthesia is the use of anesthetics to block the conduction
of afferent neural impulses to the central nervous system. Forms of
regional anesthesia include local anesthesia, peripheral nerve blocks,
nerve plexus blocks, and neuraxial (epidural and subarachnoid/spinal)
blocks. Anesthetics may be administered as a single injection or as a
continuous infusion. Regional anesthesia may be used for both intraoperative and postoperative analgesia and has been linked to shortened recovery times and hospital stays in children. A major benefit
of regional anesthesia is lesser central cardiorespiratory depressant
effects. Injection of local anesthetics (e.g., lidocaine, bupivacaine) into
the affected area may provide procedural analgesia lasting for hours
to days. Wound infiltration with local anesthetics at the conclusion of
surgery may also decrease early postoperative pain.
Neuraxial (epidural, spinal) analgesia is common in pediatric practice. The epidural space lies between the dura and the pia and arachnoid
membranes, an area through which all nerve roots pass. Caudal epidural
analgesia is placed through the sacral hiatus, inferior to the distal end of
the spinal cord. This site is often used for pelvic and lower-­limb anesthesia
during urologic and orthopedic surgery in infants and toddlers. A single
dose of caudal epidural anesthesia may provide hours of pain relief, and

675

a continuous infusion may provide effective pain relief for hours to days.
The epidural injection of opioids can provide analgesia for 12-­24 hours and
is a potential supplement to postoperative analgesia. Longer-­acting local
anesthetics (e.g., bupivacaine, ropivacaine) combined with an opioid (e.g.,
fentanyl, preservative-­free morphine) are typically used in single-­injection
and continuous epidural therapy. It is also possible to provide epidural
PCA with a continuous infusion pump and the patient’s ability to self-­
administer analgesia as needed. Epidural analgesia can also provide pain
relief in patients with chronic pain or pain caused by advanced malignant
conditions.
Complications of neuraxial anesthesia include cephalad spread of
blockade with respiratory depression, paralysis of respiratory muscles,
and brainstem depression. Common complications of neuraxial analgesia are paresthesias and, if opioids are used, pruritus, nausea, and
vomiting. Neuraxial opioid use necessitates antipruritic and antiemetic
therapy. Infection and epidural hematoma are extremely rare. Neuraxial opioids, especially when administered intrathecally, may cause
respiratory depression and require postoperative monitoring.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

91.1 Anesthetic Neurotoxicity
John P. Scott
Laboratory animal studies have suggested a link between anesthetic
exposure at an early age and neurotoxicity in developing brains. Existing nonclinical data implicate N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate and γ-­aminobutyric
acid (GABA) pathways in apoptosis and neuronal cell death.
Histopathologic changes and adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes have
been associated with exposure to both inhalational and IV anesthetics,
including isoflurane, sevoflurane, ketamine, benzodiazepines, and propofol. Animal studies were initially performed in nonprimates (rodents), and
controversy remains concerning experimental design (dose, duration of
treatment, species differences). However, work in nonhuman primates has
also shown an increased incidence of adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes after prolonged and/or multiple exposures to volatile anesthetics.
Human studies of anesthesia-­induced neurotoxicity have yielded conflicting results. Further complicating the situation are other potential
triggers for adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes, including comorbidities, surgical trauma, and perioperative cardiorespiratory status. Multiple
population-­based epidemiologic studies have suggested a potential association between anesthetic exposure and adverse neurodevelopmental
outcomes after multiple or prolonged anesthetic exposures. Large-­scale
European and Canadian cohort studies using national registries have
revealed subtle differences in standardized psychometric testing of early
school-­age children after exposure to general anesthesia. Interestingly,
other studies in children have failed to yield similar results. The Pediatric Anesthesia and Neurodevelopmental Assessment (PANDA), a multicenter matched-­sibling control study, revealed no association between
brief anesthetic exposure for inguinal hernia repair and aptitude on psychometric testing. Similarly, the General Anaesthesia and Awake-­Regional
Anaesthesia in Infancy (GAS) study, a prospective multicenter randomized controlled trial comparing general and neuraxial spinal anesthesia in
infants for hernia repair, did not demonstrate any significant differences in
neurodevelopment at 2 years of age between groups. A follow-­up study at 5
years of age similarly showed no difference in neurodevelopment between
groups receiving general and spinal anesthesia. Importantly, studies have
not shown an association between adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes
and anesthetic exposure <3 hours.
Alternatives to general anesthesia for many procedures in young children do not exist. Regional anesthetic techniques and narcotic-­based
anesthetics may gain popularity. Dexmedetomidine may also have some
neuroprotective properties. Currently, there are insufficient data to make
conclusions regarding the safety of one anesthetic approach over another.
Ultimately, the potential for neurotoxicity must be balanced against the
necessity of providing adequate anesthesia for children presenting for
surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

676 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Chapter 92

Procedural Sedation
John P. Scott
See also Chapters 91 and 93.
Sedation describes the continuum between wakefulness and general anesthesia (see Table 91.7). Many of the same medications used to
induce general anesthesia may be used to provide sedation (see Table
91.8). Analogous to the provision of anesthesia, performance of procedural sedation requires a comprehensive presedation evaluation,
intraprocedural monitoring, and postsedation recovery care. The term
conscious sedation refers to a condition in which a patient is sleepy,
comfortable, and cooperative but maintains airway-­protective and ventilatory reflexes. Depending on the choice of pharmacotherapy, sedation may not provide analgesia. Sedation that is sufficient to obtund
painful responses describes deep sedation. Deep sedation is a state
of unarousability to voice and may be accompanied by suppression of
reflex responses, with preservation of ability to respond purposefully to
repeated or painful stimulation.
Pediatric procedural sedation requires vigilance and knowledge to
ensure safety and is governed by the same guidelines as anesthesia care
(Table 92.1). Adherence to guidelines for appropriate monitoring and
management of sedation in children is imperative. Sedative doses that
cause minimal sedation in one patient may produce complete unconsciousness and apnea in another. Anxiolysis or light sedation with chloral hydrate, benzodiazepines, and dexmedetomidine is often sufficient
for nonpainful procedures. The use of dexmedetomidine for procedural sedation is safe, but recovery time can be prolonged and success variable. For painful procedures (e.g., bone marrow aspiration),
the combination of hypnosis and analgesia is required. The addition
of opioids to sedation regimens increases the risk of respiratory insufficiency. Short-­acting anesthetics (e.g., propofol, methohexital, remifentanil) provide effective procedural sedation, but their use carries a
higher likelihood of inadvertent induction of general anesthesia. Use of

these medications requires the presence of an anesthesiologist and/or
specially trained, experienced, credentialed, and qualified physicians.
Many pediatric subspecialists provide sedation and anesthesia care
for children. The use of anesthetic agents is not limited to anesthesiologists, but anesthesiology departments are obligated to help develop,
manage, and oversee sedation services. Together, hospitals and providers, including anesthesiologists, share responsibility for the oversight
and credentialing of individuals administering sedation and anesthesia.
The elements of a safe pediatric procedural sedation system include
the following:
• Clearly defined knowledge and skill sets
• Adequate prerequisite training
• Credentialing of providers
• Maintenance of certification
• Ensuring that sedation sites meet recognized standards
• Continuous quality improvement
Table 92.2 provides an approach to proper language to help the child
cope with procedural pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 92.1  Systematic Approach to Sedation in Children
Comprehensive medical history and organ system assessment,
anticipating underlying medical problems that predispose the
patient to anesthetic complications
Careful physical examination focused on the cardiorespiratory
system and airway
Appropriate fasting
Informed consent
Pediatric drug dosing (mg/kg)
Appropriately sized equipment
Documentation of vital signs and condition on a time-­based record
Rapid response (“code”) team to respond to emergencies with
“crash cart”
Fully equipped and staffed recovery area
Discharge criteria documenting recovery from sedation

Table 92.2  Suggested Language for Parents and Healthcare Providers
LANGUAGE TO AVOID

LANGUAGE TO USE

You will be fine; there is nothing to worry about. (reassurance)

What did you do in school today? (distraction)

This is going to hurt/this will not hurt. (vague; negative focus)

It might feel like a pinch. (sensory information)

The nurse is going to take some blood. (vague information)

First, the nurse will clean your arm, you will feel the cold alcohol pad, and next
. . . (sensory and procedural information)

You are acting like a baby. (criticism)

Let’s get your mind off of it; tell me about that film . . . (distraction)

It will feel like a bee sting. (negative focus)

Tell me how it feels. (information)

The procedure will last as long as . . . (negative focus)

The procedure will be shorter than . . . (television program or other familiar time
for child) (procedural information; positive focus)

The medicine will burn. (negative focus)

Some children say they feel a warm feeling. (sensory information; positive focus)

Tell me when you are ready. (too much control)

When I count to 3, blow the feeling away from your body. (coaching to cope;
distraction-­limited control)

I am sorry. (apologizing)

You are being very brave. (praise; encouragement)

Do not cry. (negative focus)

That was hard; I am proud of you. (praise)

It is over. (negative focus)

You did a great job doing the deep breathing, holding still . . . (labeled praise)

Adapted from Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management of pain in children in the emergency department. Lancet. 2016;387:83–92.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management

Chapter 93

Pediatric Pain
Management
Stacy J.B. Peterson and Steven J. Weisman
Pain is both a sensory and an emotional experience. Infants, children,
and adolescents experience a wide range of acute and chronic pain etiologies. When unrecognized and undertreated, pain extracts a significant physiologic, biochemical, and psychologic toll on both the child
and the family. Many disease processes and most interventional diagnostic or treatment procedures in pediatrics are associated with pain.
Similarly, traumatic, developmental, cognitive, psychologic, and social
experiences can also trigger and maintain chronic pain.

DEFINITION AND CATEGORIES OF PAIN

The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) defines pain
as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with,
or resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue damage.”
Furthermore, the IASP expanded the definition to include the following six key notes:
1.	Pain is always a personal experience that is influenced to varying
degrees by biologic, psychologic, and social factors.
2.	Pain and nociception are different phenomena. Pain cannot be inferred solely from activity in sensory neurons.
3.	Through their life experiences, individuals learn the concept of pain.
4.	A person’s report of an experience as pain should be respected.
5.	Although pain usually serves an adaptive role, it may have adverse
effects on function and social and psychologic well-­being.
6.	Verbal description is only one of several behaviors to express pain;
inability to communicate does not negate the possibility that a human experiences pain.
Important elements to emphasize in this definition are (1) pain
encompasses both peripheral physiologic and central neural components and (2) pain may or may not be associated with ongoing tissue
damage. The experience of pain lies primarily in the strength and patterning of central neural connectivity (Fig. 93.1). Although immediate
upstream neural activation can originate from inflammatory, structural, or biochemical events, processes not only in the periphery but
also in the spinal cord and the brain influence the intensity and duration of pain. Similarly, central neural processes in the brain are associated with the location, intensity, and distress associated with pain.
Chronic pain can develop when the upstream neural signaling continues to activate central neural circuits, such as with continued peripheral inflammatory or structural pain-­associated processes. Sometimes,
this signaling does not regress and the individual experiences ongoing
chronic pain after the resolution of the original process.
Often, however, pediatricians face the most difficult problems when
either acute pain becomes chronic or chronic pain develops and is
maintained without a definable infectious, inflammatory, metabolic,
or structural cause. When no “cause” can be found, patients are often
referred to mental health specialists, or the cause for the pain is labeled
as “stress.” Children read this message as, “The doctor thinks I am
faking pain, or I am crazy.” Parents see their child suffering and often
seek care from additional providers, with the child undergoing numerous tests, procedures, medication trials, and visits and many physicians looking for the cause of the pain so it can be “fixed” or to “get
an answer.” Meanwhile, the child is often missing school, social, and
physical activities. In addition, they often develop poor sleep habits,
nonrestorative sleep, and exhibit increasing fatigue.
It is recognized that chronic pain, in the absence of a specific identified structural, biochemical, or inflammatory cause, develops through
the initiation, maintenance, and strength of central neural connectivity

677

patterns (see Chapter 212). Centrally mediated pain derives from neural
connectivity patterns in the brain that include centers involved in autonomic nervous system control, memory, and other cognitive centers, as
well as emotional centers of the brain. In pediatrics, birth history and
child development overlay these central patterns that contribute to the
development of chronic pain. Parents may understand the concept of
a “sticky nervous system” as the perpetuator of the continued pain in
such a child. This model of brain connectivity patterns, or “top-­down”
mediators of chronic pain, is important, because it explains how psychologic and other nonpharmacologic interventions work to reduce
chronic pain and suffering.
Table 93.1 specifies important pain categories typically treated
(somatic, visceral, and neuropathic) and defines the elements and
characteristics of nociception, the peripheral physiologic aspect of
pain perception. Nociception refers to how specialized fibers (largely,
but not exclusively, the small, unmyelinated A-­delta and C fibers) in the
peripheral nervous system transmit nerve impulses (usually transmitting signals originating from peripheral mechanoreceptors and chemoreceptors) through synapses in the spinal cord’s dorsal horn through
(but not exclusively through) the spinothalamic tracts to the brain’s
higher centers, where the development of neural connectivity patterns
creates the experience of pain.

ASSESSMENT AND MEASUREMENT OF
PAIN IN CHILDREN

Assessing pain entails much more than merely quantifying it. Whenever feasible, the physician should ask the patient about the character, location, quality, duration, frequency, and intensity of the pain.
Depending on their age, children may be able to answer some or all the
questions independently or with assistance from their parents. Severity can also be assessed via utilization of various scales, which will be
discussed later. Some children may not report pain because of fears of
talking to strangers, disappointing, or bothering others, receiving an
injection if they report pain, returning to the hospital if they admit to
pain, and other negative reactions. For infants and nonverbal children,
their parents, pediatricians, nurses, and other caregivers are constantly
challenged to interpret whether the child’s distressed behaviors represent pain, fear, hunger, or a range of other perceptions or emotions.
Similarly, lack of normal interest in play without behavioral distress
signals can be manifestations of pain. Therapeutic trials of comfort
measures (cuddling, feeding) and analgesic medication may be helpful
in clarifying the triggers of the behaviors.
Behavior and physiologic signs are useful but can be misleading. A
toddler may scream and grimace during an ear examination because of
fear rather than pain. Conversely, children with inadequately relieved
persistent pain from cancer, sickle cell disease, trauma, or surgery
may withdraw from their surroundings and appear very quiet, leading observers to conclude falsely that these children are comfortable
or sedated. In adolescents, increased reports of pain may be misinterpreted as “drug seeking” behaviors. In these situations, it is important
to assess pain appropriately and determine how to best improve pain
and function. Although this may be best accomplished by adjustment
to analgesic medications, it may also involve the optimization of other
nonpharmacologic techniques. This approach, although increasing the
number or amount of interventions, may make the child become more,
not less, interactive and alert as pain control improves. Similarly, neonates and young infants may close their eyes, furrow their brows, and
clench their fists in response to pain. Adequate analgesia is often associated with eye opening and increased involvement in surroundings. A
child who is experiencing significant chronic pain may play normally
to distract attention away from pain. These coping behaviors are sometimes misinterpreted as evidence of the child’s “faking” or exaggerating
pain.

Age-­Specific and Developmentally Specific Measures

Because infants, young children, and nonverbal children cannot express
the quantity of pain they experience, several pain scales have been
devised attempting to quantify pain in these populations (Fig. 93.2 and
Table 93.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

678 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
A
SMA

M1 S1
PPC

PFC

ACC

PCC

Insula

S2

BG
Amygdala

ACC
Insula
PFC

Thalamus
HT

Amygdala

PAG

PAG

PB
RVM

B

Mid cingulate cortex
Posterior
cingulate cortex

Cingulum bundle
Corpus callosum

Thalamus
Rostral ventromedial
medulla
Periaqueductal gray

Medial
prefrontal
cortex

Default mode network

Sensorimotor network

Salience network

White matter bundles

Primary somatosensory cortex

Primary
somatosensory cortex
Temporoparietal junction

Anterior
insula

Posterior insula
Posterior corona radiata
Superior longitudinal fasciculus

Fig. 93.1 Brain pathways, regions, and networks involved in acute and chronic pain. ACC, Anterior cingulate cortex; PCC, posterior cingulate cor-

tex; BG, basal ganglia; HT, hypothalamus; PAG, periaqueductal gray; PB, parabrachial nuclei; PFC, prefrontal cortex; PPC, posterior parietal cortex;
SMA, supplementary motor area; RVM, rostral ventromedial medulla. (A, left panel from Apkarian AV, Bushnell MC, Treede RD, Zubieta JK. Human
brain mechanisms of pain perception and regulation in health and disease. Eur J Pain. 2005;9:463–484; A, right panel from Schweinhardt P, Bushnell
MC. Pain imaging in health and disease—how far have we come? J Clin Invest. 2010;120:3788–3797; B from Davis KD, Flor H, Greely HT, et al. Brain
imaging tests for chronic pain: Medical, legal and ethical issues and recommendations. Nat Rev Neurol. 2017;13:624–638.)

Table 93.1  Pain Categories and Characteristics
PAIN CATEGORY

DEFINITION

EXAMPLES

CHARACTERISTICS

Somatic

Pain resulting from injury to or
inflammation of tissues (e.g.,
skin, muscle, tendons, bone,
joints, fascia, vasculature)

Burns, lacerations, fractures, In skin and superficial structures: sharp, pulsatile, well
infections, inflammatory
localized
conditions
In deep somatic structures: dull, aching, pulsatile, not well
localized

Visceral

Pain resulting from injury to or
inflammation of viscera

Angina, hepatic distention,
bowel distention or
hypermobility, pancreatitis

Aching and cramping; nonpulsatile; poorly localized (e.g.,
appendiceal pain perceived around umbilicus) or referred
to distant locations (e.g., angina perceived in shoulder)

Neuropathic

Pain resulting from injury
to, inflammation of, or
dysfunction of the peripheral
or central nervous system

Complex regional pain
syndrome (CRPS),
phantom limb pain,
Guillain-­Barré syndrome,
sciatica

Spontaneous; burning; lancinating or shooting; dysesthesias
(pins and needles, electrical sensations); hyperalgesia
(amplification of noxious stimuli); hyperpathia (widespread
pain in response to a discrete noxious stimulus); allodynia
(pain in response to nonpainful stimulation); pain may be
perceived distal or proximal to site of injury, often
corresponding to innervation pathways (e.g., sciatica)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
Behavioral Indicators

Self-Report of Pain

Facial grimacing: The Neonatal Facial Coding System uses several
facial actions that may be indicators of pain. Pain is characterized by a
bulging brow with tight creases in between; tightly closed eyelids; a
deeply furrowed nasolabial groove; a horizontal, wide opened mouth;
and a taut tongue that may be quivering along with the chin.

Categorical description: Toddlers or young children are asked to say if they are
having "a little bit," a "middle amount," or "a lot" of pain.

679

Faces Scales: Children who do not have an appreciation of ordinal numbering
are asked to rate their pain based upon cartoons depicting facial indicators of distress.

Crying: May be an indicator of pain.
Activity: Withdrawal or immobilization of a limb may be an indicator of
pain.
Response to comfort measures: Feeding, swaddling, holding, and
ensuring that the infant is neither wet nor cold may help to discriminate
between pain and other conditions.
Physiologic indicators: Alterations in heart rate, blood pressure, SpO2,
respiratory rate, or alterations in pattern of respiration may be
nonspecific indicators of pain.

0
2
4
6
8
10
Numerical Rating Scale (NRS): Older children and teenagers are asked to rate their
pain on a scale of "0" (no pain) to "10" (worst pain).
Visual Analog Scale (VAS): Children or teenagers are asked to move an indicator along
a mechanical slide to depict the level of pain; the clinician reads a number along a
10-cm indicator on the back to determine the numeric score.

Fig. 93.2 Clinically useful pain assessment tools. (Adapted from Burg FD, Ingelfinger JR, Polin RA, et al., eds. Current Pediatric Therapy, 18th ed.

Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006:16; and Hicks CL, von Baeyer CL, Spafford P, et al. The Faces Pain Scale—revised: Toward a common metric in pediatric
pain measurement. Pain. 2001;93:173–183.)

Table 93.2  Pain Measurement Tools
NAME

VALIDATION AND
USES

FEATURES

AGE RANGE

ADVANTAGES

LIMITATIONS

Visual Analog Scale
(VAS)

Horizontal 10-­cm line;
subject marks a spot
on the line between
anchors of “no
pain” and “most
pain imaginable”

6-­8 yr and older

Good psychometric
properties;
validated for
research purposes

Acute pain
Surgical pain
Chronic pain

Cannot be used in younger
children or in those with
cognitive limitations
Requires language skills
and numerical processing;
upper anchor of “most
pain” requires an
experiential reference
point that is lacking in
many children

Numerical Rating
Scale (NRS)

Integers from 0
to 10, inclusive,
corresponding to a
range from no pain
to most pain

6-­8 yr and older

Good psychometric
properties;
validated for
research purposes

Acute pain
Surgical pain
Chronic pain

Same as for VAS

Faces Scales (e.g.,
FACES-­R, Wong-­
Baker, Oucher, Bieri,
McGrath scales)

Subjects rate their
pain by identifying
with line drawings of
faces or photos of
children

3 yr and older

Can be used at
younger ages than
VAS and NRS

Acute pain
Surgical pain

Choice of “no pain” face
affects responses (neutral
vs smiling); not culturally
universal

Behavioral or
combined
behavioral-­
physiologic scales
(e.g., FLACC,
N-­PASS, CHEOPS,
OPS, FACS, NIPS)

Scoring of observed
behaviors (e.g.,
facial expression,
limb movement)
± heart rate and
blood pressure

Some work for
any ages; some
work for specific
age-­groups,
including
preterm infants

May be used in
both infants and
nonverbal children

FLACC, N-­PASS:
Acute pain
Surgical pain

Nonspecific; overrates pain
in toddlers and preschool
children; underrates
persistent pain; some
measures are convenient,
but others require
videotaping and complex
processing; vital sign
changes unrelated to pain
can occur and may affect
total score

Autonomic measures
(e.g., heart rate,
blood pressure,
heart rate spectral
analyses)

Scores changes in
heart rate, blood
pressure, or
measures of heart
rate variability (e.g.,
“vagal tone”)

All ages

Can be used at all
ages; useful for
patients receiving
mechanical
ventilation

Nonspecific; vital sign
changes unrelated to
pain may occur and may
artifactually increase or
decrease score

Hormonal-­metabolic
measures

Plasma or salivary
sampling of
“stress” hormones
(e.g., cortisol,
epinephrine)

All ages

Can be used at all
ages

Nonspecific; changes
unrelated to pain can
occur; inconvenient; cannot
provide “real-­time”
information; standard
normal values not available
for every age bracket

VAS, visual analog scale; NRS, numerical rating scale; FLACC, face, legs activity, cry, and consolability pain scale for preverbal/nonverbal patients; N-PASS, neonatal pain agitation
and sedation scale.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

680 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
they are nonspecific, they may reflect other processes, including fever,
hypoxemia, and cardiac or renal dysfunction (Tables 93.3 and 93.4).

The Newborn and Infant

There are several behavioral distress scales for the infant and young child,
mostly emphasizing the patient’s facial expressions, crying, and body
movement. Facial expression measures appear most useful and specific
in neonates. Autonomic and vital signs can indicate pain, but because

The Older Child

Children age 3-­7 years old become increasingly articulate in describing the intensity, location, and quality of pain. Pain is occasionally
referred to adjacent areas; referral of hip pain to the thigh or area
above the knee is common in this age range. Self-­report measures for
children this age include using drawings, pictures of faces, or graded
color intensities. Children ≥8 years old can usually use verbal numerical rating scales (NRS) or visual analog pain scales (VAS) accurately
(see Fig. 93.2). Verbal numerical ratings are preferred and considered
the gold standard: valid and reliable ratings can be obtained from
children ≥8 years of age. The NRS consists of numbers from 0 to 10,
in which 0 represents no pain and 10 represents very severe pain.
There is debate about the label for the highest pain rating, but the current agreement is not to use the phrase “worst pain possible,” because
children can always imagine a greater pain. In the United States,
regularly documented pain assessments are required for hospitalized
children and children attending outpatient hospital clinics and emergency departments. Pain scores do not always correlate with changes
in heart rate or blood pressure.

Table 93.3  Signs and Symptoms of Pain in Infants and
Young Children
BEHAVIORAL CHANGES
• Change in facial expression
(grimacing, furrowing of the
brow, nasal flaring, deep
nasolabial groove, curving of
the tongue, quivering of the
chin)
• Finger clenching
• Thrashing of limbs
• Writhing
• Back arching
• Head banging
• Poor feeding
• Sleep disturbance
• Pseudoparalysis

PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES
• Increase in heart rate,
respiratory rate, blood
pressure, muscle tone
• Oxygen desaturation
• Sweating
• Flushing
• Pallor

The Cognitively Impaired Child

Measuring pain in cognitively impaired children remains a challenge.
Understanding pain expression and experience in this population is
important because behaviors may be misinterpreted as indicating that
cognitively impaired children are more insensitive to pain than neurotypical children. Children with trisomy 21 may express pain less precisely and more slowly than the general population. Pain in children
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may be difficult to assess because
these children may be both hyposensitive and hypersensitive to many
different types of sensory stimuli, and they may have limited communication abilities. Although self-­reports of pain can be elicited from
some children who are cognitively impaired, observational measures
have better validation among these children. The Noncommunicating Child’s Pain Checklist—Postoperative Version is recommended
for children up to 18 years old. In addition, the FLACC pain scale has
been validated in nonverbal and cognitively impaired children (Table
93.5). Maladaptive behaviors and reduction in function may also indicate pain. Children with severe cognitive impairments experience pain
frequently, and children with the fewest abilities experience the most
pain. For this reason, providers must be able to recognize subtle signs
and symptoms of pain (see Table 93.3)

From Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management of
pain in children in the emergency department. Lancet. 2016;387:83–92.

Table 93.4  CRIES Neonatal Pain Assessment Scale
0

1

2

Crying

No

High pitched
but consolable

Inconsolable

Requires oxygen for
saturation >95%

No

FiO2 <30%

FiO2 >30%

Increased vital signs

No

HR or BP <20%

HR or BP >20%

Expression

No

Grimace

Grimace and grunt

Sleepless

No

Wakes often

Constantly awake

Score <4 initiate nonpharmacologic measures
Score >4 initiate pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic measures
BP, Blood pressure; HR, heart rate.
From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Table 23.2, p. 487.

Table 93.5  Revised FLACC for Pain Assessment in the Cognitively Impaired*
0

1

2

Face

No particular expression or
smile

Occasional grimace/frown; withdrawn or
disinterested (appears sad or worried)

Consistent grimace or frown; frequent/constant
quivering chin, clenched jaw (distressed-­
looking face; expression of fright or panic)

Legs

Normal position or relaxed

Uneasy, restless, tense (occasional
tremors)

Kicking or legs drawn up (marked increase in
spasticity, constant tremors, or jerking)

Activity

Lying quietly, normal position,
moves easily

Squirming, shifting back and forth, tense
(mildly agitated [e.g., head back and
forth, aggression]; shallow, splinting
respirations, intermittent sighs)

Arched, rigid, or jerking (severe agitation, head
banging; shivering [not rigors]; breath-­holding,
gasping or sharp intake of breath; severe
splinting)

Cry

No cry (awake or asleep)

Moans or whimpers, occasional complaint
(occasional verbal outburst or grunt)

Crying steadily, screams or sobs, frequent
complaints (repeated outbursts, constant
grunting)

Consolability

Content, relaxed

Reassured by occasional touching,
hugging, or talking; distractible

Difficult to console or comfort (pushing away
caregiver, resisting care or comfort measures)

*Revised descriptors for children with disabilities shown in brackets.
0= Relaxed/comfortable
1–3 = Mild discomfort
4–6 = Moderate pain
7–10 = Severe pain
FLACC Scoring System: May be used in preverbal, mechanically ventilated, or cognitively impaired patients; it is an acronym that includes 5 indicators, each scored as a 0, 1, or 2, that
form a 10-­point composite scale with a range from 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain). FLACC: Score each category between 0 and 2. The total score may be any number from 0 to 10.
From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Table 23.3, p. 488.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR TREATMENT OF
PEDIATRIC PAIN

Many models of pain focus on factors that explain the interindividual variability in pain perception and the chronicity and impairment
experienced with pain. Central to these models are interrelationships
among biologic, cognitive, affective, and social factors that influence
children’s pain and disability, commonly referred to as biopsychosocial
models of pain. Biologic factors include the child’s physical health, central nervous system (CNS) factors (pain processing), gender, pubertal
status, and genetic factors. Individual child cognitive and affective factors related to perception of pain include anxiety, fear, negative affect,
pain behaviors, and functional disability, whereas social factors include
such areas as culture, socioeconomic status, school environment, social
and peer interactions, adverse childhood events, and parental and family factors. For children, developmental factors need to be considered,
such as cognitive and motor development, birth history, and epigenetic
factors (the interaction in development between genetic and environmental factors).
A framework that considers the interplay of biologic, psychologic,
and social factors is useful for understanding pediatric pain and to
guide pain assessment and the delivery of pain prevention and management. Many simple interventions designed to promote relaxation
and patient control can work either alone or synergistically with pain
medications for relief of pain and related distress. Moreover, psychologic interventions are often coupled with physical therapy interventions to assist in the management of disabling chronic pain.

Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain

The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of analgesics vary with
age. This results in drug responses in infants and young children that
differ from those in older children and adults. The elimination half-­life
of most analgesics is prolonged in neonates and young infants because
of their immature hepatic enzyme systems and reduced glomerular filtration. Clearance of analgesics may also be variable in young
infants and children. Renal blood flow, glomerular filtration, and tubular secretion increase dramatically in the first few weeks after birth,
approaching adult values by 3-­5 months of age. Renal clearance of analgesics is often greater in toddlers and preschool-­age children than in
adults, whereas in premature infants, clearance is reduced. Age-­related
differences in body composition and protein binding also exist. Total

681

body water as a fraction of body weight is greater in neonates than in
children or adults. Tissues with high perfusion, such as the brain and
heart, account for a larger proportion of body mass in neonates than
do other tissues, such as muscle and fat. Because of decreased serum
concentrations of albumin and α1-­acid glycoprotein, neonates have
reduced protein binding of some drugs, resulting in higher amounts of
free, unbound, pharmacologically active drugs.

Acetaminophen, Aspirin, and Nonsteroidal
Antiinflammatory Drugs

Acetaminophen and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
have replaced aspirin as the most used antipyretics and oral, nonopioid
analgesics (Table 93.6). This is because of the association of Reye syndrome with the use of aspirin in children with a viral infection, such as
influenza or chickenpox.
Acetaminophen, a generally safe, nonopioid analgesic and antipyretic, has the advantage of intravenous (IV), rectal, and oral routes
of administration. Acetaminophen is not associated with the gastrointestinal (GI) or antiplatelet effects of aspirin and NSAIDs, making
it a particularly useful drug in patients with cancer. Unlike aspirin
and NSAIDs, acetaminophen has only mild antiinflammatory action.
Although acetaminophen alone may not adequately treat various types
of pain, in conjunction with other agents, it can lead to improved pain
control and decreased opioid use. One effective management strategy
can be to schedule acetaminophen and/or NSAIDs to decrease the
need for opioids, while still maintaining good pain control.
Acetaminophen toxicity can result from a large single dose or cumulative excessive dosing over days or weeks (see Chapter 94). Toxicity
manifests as fulminant hepatic necrosis and liver failure in infants,
children, and adults. Drug biotransformation processes are immature
in neonates, very active in young children, and somewhat less active in
adults. Young children are more resistant to acetaminophen-­induced
hepatotoxicity than are adults as a result of metabolic differences. Sulfation predominates over glucuronidation in young children, leading
to a reduction in NAPQI production.
Aspirin is indicated for certain rheumatologic conditions and for
inhibition of platelet adhesiveness, as in the treatment of Kawasaki
disease. Concerns about Reye syndrome have resulted in a substantial decline in pediatric aspirin use. In general, aspirin should not be
used for routine pain control in children. It is important to be aware of

Table 93.6  Commonly Used Nonopioid Medications (Antiinflammatory Medications)
MEDICATION

DOSAGE

COMMENT(S)

Acetaminophen

10-­15 mg/kg PO q4h
10 mg/kg IV q4h
15 mg/kg IV q6h
10 mg/kg IV q6h (<2 yr)
20-­30 mg/kg/PR q4h
40 mg/kg/PR q6-­8h
Maximum daily dosing:
75 mg/kg/24 hr (children)
60 mg/kg/24 hr (<2 yr)
30-­45 mg/kg/24 hr (neonates)

Minimal antiinflammatory action; no antiplatelet or adverse
gastric effects; overdosing can produce fulminant hepatic
failure.

Ibuprofen

8-­10 mg/kg PO q6h
10 mg/kg IV q4-­6h to maximum of 400 mg
Maximum daily dose: 2,400 mg

Antiinflammatory; transient antiplatelet effects; may cause
gastritis; extensive pediatric safety experience.

Naproxen

5-­7 mg/kg PO q8-­12h
Maximum daily dose: 1,000 mg

Antiinflammatory; transient antiplatelet effects; may cause
gastritis; more prolonged duration than that of ibuprofen.

Ketorolac

Loading dose 0.3 mg/kg, then 0.25-­0.3 mg/kg IV q6h
to a maximum of 5 days; maximum single dose 15
mg for those < 50 kg and 30 mg for those ≥ 50 kg

Antiinflammatory; reversible antiplatelet effects; may cause
gastritis; useful for short-­term situations in which oral dosing
is not feasible.

Diclofenac sodium

2-­3 mg/kg/day divided in 2 or 3 doses
Maximum daily dose: 150 mg

Antiinflammatory; reversible antiplatelet effects; lower risk of
gastritis and ulceration compared with other NSAIDs.

Celecoxib

Only approved for children ≥2 yr;
≥10 kg to ≤25 kg: 50 mg PO bid
>25 kg: 100 mg PO bid

Antiinflammatory; no or minimal antiplatelet or gastric effects;
cross-­reactivity with sulfa allergies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

682 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
aspirin-­containing medications that may be available over the counter
when treating patients.
NSAIDs are used widely to treat pain and fever in children. Most
currently available NSAIDs are nonselective cyclooxygenase (COX)
inhibitors, that is, drugs that nonselectively block the activity of both
COX-­1 (found in gastric mucosa and platelets) and COX-­2 (active
in inflammatory pathways and cortical renal blood flow regulation)
enzymes that synthesize prostaglandins. In children with juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, ibuprofen and aspirin are equally effective, but
ibuprofen is associated with fewer side effects and better drug adherence. NSAIDs, used adjunctively in surgical patients, reduce opioid
requirements (and therefore opioid side effects) by as much as 35–40%.
Although NSAIDs can be useful postoperatively, they should be used
as an adjunct to, not as a substitute for, opioids in patients with acute
moderate to severe pain.
Ketorolac is useful in treating moderate to severe acute pain in
patients who are unable or unwilling to take oral NSAIDs. Intravenous diclofenac is also available in other countries. U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) recommendations limit ketorolac to five
consecutive days of administration. IV ibuprofen (Caldolor) is FDA
approved for the management of pain and fever in infants and children
>6 months of age, but is not widely available.
Adverse effects of NSAIDs are uncommon but may be serious when
they occur, including gastritis with pain and bleeding; decreased renal
blood flow that may reduce glomerular filtration and enhance sodium
reabsorption, in some cases leading to tubular necrosis; hepatic dysfunction and liver failure; inhibition of platelet function; and an
increased incidence of cardiovascular events in patients predisposed
to stroke and myocardial infarction. Although the overall incidence of
bleeding is very low, gastric bleeding is the most common cause of serious morbidity related to this class of analgesics. NSAIDs should not be
used in the child with a bleeding diathesis or at risk for bleeding and
should be used with caution postsurgically. Use after surgeries such as
tonsillectomy has been debated, but current postoperative guidelines
do include the use of NSAIDs. Renal injury from short-­term use of
ibuprofen in euvolemic children is quite rare; the risk is increased by
hypovolemia or cardiac dysfunction. The safety of both ibuprofen and
acetaminophen for short-­term use is well established (see Table 93.6).
The only COX-­2 specific NSAID currently available in the United
States is oral celecoxib, whereas in other countries parenteral parecoxib
and oral rofecoxib are also available. The coxib drugs are selective
COX-­2 enzyme inhibitors. Therefore they are effective antiinflammatory and analgesic molecules that generally do not result in platelet
inhibition with enhanced bleeding or in gastric inflammation or ulceration, findings that may be seen with the nonselective COX inhibitors
in the NSAID class. COX-­2 selective NSAIDs do inhibit regulation
of cortical renal blood flow and therefore carry the same risk of renal
toxicity and acute tubular necrosis, particularly in the setting of low
cardiac output states or dehydration. Celecoxib is therefore an appropriate primary or adjunctive analgesic to use in children after surgery,
in children with gastric mucosal pathology, or in oncology patients in
whom concern for hemostasis contraindicates conventional NSAIDs.
Use of NSAIDs for pain management in children less than 6 months
is not generally recommended due to immature glomerular filtration.
However, limited use between 3 and 6 months may be appropriate.

Opioids

Opioids are analgesic substances either derived from the opium
poppy (opiates) or synthesized to have a similar chemical structure
and mechanism of action (opioids). The term “narcotics” (narcotic
analgesics) should be avoided for these agents, as it connotes criminality and lacks pharmacologic descriptive specificity. Opioids are
administered for moderate and severe pain, such as acute postoperative pain, pain from trauma, sickle cell crisis pain, and cancer pain.
Opioids can be administered by the oral, rectal, oral transmucosal,
transdermal, intranasal, epidural, intrathecal, IV, subcutaneous (SC),
or intramuscular (IM) route. Regardless of route of administration,
the site of action is at mu (μ) opioid receptors in the peripheral nervous system, spinal cord, brainstem, and higher CNS centers. Infants

and young children are sometimes underdosed with opioids because
of concern about significant respiratory side effects. Opioids’ respiratory depressant effects result from infants’ lower metabolic clearance
of opioids and higher blood levels with frequent dosing. With proper
understanding of the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics of
opioids, children can receive effective relief of pain and suffering with
a good margin of safety, regardless of pharmacokinetic maturity, age,
or size (Tables 93.7-­93.9).
Opioids act by mimicking the actions of endogenous opioid peptides, binding to receptors in the brain, brainstem, spinal cord, and to
a lesser extent in the peripheral nervous system, thus leading to inhibition of nociception. Opioids also bind to μ receptors in the pleasure
centers of the midbrain, particularly in genetically susceptible individuals, a factor responsible for the euphoric effect in some individuals
and the predilection to psychologic dependence and addictive behavior. Opioids also have dose-­dependent respiratory depressant effects
when interacting with the μ-­opioid receptors in the respiratory centers
of the brainstem, depressing ventilatory drive and blunting ventilatory
responses to both hypoxia and hypercarbia. These respiratory depressant effects are increased with co-­administration of other sedating
drugs, particularly benzodiazepines or barbiturates.
Optimal use of opioids requires proactive and anticipatory management of side effects (see Table 93.8) as well as dose adjustments for renal
or hepatic disease (Table 93.10). Common side effects include sedation,
constipation, nausea, vomiting, urinary retention, and pruritus. Tolerance usually develops to the side effect of nausea, which typically subsides with long-­term dosing, but nausea may require treatment with
antiemetics, such as a phenothiazine, butyrophenones, antihistamines,
or a serotonin receptor antagonist such as ondansetron or granisetron.
Pruritus and other complications during patient-­controlled analgesia
with opioids may be effectively managed by low-­dose IV naloxone.
The most common troubling, but treatable, side effect is constipation. Patients who take opioids for chronic pain for long periods
predictably develop tolerance to the sedative and analgesic effects of
opioids over time, but tolerance to constipation does not occur, and
constipation remains a troublesome and distressing problem in almost
all patients with long-­term opioid administration. Stool softeners and
stimulant laxatives should be administered to most patients receiving
opioids for more than a few days. Osmotic and bulk laxatives are less
effective, usually producing more distention and discomfort. A peripherally acting opiate μ-­receptor antagonist, methylnaltrexone, promptly
and effectively reverses opioid-­induced constipation in patients with
chronic pain who are receiving opioids daily. Methylnaltrexone is
approved for use as either an injectable or oral formulation, but only
the SC injection is commercially available, which most children will
object to receiving. Naldemedine and naloxegol are other agents with
actions similar to methylnaltrexone. Lubiprostone is a colonic chloride channel inhibitor that impairs water reabsorption in the colon and
is very effective for opioid-­induced constipation.
Media and government attention to the “opioid epidemic” has reasonably led to scrutiny of the prescription of opioids to children, and
FDA approval of opioid formulations for children has raised alarm and
criticism by some vocal critics of the use of opioids for medical purposes. Thus one of the potent barriers to effective management of pain
with opioids is the fear of addiction held by many prescribing pediatricians and parents alike. Pediatricians should understand the phenomena of tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, and addiction (Table 93.11).
Opioid addiction is the result of the complex interplay of genetic predisposition, psychiatric pathology, and social forces, including poverty, joblessness, hopelessness, and despair. The dramatic increase in
the amount of opioid abuse and overdoses and opioid-­related deaths,
although highest in the adult non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska
Native population age 35–44 years old, has also significantly risen in
children and adolescents. Among persons 14–18 years, overdose
deaths increased 114% from 2019 to 2021 with 2,037 (91.3%) of adolescent overdose deaths in 2021 involving at least one opioid. Despite this
rise in abuse of opioids, a longitudinal study of children and adolescents treated for medical reasons with opioids found that there was no
increased risk of the development of substance abuse, at least until their

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 93.7  Pediatric Dosage Guidelines for Opioid Analgesics
EQUI-­ANALGESIC
DOSES

PARENTERAL DOSING

IV:PO DOSE
RATIO

ORAL DOSING

IV

<50 kg

≥50 kg

<50 kg

≥50 kg

COMMENTS

Fentanyl

10 μg

100 μg

0.5-­1 μg/kg q1-­2h
0.5-­1.5 μg/kg/hr

0.5-­1 μg/kg q1-­2h
0.5-­1.5 μg/kg/hr

Oral
transmucosal:
1:10
Transdermal: 1:1

Oral transmucosal:
10 μg/kg
Transdermal: 12.5-­
50 μg/hr

Transdermal patches
available; patch
reaches steady state
at 24 hr and should
be changed q72h

70-­100 times as potent as morphine with
rapid onset and shorter duration.
With high doses and rapid administration,
can cause chest wall rigidity.
Useful for short procedures; transdermal
form should be used only in opioid-­
tolerant patients with chronic pain.

Hydrocodone

N/A

1.5 mg

N/A

N/A

N/A

0.15 mg/kg

10 mg

Weak opioid; only available in form with
acetaminophen.

Hydromorphone

0.2 mg

0.6 mg

0.01 mg q2-­4h
0.002 mg/kg/hr

0.01 mg q2-­4h
0.002 mg/kg/hr

1:3

0.04-­0.08 mg/kg
q3-­4h

2-­4 mg q3-­4h

Five times the potency of morphine; no
histamine release and fewer adverse
events than morphine.

Methadone

1 mg

2 mg

0.1 mg/kg q8-­24h

0.1 mg/kg q8-­24h

1:2

0.2 mg/kg q8-­12h
PO; available as
liquid or tablet

2.5 mg TID

Duration 12-­24 hr; useful in certain types
of chronic pain; requires additional
vigilance because it will accumulate
over 72 hr and produce delayed
sedation.
When patients tolerant of opioids are
switched to methadone, they show
incomplete cross-­tolerance and
improved efficacy.
Because methadone is associated with
prolonged QTc, monitoring is needed
for children receiving high and
extended dosing.

Morphine

1 mg

3 mg

0.05 mg/kg q2-­4h
0.01-­0.03 mg/
kg/hr

0.1 mg/kg q2-­4h
0.01-­0.03 mg/kg/hr

1:3

Immediate release:
0.3 mg/kg q3-­4h
Sustained release:
20-­35 kg: 10-­15 mg
q8-­12h
35-­50 kg: 15-­30 mg
q8-­12h

Immediate release:
15-­20 mg q3-­4h
Sustained release: 30-­
90 mg q8-­12h

Potent opioid for moderate/severe pain;
may cause histamine release.
Sustained-­release form must be
swallowed whole; if crushed, becomes
immediate acting, leading to acute
overdose.

Oxycodone

N/A

3 mg

N/A

N/A

N/A

0.1-­0.2 mg q3-­4h;
available in liquid
(1 mg/mL)

Immediate release:
5-­10 mg q4h
Sustained release: 10-­
120 mg q8-­12h

Strong opioid only available as an oral
agent in North America; more potent
than and preferable to hydrocodone.
Sustained-­release form must be
swallowed whole; if crushed, becomes
immediate acting, leading to acute
overdose.

N/A, not available.

ORAL

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DRUG

683

684 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 93.8  Management of Opioid-­Induced Adverse Effects
Respiratory depression

Naloxone: 0.01-­0.02 mg/kg up to a full reversal dose of 0.1 mg/kg. May be given IV, IM, IN, SC, or via ETT.
The full reversal dose should initially be used for apnea in opioid-­naive patients. In opioid-­tolerant patients, a
reduced dose should be given and titrated up slowly to treat symptoms but prevent acute withdrawal.
Ventilation may need to be supported during this process.
Dose may be repeated every 2 min to a total of 10 mg.
Adult maximum dose is 2 mg/dose. Give with caution to patients who are receiving long-­term opioid therapy, as it
may precipitate acute withdrawal.
Duration of effect is 1-­4 hr; therefore close observation for recurrent symptoms is essential.

Excessive sedation without
evidence of respiratory
depression

Change opioid or decrease the dose. In palliative patients or other special circumstances, can consider treating
with stimulants.
Methylphenidate*: 0.3 mg/kg per dose PO (typically 10-­20 mg/dose to a teenager) before breakfast and lunch. Do
not administer to patients receiving clonidine, because dysrhythmias may develop.
Dextroamphetamine: 2.5-­10 mg on awakening and at noon. Not for use in young children or in patients with
cardiovascular disease or hypertension.
Modafinil: Pediatric dose not established. May be useful in selected patients. Typical adult dose: 50-­200 mg/day.

Nausea and vomiting

Metoclopramide†: 0.15 mg/kg IV up to 10 mg/dose q6-­12h for 24 hr.
Trimethobenzamide: if weight <15 kg, 100 mg PO or PR q6h; if >15 kg, 200 mg PO or PR q6h. (Note: Suppository
contains benzocaine 2%.) Not for use in newborn infants or premature infants.
5-­HT3 receptor blockers:
Ondansetron: 0.15 mg/kg up to 8 mg IV q6-­8h not to exceed 32 mg/day (also available as a sublingual tablet).
Granisetron: 10 to 20 μg/kg IV q12-­24h.
Prochlorperazine*‡ (Compazine): >2 yr or >20 kg, 0.1 mg/kg per dose q8h IM or PO up to 10 mg/dose.
Change opioid.

Pruritus

Hydroxyzine: 0.5 mg/kg PO q6h.
Nalbuphine: 0.1 mg/kg IV q6h for pruritus caused by intraaxial opioids, especially fentanyl. Administer slowly over
15-­20 min. May cause acute reversal of systemic μ-­receptor effects and leave κ-­agonism intact.
Naloxone: 0.5-­2 mcg/kg/hr IV infusion (titrate up to decrease pruritus and reduce infusion if pain increases).
Ondansetron: 0.05-­0.1 mg/kg IV or PO q8h.
Cyproheptadine†: 0.1-­0.2 mg/kg PO q8-­12h. Maximum dose 12 mg.
Change opioid.

Constipation

Encourage water consumption, high-­fiber diet, and vegetable fiber.
Bulk laxatives: Metamucil, Maltsupex.
Lubricants: Mineral oil 15-­30 mL PO daily as needed (not for use in infants because of aspiration risk).
Surfactants: Sodium docusate (Colace):
<3 yr: 10 mg PO q8h
3-­6 yr: 15 mg PO q8h
6-­12 yr: 50 mg PO q8h
>12 yr: 100 mg PO q8h
Stimulants:
Bisacodyl suppository (Dulcolax):
<2 yr: 5 mg PR qhs
>2 yr: 10 mg PR qhs
Senna syrup (218 mg/5 mL): >3 yr: 5 mL qhs
Enema: Fleet hypertonic phosphate enema (older children; risk of hyperphosphatemia).
Electrolytic/osmotic: Milk of magnesia; for severe impaction: polyethylene glycol (GoLYTELY, MiraLAX).
Methylnaltrexone is an opioid antagonist that works in the colon and does not cross the blood-­brain barrier to
reverse analgesia; given as subcutaneous injection every day or every other day (0.15 mg/kg) and is effective in
producing stool in 30-­60 min in most patients.

Urinary retention

Straight catheterization, indwelling catheter.
Decrease opioids, use naloxone drip.

*Avoid in patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
†May be associated with extrapyramidal side effects, which may be more often seen in children than in adults.
‡Consider pretreatment with diphenydramine to decrease risk of anti-dopaminergic adverse events (e.g., dystonia).
ETT, Endotracheal tube; IV, intravenously; IM, intramuscularly; IN, intranasally; PO, orally; PR, rectally; SC, subcutaneously.
Modified from Burg FD, Ingelfinger JR, Polin RA, et al., eds. Current Pediatric Therapy, 18th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006, p 16.

mid-­20s. Thus the rational short-­or even long-­term use of opioids in
children does not lead to a predilection for or risk of addiction in a
child not otherwise at risk because of genetic background, economic
factors, or social milieu.
It is equally important for pediatricians to realize that even patients
with recognized substance abuse diagnoses are entitled to effective
analgesic management, which often includes the use of opioids. If legitimate concerns exist about addiction in a patient, safe, effective opioid
pain management is often best provided by specialists in pain management and addiction medicine. Table 93.12 outlines the U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) opioid recommendations for
chronic pain (primarily in adults).
There is no longer a reason to administer opioids by IM injection.
Continuous IV infusion of opioids is an effective option that permits

more constant plasma concentrations and clinical effects than intermittent IV bolus dosing without the pain associated with IM injection.
The most common approach in pediatric centers is to administer a low-­
dose basal opioid infusion while permitting patients to use a patient-­
controlled analgesia (PCA) device to titrate the dosage above the
infusion (Fig. 93.3) (see Chapter 91). Compared with children given
intermittent IM morphine, children using PCA reported better pain
scores. PCA has several other advantages: (1) dosing can be adjusted to
account for individual pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variation and for changing pain intensity during the day; (2) psychologically
the patient is more in control, actively coping with the pain; (3) overall opioid consumption tends to be lower; (4) fewer opioid side effects
occur; and (5) patient satisfaction is generally much higher. Children
as young as 5-­6 years old can effectively use PCA. The device can also

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
be activated by parents or nurses, known as PCA-­by-­proxy (PCA-­P)
or parent-­nurse controlled analgesia (PNCA), which produces analgesia in a safe, effective manner for children who cannot activate the
Table 93.9  Equianalgesic Doses and Half-­Life (T1/2β) of
Some Commonly Used Opioids
OPIOID

IM/IV DOSE
(mg)

ORAL DOSE
(mg)

Morphine

10

30

2-­3

Oxycodone

15

20-­30

2-­3

Fentanyl

0.15-­0.2

—

3-­5

Alfentanil

0.75-­1.5

—

1-­2

Sufentanil

0.02

—

2-­3

Methadone

10

10-­15

15-­40

Hydromorphone

1.5

7.5

3-­4

Tramadol†

100

100

5-­7

Buprenorphine

0.4

0.8 (sublingual)

3-­5

Pentazocine

60

150

3-­5

Nalbuphine

10-­20

—

2-­4

Butorphanol

2

—

2-­3

T1/2β (hr)

†Only part of its analgesic action results from action on μ-­opioid receptors.

NOTES:
• Published reports vary in the suggested doses considered to be equianalgesic to
morphine. Therefore titration to clinical response in each patient is necessary.
• Suggested doses are the results of single-­dose studies only. Therefore use of the
data to calculate total daily dose requirements and repeated or continuous doses
may not be appropriate.
• There may be incomplete cross-­tolerance between these drugs. In patients who have
been receiving one opioid for a prolonged period, it is usually necessary to use a
dose lower than the expected equianalgesic dose when changing to another opioid
and to titrate to effect.
Modified from Macintyre PE, Ready LB. Acute Pain Management: A Practical Guide,
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001, p 19.

685

PCA demand button themselves because they are too young or intellectually or physically impaired. PCA overdoses have occurred when
well-­meaning, inadequately instructed parents pushed the PCA button
in medically complicated situations, with or without the use of PCA-­P,
highlighting the need for patient and family education, use of protocols, physiologic monitoring, and adequate nursing supervision.
Because of the high risk of adverse side effects (respiratory depression), the FDA has issued contraindications for the pediatric use of
codeine and tramadol (Table 93.13).

Local Anesthetics

Local anesthetics are widely used in children for topical application,
cutaneous infiltration, peripheral nerve block, neuraxial blocks (intrathecal or epidural infusions), and IV infusions (see Chapter 91). Local
anesthetics can be used with excellent safety and effectiveness. Local
anesthetics interfere with neural transmission by blocking neuronal
sodium channels. Excessive systemic dosing can cause seizures, CNS
depression, and (by cardiac and arteriolar sodium channel blockade)
hypotension, arrhythmias, cardiac depression, and cardiovascular collapse. Local anesthetics therefore require a strict maximum dosing
schedule. Pediatricians should be aware of the need to calculate these
doses and adhere to guidelines.
Topical local anesthetic preparations do not generally result in
measurable systemic blood levels and can reduce pain in diverse
circumstances: suturing of lacerations, placement of peripheral IV
catheters, lumbar punctures, and accessing indwelling central venous
ports (Table 93.14). The application of tetracaine, epinephrine
(adrenaline), and cocaine (TAC) results in good anesthesia for suturing wounds but should not be used on mucous membranes or the
hypervascular faces of young children. An alternative combination
of lidocaine, epinephrine, and tetracaine (LET) is preferred to avoid
the psychomimetic properties of cocaine. EMLA, a topical eutectic
mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine used to anesthetize intact skin,
is frequently applied for venipuncture, lumbar puncture, and other
needle procedures. A 5% liposomal lidocaine cream (LMX4) is also
effective as a topical anesthetic. Another unique device is the needle-­
free J-­tip, which uses a CO2 cartridge to deliver lidocaine into the
subcutaneous tissue via a micro-­atomizing tip. This can be used to

Table 93.10  Opioid Use Guidelines in Hepatic and Renal Dysfunction

DRUG

PKA

PROTEIN
BINDING (%)

PHASE 1
METABOLISM

PHASE 2
METABOLISM

ACTIVE
METABOLITE

Morphine

8.0

30

None

Glucuronidation

M6G

Fentanyl

8.4

80

CYP3A4

None

Hydromorphone

8.2

20

None

Methadone

8.3

90

Codeine

8.2

Oxycodone

BILIARY
EXCRETION1
(%)
10

RENAL
EXCRETION2

USE IN
RENAL
FAILURE

Metabolites

Use with
cautiona,c

None

Norfentanyl

Preferredb,e

Glucuronidation

H6G

H3G & H6G

Use with
cautiona,d

CYP2B6
CYP3A4,
CYP2D6

None

None

Metabolites

Use with
cautionb,e

25

CYP2D6

None

Morphine,
Hydrocodone
M6G

M6G

Nob,d

8.5

45

CYP3A4,
CYP2D6

None

Oxymorphone

Noroxycodone

Use with
cautionf

Oxymorphone

8.2

10

CYP3A4

Glucuronidation

None

Noroxymorphone

Use with
cautiona,c

Remifentanil

7.1

70

Esterase

None

None

Metabolite

20-­40

1In the setting of hepatic dysfunction, all opioids should be used cautiously (“go low, go slow”). Meperidine (inactive metabolite associated with seizures) and codeine (cannot be

metabolized into active metabolite, morphine) should not be used. Fentanyl may be the best opioid to use (in severe liver dysfunction, plasma cholinesterase may not be available
to metabolize remifentanil).
2In the setting of renal failure, metabolites of morphine, codeine, hydromorphone, hydrocodone, and meperidine can accumulate, producing increased therapeutic and adverse effects.
aParent drug removed by dialysis; bParent drug not/poorly dialyzed; cMetabolites removed by dialysis; dMetabolites not/poorly dialyzed; eMetabolites inactive;

From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Table 23.6, p. 496.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

686 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 93.11  Practical Aspects of Prescribing Opioids
• Morphine, hydromorphone, or fentanyl is regarded as first choice
for severe pain.
• Dosing should be titrated and individualized. There is no “right”
dose for everyone.
• The right dose is the dose that relieves pain with a good margin
of safety.
• Dosing should be more cautious in infants, in patients with
coexisting diseases that increase risk or impair drug clearance,
and with concomitant administration of sedatives.
• Hydromorphone is metabolized by CYP2D6 and fentanyl by
CYP3A4 and to some extent 2D6; drugs that compete for 2D6
enzyme will raise blood levels and increase risk of respiratory
depression.
• Morphine is metabolized by glucuronidation to an active
metabolite, morphine-­6-­glucuronide, which accumulates and
causes CNS toxicity in renal impairment.
• Anticipate and treat peripheral side effects, including
constipation, nausea, and itching.
• Give doses at sufficient frequency to prevent the return of severe
pain before the next dose.
• Use a drug delivery method, such as patient-­controlled anesthesia
or continuous infusions, that avoids the need for “prn” decision-­
making.
• With opioid dosing for >1 wk, taper gradually to avoid abstinence
syndrome.
• When converting between parenteral and oral opioid doses, use
appropriate potency ratios (see Table 93.9).
• Tolerance refers to decreasing drug effect with continued
administration of a drug. Over time a patient will need higher
dosing to achieve the same clinical effect; however, tolerance to
sedation and respiratory depression develop more rapidly than
tolerance to analgesia. Thus with higher doses, patients do not
experience oversedation or respiratory depression.
• Dependence refers to the need for continued drug dosing
to prevent abstinence syndrome when a drug is abruptly
discontinued or its dose reduced. Abstinence syndrome is
characterized by irritability, agitation, autonomic arousal, nasal
congestion, piloerection, diarrhea, jitteriness, and yawning; it is
produced by administration of potent opioids for >5-­7 days.
• Addiction, a psychiatric pathology, refers to psychologic craving,
compulsive drug-­seeking behavior, and drug use despite
medical harm. Addiction has strong genetic and environmental
determinants. Opioid therapy will not lead to addiction in
nonsusceptible individuals, and opioid underdosing does not
prevent addiction; it may in fact increase drug-­seeking behavior
for relief of pain (e.g., watching the clock), referred to as
“pseudoaddiction.”

start IVs or provide superficial analgesia before a procedure (e.g.,
lumbar puncture).
Lidocaine is the most commonly used local anesthetic for cutaneous infiltration. Maximum safe doses of lidocaine are 5 mg/kg without
epinephrine and 7 mg/kg with epinephrine. Although concentrated
solutions (2%) are commonly available from hospital pharmacies,
more dilute solutions (0.25% and 0.5%) are equally as effective as 1–2%
solutions. The diluted solutions cause less burning discomfort on injection and permit use of larger volumes without achieving toxic doses.
In the surgical setting, cutaneous infiltration is more often performed
with bupivacaine 0.25% or ropivacaine 0.2% because of the much longer duration of effect; maximum dosage of these long-­acting amide
anesthetics is 2-­3 mg/kg and 3-­4 mg/kg, respectively. Liposomal bupivacaine injectable suspension (Exparel) is approved for children age 6
years old and above. It is an excellent choice for surgical wound infiltration. The maximum dose for children is 4 mg/kg.
Neuropathic pain may respond well to the local application of a 5%
lidocaine topical patch (Lidoderm) for 12 hours/day (see Table 93.14),
although access to lidocaine topical patches may be limited by insurance coverage. Over-­the-­counter 4% lidocaine patches are available
without prescription. Peripheral and central neuropathic pain also
may respond to IV lidocaine infusions, which may be used in hospital

settings for refractory pain, complex regional pain syndromes, and pain
associated with malignancies or the therapy of malignancies, such as
oral mucositis after bone marrow transplantation. In these patients, 1-­2
mg/kg/hr should be administered and the infusion titrated to achieve
a blood lidocaine level in the 2-­5 μg/mL range, with use of twice-­daily
therapeutic blood monitoring.

UNCONVENTIONAL MEDICATIONS IN
PEDIATRIC PAIN

Unconventional analgesic medication refers to a wide number of drugs
developed for other indications but found to have analgesic properties.
These drugs have been used for acute and chronic pain and include
antidepressants, antiepileptic drugs, and neurotropic drugs (Tables
93.15 and 93.16).
The unconventional analgesics are generally used to manage neuropathic pain conditions, migraine disorders, fibromyalgia syndrome,
and some forms of functional chronic abdominal pain syndromes.
These agents also are used as components of multimodal analgesia in
the management of surgical, somatic, and musculoskeletal pain. Figure
93.4 presents a decision-­making tree to help the physician select the
appropriate analgesic category for various types of pain.
Although several unconventional pain medications are FDA
approved for analgesic use, most are not approved for use in youth with
acute or chronic pain. Thus these drugs should be used with caution,
with a focus on mitigating pain to allow a child to participate effectively
in therapies and return to normal activity as soon as possible. The use
of psychotropic medications should be guided by the principles applied
to pharmacologic treatment of any symptom or disease. Target symptoms should be identified and medication side effects monitored. To
determine dosing regimens, the physician should consider the child’s
weight and the effects that the medical condition and other medications, such as psychotropic drugs, may have on the child’s metabolism.
Therapeutic blood level monitoring can be considered. Side effects
should be addressed in detail with both parent and child and specific
instructions given for responding to possible adverse events. Directly
addressing concerns about addiction, dependence, and tolerance may
be necessary to decrease treatment-­related anxiety and improve medication adherence.

Antidepressant Medications

Antidepressants are useful in adults with chronic pain, including neuropathic pain, headaches, and rheumatoid arthritis, independent of
their effects on depressive disorders. Antidepressants’ analgesic mechanism of action is inhibition of norepinephrine reuptake in the CNS.
In children, because clinical trials have been limited, the practitioner
should use antidepressants cautiously to treat chronic pain or associated depressive or anxiety symptoms. The FDA has issued a “black
box warning” to inform the public of a small but significant increase
in suicidal thoughts and attempts in children and adolescents receiving antidepressants. A meta-­analysis of studies involving children and
adolescents receiving antidepressants for pain indicated that no suicides had been completed. The pediatrician should address this issue
with parents of patients being treated with antidepressants and should
develop monitoring plans consistent with current FDA recommendations (see Table 93.16).
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have been studied in children
with chronic pain and found to be effective in pain relief for symptoms that include neuropathic pain, functional abdominal pain, and
migraine. TCA efficacy may be based on inhibition of the neurochemical pathways involved in norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake and
interference with other neurochemicals involved in the perception
or neural conduction of pain. Because sedation is a common side
effect, TCAs may also be effective in treating the sleep disorders that
frequently accompany pediatric pain. Biotransformation of TCAs is
extensive in healthy children. Typically, TCAs are administered only
at bedtime, especially the more sedating tricyclic medications such as
amitriptyline. Alternatively, the patient can be started on a bedtime
dose of a TCA, which may be able to then be titrated to a daily divided
dose, with the larger dose given at bedtime. It should be noted that
pain symptoms usually remit at lower doses than those recommended

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management

687

Table 93.12  CDC Practice Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Pain (2022) Excluding Sickle Cell Anemia, Cancer, Palliative
Care and End of Life Care
DETERMINING WHETHER OR NOT TO INITIATE OPIOIDS FOR PAIN
All patients with pain should receive treatment that provides the
greatest benefits relative to risks. (See Recommendation 1 for
determining whether or not to initiate opioids for acute pain [i.e.,
pain lasting <1 month] and Recommendation 2 for determining
whether or not to initiate opioids for subacute pain [i.e., pain lasting
1–3 months] or chronic pain [i.e., pain lasting >3 months].)
Recommendation 1
Nonopioid therapies are at least as effective as opioids for many
common types of acute pain. Clinicians should maximize use of
nonpharmacologic and nonopioid pharmacologic therapies as
appropriate for the specific condition and patient and only consider
opioid therapy for acute pain if benefits are anticipated to outweigh
risks to the patient. Before prescribing opioid therapy for acute
pain, clinicians should discuss with patients the realistic benefits and
known risks of opioid therapy.
Recommendation 2
Nonopioid therapies are preferred for subacute and chronic pain.
Clinicians should maximize use of nonpharmacologic and nonopioid
pharmacologic therapies as appropriate for the specific condition
and patient and only consider initiating opioid therapy if expected
benefits for pain and function are anticipated to outweigh risks to
the patient. Before starting opioid therapy for subacute or chronic
pain, clinicians should discuss with patients the realistic benefits and
known risks of opioid therapy, should work with patients to establish
treatment goals for pain and function, and should consider how
opioid therapy will be discontinued if benefits do not outweigh risks.
SELECTING OPIOIDS AND DETERMINING OPIOIDS DOSAGES
Recommendation 3
When starting opioid therapy for acute, subacute, or chronic pain,
clinicians should prescribe immediate-release opioids instead of
extended-release and long-acting (ER/LA) opioids.
Recommendation 4
When opioids are initiated for opioid-naïve patients with acute, subacute,
or chronic pain, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective dosage.
If opioids are continued for subacute or chronic pain, clinicians should
use caution when prescribing opioids at any dosage, should carefully
evaluate individual benefits and risks when considering increasing
dosage, and should avoid increasing dosage above levels likely to yield
diminishing returns in benefits relative to risks to patients.
Recommendation 5
For patients already receiving opioid therapy, clinicians should carefully
weigh benefits and risks and exercise care when changing opioid
dosage. If benefits outweigh the risks of continued opioid therapy,
clinicians should work closely with patients to optimize nonopioid
therapies while continuing opioid therapy. If benefits do not
outweigh risks of continued opioid therapy, clinicians should optimize
other therapies and work closely with patients to gradually taper to
lower dosages or, if warranted based on the individual circumstances
of the patient, appropriately taper and discontinue opioids. Unless
there are indications of a life-threatening issue such as warning signs
of impending overdose (e.g., confusion, sedation, or slurred speech),
opioid therapy should not be discontinued abruptly, and clinicians
should not rapidly reduce opioid dosages from higher dosages.

DECIDING DURATION OF INITIAL OPIOID PRESCRIPTION AND
CONDUCTING FOLLOW-UP
Recommendation 6
When opioids are needed for acute pain, clinicians should prescribe
no greater quantity than needed for the expected duration of pain
severe enough to require opioids.
Recommendation 7
Clinicians should evaluate benefits and risks with patients within 1–4
weeks of starting opioid therapy for subacute or chronic pain or of
dosage escalation. Clinicians should regularly reevaluate benefits
and risks of continued opioid therapy with patients.
ASSESSING RISK AND ADDRESSING POTENTIAL HARMS OF
OPIOID USE
Recommendation 8
Before starting and periodically during continuation of opioid
therapy, clinicians should evaluate risk for opioid-related harms and
discuss risk with patients. Clinicians should work with patients to
incorporate into the management plan strategies to mitigate risk,
including offering naloxone.
Recommendation 9
When prescribing initial opioid therapy for acute, subacute, or
chronic pain, and periodically during opioid therapy for chronic
pain, clinicians should review the patient’s history of controlled
substance prescriptions using state prescription drug monitoring
program (PDMP) data to determine whether the patient is receiving
opioid dosages or combinations that put the patient at high risk for
overdose.
Recommendation 10
When prescribing opioids for subacute or chronic pain, clinicians
should consider the benefits and risks of toxicology testing to
assess for prescribed medications as well as other prescribed and
nonprescribed controlled substances.
Recommendation 11
Clinicians should use particular caution when prescribing opioid
pain medication and benzodiazepines concurrently and consider
whether benefits outweigh risks of concurrent prescribing of opioids
and other central nervous system depressants.
Recommendation 12
Clinicians should offer or arrange treatment with evidencebased medications to treat patients with opioid use disorder.
Detoxification on its own, without medications for opioid use
disorder, is not recommended for opioid use disorder because of
increased risks for resuming drug use, overdose, and overdose
death.

From Dowell D, Ragan KR, Jones CM, et al: CDC clinical practice guidelines for prescribing opioids for pain – United States, 2022. MMWR 2022;71(3):1-95.

or required for the treatment of mood disorders. Most children and
adolescents do not require more than 0.25-­1 mg/kg of amitriptyline or
nortriptyline once daily at bedtime.
Attention should also be paid to hepatic microsomal enzyme metabolism, because CYP2D6 inhibitors, such as cimetidine and quinidine, can
increase levels of TCAs. Anticholinergic side effects, which are less common in children than in adults, may remit over time. Constipation, orthostatic hypotension, and dental caries from dry mouth should be addressed
by emphasizing the importance of hydration, good oral hygiene, and regular dental visits. Other side effects include weight gain, mild bone marrow suppression, and liver dysfunction. Some practitioners recommend
monitoring CBC and liver function values at baseline and periodically

during therapy. TCA blood levels can be obtained as well, but the need for
therapeutic blood monitoring should be assessed on an individual basis.
Reasons for blood level monitoring include concerns for altered metabolism, adherence, overdose, or sudden change in mental status.
All TCAs inhibit cardiac conduction pathways and prolong the QT
interval. Sudden cardiac death has been reported in children taking
TCAs, principally desipramine, probably related to QTc prolongation.
There is no general agreement for monitoring the electrophysiologic
effects of these drugs, but it is prudent to obtain a careful personal
and family history focusing on cardiac arrhythmias, heart disease,
and syncope before the initiation of treatment. A baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) should be obtained, with care taken to ensure that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pain

Drug concentration

‘Analgesic Increasing
corridor’ side effects

688 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia

Increase in pain stimulus
0

4

8

12
16
Time (hours)

20

24

Fig. 93.3 Patient-­controlled analgesia is more likely to keep blood

concentrations of opioid within the “analgesic corridor” and allows rapid titration if there is an increase in pain stimulus requiring higher blood
levels of opioid to maintain the analgesia. (From Burg FD, Ingelfinger
JR, Polin RA, et al., eds. Current Pediatric Therapy,18th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006:16.)

Table 93.13  Summary of FDA Recommendations
• Use of codeine to treat pain or cough in children <12 yr old is
contraindicated.
• Use of tramadol to treat pain in children <12 yr old is
contraindicated.
• Use of tramadol for treatment of pain after tonsillectomy or
adenoidectomy in patients <18 yr old is contraindicated. (Codeine
was already contraindicated in such patients.)
• Use of codeine or tramadol in children 12-­18 yr old who are obese
or who have an increased risk of serious breathing problems, such
as those with obstructive sleep apnea or severe lung disease, is
not recommended.
• Use of codeine or tramadol in breastfeeding women should be
avoided.
From FDA warns against use of codeine and tramadol in children and breastfeeding
women. Med Lett. 2017;59(1521):86–88.

the QTc is <450 msec. If the dose of amitriptyline or nortriptyline
is increased beyond 0.5 mg/kg/day, an ECG should be performed
for each dosing increase. With TCAs, as with other antidepressants,
physical dependence and a known discontinuation syndrome can
occur. The discontinuation syndrome includes agitation, sleep disturbances, appetite changes, and GI symptoms. These medications
should be tapered slowly to assist in distinguishing among symptoms
that indicate rebound, withdrawal, or the need for continuing the
medication.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have minimal efficacy in the treatment of a variety of pain syndromes in adults. SSRIs
are very useful when symptoms of depression or anxiety are present
and cannot be addressed adequately by nonpharmacologic means.
Escitalopram (Lexapro), fluoxetine (Prozac), and sertraline (Zoloft)
have been approved by the FDA for use in children and adolescents.
SSRIs have a significantly milder side effect profile than TCAs (most
side effects are transient), and they have no anticholinergic side effects.
Chief side effects include GI symptoms, headaches, agitation, insomnia, sexual dysfunction, and anxiety. Rarely, hyponatremia, or the
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH),
may occur. Interactions with other medications that have serotonergic
effects may also occur. When multiple medications with serotonergic
activity are used in combination, there may be increased likelihood
that a life-­threatening serotonin syndrome may occur, with associated symptoms of myoclonus, hyperreflexia, autonomic instability,
muscle rigidity, and delirium (see Chapter 94). It is important to note
that although triptans have serotonergic effects, it is unlikely that
the combination will lead to serotonin syndrome. This is because it
is hypothesized that serotonin receptors 2A and 1A are the receptors
involved in serotonin syndrome, whereas triptans are selective for
serotonin antagonists 1B and 1D. There is also a discontinuation syndrome associated with shorter-­acting SSRIs (e.g., paroxetine), which
includes dizziness, lethargy, paresthesias, irritability, and vivid dreams.
To avoid this, dosages of medications should be tapered slowly over
several weeks.
The selective serotonin-­
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
(SNRIs) duloxetine and venlafaxine have demonstrated significant
efficacy with chronic neuropathic and other pain syndromes because
they inhibit both serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake, and they
may directly block associated pain receptors as well. Venlafaxine has
no pain indication labeling. Duloxetine is FDA approved for managing
neuropathic pain (specifically, diabetic neuropathy) and fibromyalgia

Table 93.14  Topical Pharmacologic Management of Acute Pain in Children
DRUG

DOSE

INTACT SKIN
Lidocaine 2.5% and prilocaine 2.5% (EMLA
cream)

NOTES

<3 mo old or <5 kg: 1 g
3-­12 mo and >5 kg: 2 g
1-­6 yr and >10 kg: 10 g
7-­12 yr and >20 kg: 20 g

60 min is needed to achieve maximum effect;
cover cream with an occlusive dressing
(Tegaderm)

Lidocaine, liposomal 5% (LMX4)

1-­20 g as noted earlier

30-­60 min needed to achieve maximum effect;
cover with an occlusive dressing (Tegaderm)

Lidocaine 70 mg and tetracaine 70 mg (Synera
patch)

Age ≥3 yr: apply patch

20-­30 min needed to achieve maximum effect

Tetracaine 4% (Ametop)

>1 mo and <5 yr: apply 1 tube of gel (1 g)
>5 yr: apply up to 5 tubes of gel (5 g)

30 min before venipuncture
45 min before intravenous cannulation

Age ≥1 yr: apply to wound

20 min needed for maximum effect

WOUNDS
Lidocaine, epinephrine, tetracaine (LET)
solution or gel*

*Also referred to as ALA on the basis of alternative names for the constituents: adrenaline, lignocaine, amethocaine. These mixtures are locally made by hospital formularies, with a
common formula being lidocaine 4% plus epinephrine 0.1% plus tetracaine 0.5%. The cocaine-­based formulation was historically avoided on wounds of digits, ears, penis, nose,
mucous membranes, close to the eye, or deep wounds involving bone, cartilage, tendon, or vessels. The lidocaine-­based formulation can be used in such settings.
Adapted from Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management of pain in children in the emergency department. Lancet. 20166;387:83–92.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management

689

Table 93.15  Commonly Used Adjunctive Analgesics
DRUG NAME
(TRADE NAME)

SUGGESTED STARTING DOSE AND
DOSING INTERVAL
MAXIMUM DOSE PER DAY

ADVANTAGES (INDICATION FOR
USE)

DISADVANTAGES (SIDE
EFFECTS)

Gabapentin
(Neurontin)

10-­15 mg/kg per day divided bid or tid
Max dose: 50 mg/kg per day (3 g/day)

Adjunct for the management of
pediatric neuropathic pain, epilepsy

Drug reaction with eosinophilia
and systemic symptoms (DRESS),
anaphylaxis, somnolence,
dizziness, peripheral edema,
emotional lability, respiratory
depression when combined with
opioids

Pregabalin (Lyrica)

2.5 mg/kg per day divided bid or tid
Max dose: 600 mg per day

Adjunct for the management of
neuropathic pain associated with
spinal cord injury, fibromyalgia, and
epilepsy

Ataxia, blurred vision, visual field
loss, constipation, drowsiness,
headaches, peripheral edema,
weight gain, tremor

Clonidine (Catapres)

5-­25 mcg/kg per day divided every 4-­8
hours if PO dosing
Max dose: 2.4 mg/day

Used to treat hypertension and
mitigate drug withdrawal symptoms;
also used as a pain or peripheral
nerve block additive

Drowsiness, dizziness, fatigue,
headache, dry mouth,
hypotension

Dexmedetomidine
(Precedex)

Loading dose: 0.5-­1 mcg/kg
Infusion rate: 0.2-­0.7 mcg/kg per hour
titrated to effect
Suggested max dose: 2.5 mcg/kg per
hour

Sedative and analgesic properties;
intraoperative bolus dose of 1 mcg/
kg decreases postoperative morphine
consumption and 2 mg/kg decreases
emergence delirium

Bradycardia, hypotension

Tizanidine (Zanaflex)

Patients >18 yr: starting dose 2 mg q6-8h
Max single dose: 16 mg
Max daily dose: 36 mg

Antispasmodic agent

Dizziness, drowsiness, bradycardia,
hypotension, fatigue,
hallucinations, xerostomia

Diazepam (Valium)

PO: 0.1-­0.8 mg/kg/day
IV: 0.05-­0.3 mg/kg/dose every 4-­8 hr
Max dose: 10 mg
Use lowest needed dose; use lower dose
when combined with opioids or other
sedating medications

Antispasmodic, anxiolytic, sedative,
seizure prophylaxis, promotes sleep

Somnolence, unsteady gait

Cyclobenzaprine
(Flexeril)

Patients >15 yr: 5 mg PO bid-­tid
Max dose: 10 mg PO tid

Antispasmodic

Blurry vision, dizziness, drowsiness,
lightheadedness, xerostomia

Ketamine

Loading dose: 0.25-­0.5 mg/kg IV before
incision
Infusion rate:
0.1-­1 mg/kg per hr intraoperatively
0.05-­0.1 mg/kg per hr postoperatively
Max parenteral dose 3,600 mg/day

Sedation, analgesic adjunct,
especially beneficial for
opioid-­tolerant or chronic pain
patients

Hallucinations, double/blurry
vision, jerky muscle movements,
drowsiness, loss of appetite,
nausea

Lidocaine

Loading dose: 1-­1.5 mg/kg IV
Infusion rate:
1-­2 mg/kg per hr intraoperatively
Max dose: 4.5 mg/kg (not to exceed 300
mg in 2 hr)

Used during intraabdominal
procedures to prevent severe
postoperative pain

Cardiac arrhythmia,
epilepsy/seizures, renal failure

Modified from Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Table 23.12, p. 510.

syndrome. It is approved for the treatment of pediatric fibromyalgia
in adolescents 13-­17 years of age and for the treatment of generalized
anxiety disorder in children 7-­17. A significant advantage of SNRIs
over TCAs when used for headache prophylaxis or neuropathic pain
is that they have therapeutic effects on mood and anxiety at dosages
effective for pain control.
Because both SSRIs and SNRIs have fewer anticholinergic side effects
than TCAs, adherence to them is better than in psychiatric populations
taking TCAs. Side effects of both types of drugs include GI symptoms,
hyperhidrosis, dizziness, and agitation, but these effects generally wane
over time. Hypertension and orthostatic hypotension may occur; in
addition, the patient’s blood pressure should be closely followed, and
appropriate hydration should be stressed. Note that whereas appetite
stimulation and weight gain are associated with all TCAs, duloxetine
is often associated with weight loss, frequently a desirable side effect,
especially in overweight adolescents.

All antidepressants, including the TCAs, SSRIs, and SNRIs, are
thought to have the potential to increase the risk of suicidal ideation and the risk of suicide in patients, as noted earlier. The FDA
states, “All pediatric patients being treated with antidepressants for
any indication should be observed closely for clinical worsening,
suicidality, and unusual changes in behavior, especially during the
initial few months of a course of drug therapy, or at times of dose
changes, either increases or decreases.” However, the FDA also notes,
“Although there has been a long-­standing concern that antidepressants may have a role in inducing worsening of depression and the
emergence of suicidality in certain patients, a causal role for antidepressants in inducing such behaviors has not been established.
Nevertheless, patients being treated with antidepressants should be
observed closely for clinical worsening and suicidality, especially
at the beginning of a course of drug therapy, or at the time of dose
changes, either increases or decreases.”

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

690 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 93.16  Medications for Pediatric Chronic Pain
MEDICATION

DOSING

COMMENTS

TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Amitriptyline, nortriptyline
For patients ≥50 kg: Initial dose 5-­10 mg PO qhs; titrate over
2-­3 weeks to 25-­50 mg PO qhs
For patients 25-­50 kg: Initial dose 0.1 mg/kg PO qhs. Titrate
over 2-­3 weeks to max dose of 0.5 mg/kg

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN-NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)
For patients > 13 yr: Dose 30-60 mg PO daily; max 600 mg/day
ANTICONVULSANTS
Gabapentin (Neurontin)

Pregabalin (Lyrica)

Obtain 12-­lead ECG for prolonged QT interval
Side effects are related to anticholinergic effects,
including tachycardia, dry mouth, urinary
retention, and sedation
Use with caution with other antidepressants
because of risk of serotonin syndrome
Concomitant use with CYP2D6 inhibitors may lead
to increased serum concentration
Review risk of suicidality

For patients ≥50 kg: Initial dose 100-300 mg PO 1-­2 times
daily; titrate slowly to max dose of 1,800 mg/day divided
tid; higher dosing possible in select patients
For patients <50 kg: Initial dose 2-­5 mg/kg PO daily; titrate
slowly to max dose of 35 mg/day divided tid; higher
dosing possible in select patients

Side effects include drowsiness, concentration and
memory impairments, and peripheral edema
(rare)
Dose adjustment necessary with renal impairment

Patients >12 yr of age: Initial dose 25-75 mg PO 1-­2 times
daily; titrate up to max of 300 mg/day divided bid or tid

Side effects include drowsiness, headaches, peripheral
edema (rare), and thrombocytopenia (rare)

Titrate all medications according to clinical benefit and side effects; use lowest effective dose.
Antidepressants and anticonvulsants may increase the risk of suicidal thinking and behavior in children, adolescents, and young adults. Monitor
closely for changes in mood or behavior.
Modified from Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Table 25.2, p. 580.

Pain diagnosis

Neuropathic pain

Somatic pain

Fail

Conventional analgesics:
APAP, NSAIDs, Coxibs, Opioids

Neuropathic pain
diagnosis

Painful
neuropathy,
CRPS

Migraine, CDH

No
Mood lability?

Small fiber
neuropathy

Sleep
disturbance?

Capsaicin
No

Yes

Yes

Fail

Valproic acid

Tricyclic
antidepressant

Antiepileptic
drug

Fail

Add

Fail

Fail
Nerve block

Fig. 93.4 Algorithm for selection of conventional and nonconventional analgesics. APAP, Acetaminophen; CDH, chronic daily headaches;
CRPS, complex regional pain syndrome; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

Antiepileptic Drugs

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), such as gabapentin, pregabalin, carbamazepine, and valproic acid, are believed to relieve chronic pain
by blocking sodium (valproate and the gabapentinoids) or calcium

(carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine) channels at the cellular neuronal
level, thereby suppressing spontaneous electrical activity and restoring the normal threshold to depolarization of hypersensitive nociceptive neurons, without affecting normal nerve conduction. These
medications are particularly useful in patients with mood disorders
who have neuropathic pain. In adults, the FDA has approved carbamazepine for trigeminal neuralgia; valproate for migraine prophylaxis;
and pregabalin for neuropathic pain complicating diabetes, herpes
zoster, and for management of fibromyalgia. AEDs generally have GI
side effects in addition to sedation, anemia, ataxia, rash, and hepatotoxicity. The majority are also associated with weight gain. Carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are also associated with Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome.
Liver function and CBC should be monitored at the start of therapy and periodically with AEDs. Carbamazepine and valproic acid
have narrow therapeutic windows and variability in therapeutic blood
medication levels, in addition to many drug-­drug interactions, and
may cause liver disease and renal impairment. Drug levels should be
measured with each dose increase and periodically thereafter. Carbamazepine, in particular, causes autoinduction of hepatic microsomal
enzymes, which can further complicate obtaining a therapeutic medication level. Female patients should have pregnancy testing before taking valproate, and those who are sexually active must be cautioned to
use effective contraception, because neural tube defects are associated
with carbamazepine.
Less toxic AEDs (gabapentin and pregabalin) have supplanted the
use of valproate and carbamazepine in patients with pain. These agents
have their own side effect profiles, but they are much less toxic than
their predecessors and do not require monitoring of liver or bone marrow function or blood levels. Furthermore, they are also far less lethal
in accidental or deliberate overdose.
Gabapentin is approved for treatment of postherpetic neuralgia and
is also widely prescribed for other pain disorders. It has demonstrated
some efficacy in treating children with chronic pain, particularly neuropathic pain, and is used in treatment of chronic headache disorders,
complex regional pain syndromes, chemotherapy-­induced neuropathy,
and diabetic neuropathy in both children and adults. Gabapentin has
a relatively benign side effect profile and no drug interactions. Side
effects include somnolence, dizziness, and ataxia; children occasionally demonstrate side effects not reported in adults, such as impulsive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
or oppositional behavior, agitation, and occasionally depression. These
side effects do not seem to be dose related.
Pregabalin works by similar mechanisms as gabapentin and may
have a lower side effect profile. It is most often dosed twice a day rather
than three times a day, which may lead to increased adherence. Both
gabapentin and pregabalin undergo virtually no hepatic metabolism,
with no significant drug-­drug interactions, a common concern in
patients with chronic pain, who frequently take multiple medications—
for both the pain and the underlying medical condition associated with
the pain. However, because both AEDs depend on renal function for
clearance, doses must be adjusted in the presence of renal dysfunction.
Topiramate also demonstrates greater success than traditional
AEDs in treating trigeminal neuralgia in adults and in migraine prophylaxis. Topiramate is approved for migraine prophylaxis in children
and adolescents from the age of 12-­17. Topiramate therapy results
more frequently in cognitive dysfunction and short-­term memory
loss than gabapentin or pregabalin, and although these neurocognitive
effects are often well tolerated, they should be monitored. The pediatrician should also be aware that topiramate is associated with weight
loss, whereas other AEDs are typically associated with significant
weight gain. This side effect is particularly valuable in weight-­conscious
adolescents, whereas in the anorexic cancer patient, a TCA would be
preferable to induce appetite and weight gain. In at-­risk populations,
routine weight checks are recommended.

Benzodiazepines

Children and adolescents with chronic pain may have comorbid psychologic conditions, such as depressed mood, sleep disturbances, and
anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, separation
anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and panic attacks. Psychologic factors affect a youth’s perception of pain and mechanisms
of coping with a pain disorder. A conditioned response to pain may be
to feel out of control and increase anxiety and pain, and conversely,
anticipatory anxiety related to pain will inhibit activities and recovery.
Feelings of helplessness sensitize the child to increasing amounts of
pain, leading the child to perseverate on pain, think catastrophically,
and feel hopeless. Changes in children’s normal routines, with a negative impact on participation in valued activities, may further promote
hopelessness, resulting in increased pain experiences and development
of a depressive disorder.
Benzodiazepines are anxiolytic medications that also have muscle
relaxant effects. They have a role in the treatment of acute pain in the
hospital, where they are useful adjuncts because they inhibit painful
muscle spasms in postsurgical patients. They also can suppress the
anxiety that often occurs in hospitalized children, anxiety that interferes with restorative sleep and amplifies the child’s perception of pain.
Benzodiazepines are useful to calm children with anxiety and anticipatory anxiety about planned painful procedures. They are frequently
used as a part of procedural sedation or preoperatively before surgical
procedures.
Because dependence, tolerance, and withdrawal may occur with
prolonged use, benzodiazepines are generally not recommended for
the routine management of chronic pain or anxiety in children. Further, the risk of respiratory depression when benzodiazepines are combined with opioid therapy has contributed to the increasing number
of opioid-­related deaths in the United States. In concert with psychotherapy, benzodiazepines may help control anxiety symptoms that
amplify the perception of pain, but we recommend the appropriate use
of benzodiazepines in the chronic setting occur under the direction of
a psychiatrist. In addition, other alternatives such as hydroxyzine may
provide similar benefit without the negative aspects encountered with
chronic benzodiazepine use.
Infrequently, benzodiazepines may cause behavioral disinhibition,
psychosis-­like behaviors, or, in large doses, respiratory depression.
When dosing these medications, the pediatrician should consider
that many benzodiazepines are metabolized by the cytochrome P450
microsomal enzyme system. This issue may be less significant with
lorazepam and oxazepam, which undergo first-­pass hepatic conjugation. Side effects common to benzodiazepines include sedation, ataxia,

691

anemia, increased bronchial secretions, and depressed mood. If a
benzodiazepine is administered for more than 5 consecutive days, the
dosage should be slowly tapered. Abrupt discontinuation of therapy
can lead to autonomic instability, delirium, agitation, seizures, and profound insomnia. The routine use of benzodiazepines to treat anxiety
during hospitalization is not recommended and should only be used
under expert guidance.

Antipsychotics and Major Sedatives

Low doses of antipsychotic medications are often used to address
the more severe anxiety, agitation, and behavioral decompensation
sometimes associated with severe pain. The use of these medications
is controversial because associated adverse events may be severe and
irreversible. Typical antipsychotics used in the past, including thioridazine (Mellaril), haloperidol (Haldol), and chlorpromazine (Thorazine),
are associated with a decreased seizure threshold, dystonia, agranulocytosis, weight gain, cardiac conduction disturbances, tardive dyskinesia, orthostatic hypotension, hepatic dysfunction, and life-­threatening
laryngeal dystonia and have little role in the routine treatment of pain
in children. Chlorpromazine is approved in adults for intractable
hiccups, and its use may be appropriate in select settings such as the
palliative setting, although this is not considered a first-­line medication. Side effects are generally less severe with atypical antipsychotics.
Because these effects may still occur, however, the pediatrician should
obtain a baseline ECG, liver function values, and CBC and, if possible, obtain a child psychiatry consultation. If the pediatrician is using
typical antipsychotics, an inventory of movement disturbances, such
as the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) test, should be
performed at baseline and at every follow-­up visit, because movement
disorders can worsen with abrupt withdrawal of medications or can
become irreversible.
Atypical antipsychotics are generally associated with less severe
side effect profiles, particularly dyskinesias and dystonias. Use of olanzapine (Zyprexa), which is particularly helpful with insomnia and
severe anxiety, requires assessing and monitoring blood levels of glucose, cholesterol, and triglyceride; olanzapine’s side effects may include
diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, or significant weight gain. The anticholinergic side effects associated with quetiapine (Seroquel) warrant
frequent monitoring of blood pressure. Risperidone at doses >6 mg
may cause side effects similar to those of typical antipsychotics. Aripiprazole (Abilify) has been used for severe anxiety and/or for treatment-­
resistant depression. All antipsychotics are associated with the rare but
potentially lethal neuroleptic malignant syndrome, which includes
severe autonomic instability, muscular rigidity, hyperthermia, catatonia, and altered mental status (see Chapter 33).

Other Pain Control Medications

Alpha-­adrenergic receptor agonists such as clonidine are typically used
as antihypertensive agents. However, they are often helpful as both anxiolytics and sleep-­onset agents in the anxious hospitalized child. The
α-­agonists also have central effects on pain reduction. Clonidine can
be given orally or transdermally if the child’s blood pressure permits.
In certain settings, IV dexmedetomidine, an α-­agonist sedating agent,
can be used preoperatively for anxiety, in the intensive care unit (ICU)
for sedation, and may be used for pain in certain circumstances. Weaning off dexmedetomidine can often be accomplished with a transition
to clonidine. Propranolol and metoprolol are both β-­blocking agents
typically used for the child with autonomic instability and for thalamic storm. They may also be used in migraine prophylaxis. There are
reports that β blockers can enhance depression in a child who already
has a major depressive disorder, and discussion with a child psychiatrist may be helpful in decisions about using propranolol if needed.
Both clonidine and propranolol have been found useful for the agitated
child with ASD. Another α-­agonist, guanfacine, is more likely to be
used during the day for the child with ASD because it is less sedating
than clonidine. Despite research on the impact of clonidine on chronic
pain, no data are available to determine if guanfacine is as effective in
reducing pain. Ketamine, a blocker of N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate (NMDA)
receptors, has been used for intractable pain in hospitalized children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

692 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Neonate

Infant

Preschool

School-age

Oral stimulation: breastfeeding, pacifier, sucking
Physical
comfort
measures

Adolescent

Cold and heat

Physical contact: skin-to-skin contact, rocking,
cuddling, swaddling, kangaroo care
Touch: stroking, rubbing, patting

Blowing bubbles, lighted wand, sound, music, books
Puppets, imitation game
Distracting
activities

Art: drawing, coloring, play dough
Interactive games: video games, movies, computer games, books
Guided imagery, hypnosis

Fig. 93.5 Nonpharmacologic interventions for pediatric pain. (From Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management
of pain in children in the emergency department. Lancet. 2016;387:83–92.)

and in outpatients with severe sickle cell disease–related chronic pain,
as well as others in palliative care for whom opioids are not sufficient to
reduce pain. Recommended doses for pain management in non-­ICU
settings are between 0.1 and 0.3 mg/kg/hr. Higher doses may result
in increased side effects, sedation with little benefit, and possible ICU
admission. Because ketamine can have central hallucinatory effects,
such children should be monitored closely.

NONPHARMACOLOGIC TREATMENT OF PAIN

Numerous psychologic and physical treatments for relieving pain,
fear, and anxiety as well as enhancing functioning have excellent safety
profiles and proven effectiveness and should always be considered for
incorporation into pediatric pain treatment (Fig. 93.5). In acute and
procedural pain, nonpharmacologic strategies have long been used to
help reduce distress in children undergoing medical procedures and
surgery. Many of these methods aim to help children shift attention
from pain and alter pain perception (e.g., distraction, hypnosis, imagery). Similarly, in the treatment of chronic pain, several strategies, often
falling under the umbrella category of cognitive-­behavioral therapies
(CBTs), have been shown to reduce pain and improve functioning and
quality of life. CBT was developed with the goal of modifying social/
environmental and behavioral factors that may exacerbate the child’s
experience of pain and pain-­related disability. Meta-­analyses of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of CBT interventions have found
large positive effects of psychologic intervention on reductions in
pain and/or its deleterious effects in children with headache, abdominal pain, and fibromyalgia, with relative or comparative effectiveness
of different interventions examined in areas such as headache and
abdominal pain in children. Biofeedback and relaxation therapies
have been found to have superior effects to pharmacologic treatments
in reducing headache pain in children and adolescents. Similarly, for
recurrent abdominal pain, positive effects for CBT were found relative to attention-­control conditions and pharmaceutical, botanical, and
dietary interventions (which had very weak evidence). Positive results
have even resulted from very brief (three sessions) and remotely delivered (telephone or internet) therapies, with outcomes lasting up to 12
months after intervention.
When deciding how to incorporate nonpharmacologic techniques to
treat pain, the practitioner should (1) conduct a thorough assessment
of individual, social, and environmental factors that may be contributing to the patient’s pain and functioning limitations; (2) based on this
assessment, decide whether nonpharmacologic techniques alone may
be sufficient as a beginning to treatment or if these treatments should
be integrated with appropriate analgesics; (3) give children (and family
members) developmentally and situationally appropriate information
as to the rationale for treatment selection and what to expect, given
the child’s medical condition, procedures, and treatments; (4) include
patients and their families in decision-­making to ensure an appropriate treatment choice and to optimize adherence to treatment protocols;

and (5) above all, develop a communication plan among the different
care providers, typically with the pediatrician as the case manager, so
that the messages to the child and parent are consistent and the modes
of therapy are organized into an integrative team approach. Finally, it
is important to recognize that in addition to pain, other psychologic
disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders, major depression) may affect the presenting pain complaint and may need to be identified and addressed as
part of, or separate from, the pain management plan. Individual psychotherapy or psychiatric intervention may be warranted to adequately
treat a comorbid disorder.
CBT strategies refer to a range of techniques that teach children (and
their caregivers) how to manage pain by learning new ways to think
about the pain and how to change behaviors associated with it. Strategies focusing on cognitions are typically aimed at enhancing parents’
and children’s confidence and self-­efficacy to handle pain and decrease
fear of pain. In addition, pain coping skills may shift the child’s attentional focus away from pain and painful stimuli.
The goals of those strategies focusing on behavior change are to
modify (1) contingencies in the child’s environment, such as teaching
parents how to respond to pain behaviors in ways that encourage wellness, rather than illness behaviors; (2) the ways parents model reactions to pain or discomfort; (3) child and parent coping techniques
when psychosocial distress or problems in social relations exist; and
(4) the child’s behavioral reactions to situations, such as relaxation and
exposure to previously avoided activities. Common examples of these
strategies are discussed in the next several paragraphs. Whereas comprehensive CBTs are typically conducted by trained mental health specialists over several sessions, some basic CBT strategies can be briefly
and easily introduced by practitioners into most medical settings. If
more in-­depth CBT treatment is needed, a referral to a qualified mental
health specialist with CBT skills is warranted.
Parent and family education and/or psychotherapy, particularly within cognitive-­behavioral family approaches, is one treatment
modality through which these goals are accomplished and has been
shown to be effective for treating chronic pain. Parents can learn to
cope with their own distress and to understand pain mechanisms and
appropriate treatment of pain. Key components include teaching parents to alter family patterns that may inadvertently exacerbate pain
through developing behavior plans. Parents are taught to create plans
for the child to manage the child’s own symptoms and increase independent functioning. Often, adult caregivers (e.g., parents, teachers)
need only guidance on developing a behavioral incentive plan to help
the child return to school, gradually increase attendance, and receive
tutoring after a prolonged, pain-­related absence. Suggested sample brief
strategy: Ask caregivers how they react to the child’s pain complaints;
assess whether they encourage wellness activities or give attention and
“rewards” primarily when the child says he or she does not feel well;
and suggest that caregivers respond to the child in ways that encourage
wellness, both when complaining and not complaining.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
Relaxation training is often employed to promote muscle relaxation
and reduction of anxiety, which often accompanies and increases pain.
Relaxation training, along with distraction and biofeedback, are treatments often included in CBT, but also are discussed in the literature
without mention of CBT.
Controlled breathing and progressive muscle relaxation are commonly used relaxation techniques taught to preschool-­age and older
children. Suggested sample brief strategy: Ask the child (or instruct the
caregiver to do so) to practice the following and use if pain is coming on: focus on the breath and pretend to be blowing up a big balloon while pursing the lips and exhaling slowly. This is one way to help
induce controlled breathing.
Distraction can be used to help a child of any age shift attention
away from pain and onto other activities. Common attention sustainers in the environment include bubbles, music, video games, television,
the telephone, conversation, school, and play. Asking children to tell
stories, asking parents to read to the child, and even mutual storytelling
can be helpful distracters. Being involved with social, school, physical,
or other activities helps the child in chronic pain to regain function.
Suggested sample brief strategy: Encourage the child (or instruct the
caregiver to do so) to shift attention away from the pain by continuing
to engage in other activities and/or think of something else.
Biofeedback involves controlled breathing, relaxation, or hypnotic
techniques with a computer synchronized device that provides visual
or auditory feedback to the child when the desired action is approximated. Common targets of actions include muscle tension, peripheral
skin temperature through peripheral vasodilation, and anal control
through rectal muscle contraction and relaxation. Biofeedback also
enhances the child’s sense of mastery and control, especially for the
child who needs more “proof ” of change than that generated through
hypnotherapy alone.
Hypnotherapy has also been used in the treatment of chronic pain in
children, although the evidence for its effectiveness has not been as extensively studied as CBT. Hypnotherapy helps a child focus on an imaginative experience that is comforting, safe, fun, or intriguing. Hypnotherapy
captures the child’s attention, alters his or her sensory experiences, reduces
distress, reframes pain experiences, creates time distortions, helps the
child dissociate from the pain, and enhances feelings of mastery and self-­
control. Children with chronic pain can use metaphor, for example, imagining they have overcome something feared because of pain in real life. As
the child increases mastery of imagined experiences, the enhanced sense
of control can be used during actual pain rehabilitation. Hypnotherapy is
best for children of school age or older.
Nonpharmacologic treatments of pain may also be applied to other
treatment needs. A child who learns relaxation to reduce distress from
lumbar punctures in cancer treatment may also apply this skill to other
stressful medical and nonmedical situations, such as stressors caused
by school.
Yoga is intended to achieve balance in mind, body, and spirit. Therapeutic yoga can be helpful in treating chronic pain; improving mood,
energy, and sleep; and reducing anxiety. Yoga involves a series of asanas
(body poses) oriented to the specific medical condition or symptoms.
Some forms of yoga use poses within a movement flow and format.
Iyengar yoga is an alignment-­based system that uses props, such as
blankets, bolsters, blocks, and belts, to support the body while the practitioner assumes more healing poses. Yoga promotes a sense of energy,
relaxation, strength, balance, and flexibility and, over time, enhances
a sense of mastery and control. Within a yoga practice, the child may
learn certain types of breathing (pranayama) for added benefit. With
a focus on body postures or in types of flow yoga, the child learns
mindfulness or being present in the moment. By focusing on body and
breath, the child can develop strategies to avoid ruminating about the
past or worrying about the future.
Mindfulness meditation involves a focus on the present, “in-­the-­
moment” experience using a variety of strategies. Many studies in
adults report the value of meditation for chronic pain states and for
anxiety and depression. These strategies help children learn how to be
mindful and in the present with enhanced parasympathetic control.
Many mindfulness smartphone applications are geared to children of

693

different ages, as well as books for parents on how to help their children achieve a mindful state to enhance relaxation. Although there are
different schools of mindfulness, such as Vipassana (insight-­oriented
meditation, often using a focus on the breath) and transcendental meditation (in which the child learns the use of a silent mantra to facilitate
acquiring a deeper inner calmness), the goal is to help the child learn
strategies that enhance self-­competence in reducing stress and enhancing a state of well-­being.
Massage therapy involves the therapist’s touching and applying varied degrees of pressure on the child’s muscles. Massage is very useful
for children with chronic pain and especially helpful for those with
myofascial pain. There are several types of massage, including craniosacral therapy. For young children, it can be helpful to have parents
learn and perform brief massage on their children before bedtime.
Massage therapy likely will not be helpful to or tolerated by the child
with sensory sensitivity and sensory aversion.
Physical therapy can be especially useful for children with chronic
musculoskeletal pain and for those deconditioned from inactivity.
Exercise appears specifically to benefit muscle functioning, circulation,
and posture while also improving body image, body mechanics, sleep,
and mood. The physical therapist and the child can develop a graded
exercise plan for enhancing the child’s overall function for the child to
continue at home. Research indicates that physical therapy affects central neurobiologic mechanisms that enhance “top-­down” pain control.
Acupuncture/acupressure involves the placement of needles or
pressure at specific points along a meridian, or energy field, after the
acupuncturist has made a diagnosis of excess or deficient energy in
that meridian as the primary cause of the pain. Acupuncture/acupressure is a feasible, popular part of a pain management plan for children
with chronic pain. Acupuncture/acupressure alleviates chronic nausea, fatigue, and several chronic pain states, including migraine and
chronic daily headaches, abdominal pain, and myofascial pain. Acupuncture/acupressure also has efficacy in adults with myofascial pain,
primary dysmenorrhea, sickle cell crisis pain, and sore throat pain. The
acupuncturist must relate well to children so that the experience is not
traumatic, because added stress would undo the benefits gained.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is the use of a
battery-­operated tool worn on the body to send electrical impulses into
the body at certain frequencies set by the machine. TENS is believed
to be safe and can be tried for many forms of localized pain. Children
often find TENS helpful and effective.
Music therapy and art therapy can be especially helpful for young
and nonverbal children who would otherwise have trouble with traditional talk psychotherapies. Also, many creative children can more
easily express fears and negative emotions through creative expression
and, with the therapist’s help, learn about themselves in the process.
There is also increasing research on the impact of art and music therapy
on altering central neural circuits that maintain and enhance pain.
Dance, movement, pet therapies, and aromatherapy have also
been used and may be helpful, but these have not been as well studied
in children for pain control as have other complementary therapies.
Often, clinical experience helps guide the pediatrician in the benefits
of these therapies with individual patients. For example, pet therapy is
gaining favor in hospitals and in stress reduction for sick children. Pets
often can become self-­regulators for the child with ASD, although the
neurobiologic mechanisms are not yet understood.

INVASIVE INTERVENTIONS FOR TREATING PAIN

Various interventional neuraxial and peripheral nerve blocks may
have a role in the treatment of pain acutely (e.g., long-­bone fracture),
perioperatively, and for the patient with chronic pain (e.g., headache,
abdominal pain, complex regional pain syndrome [CRPS], or cancer
pain). Interventions also provide intraoperative anesthesia and postoperative analgesia (see Chapter 91). Use of interventional procedures
varies greatly across institutions; they may be frequently used at some
hospitals, whereas other institutions focus mainly on noninterventional treatment plans. Interventional procedures may be useful in
some children who have specific types of chronic pain, but their use
in children (as widely practiced in adult pain clinics) generally is not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

694 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
recommended because the pediatric research is insufficient. Therefore the data are largely extrapolated from the adult population. Use
of such procedures in children should generally not be considered or
undertaken by an adult chronic pain provider who is willing to perform such a procedure on a child or adolescent. Rather, the potential
procedure or block should be undertaken only at the direction or guidance of a pediatric pain specialist. Complications and lack of benefit
can occur in children, as may occur in adults; however, more harm may
be done in the pediatric populations. This is especially true as children
and families may “pin their hopes” on a particular intervention “curing their child,” when in reality chronic pain is a complex phenomenon that responds best to multidisciplinary management. This does
not mean that no block should be recommended in children, but that
procedural interventions should be used judiciously, appropriately, and
in conjunction with other biopsychosocial treatments by or under the
guidance of a pediatric pain expert.
Regional anesthesia provides several benefits, particularly in the
acute perioperative setting. As an alternative to or in augmentation
of opioid-­based pain control, regional anesthesia minimizes opioid
requirements and therefore opioid side effects, including nausea, vomiting, somnolence, respiratory depression, pruritus, constipation, and
physical dependence. It can provide equal or improved analgesia, as it
interrupts nociceptive pathways and may profoundly inhibit endocrine
stress responses. Regional anesthesia also results in earlier ambulation
in recovering surgical patients, helps prevent atelectasis in the patient
with chest pain, and usually results in earlier discharge from the hospital. Theoretically, the interruption of nociceptive pathways in the
periphery by regional anesthetics will prevent or reverse the process of
amplification of pain signals induced by nociception (e.g., CNS wind­up, glial cell activation). For postoperative pain, effective regional anesthesia reduces the risks of acute pain evolving to chronic pain. Regional
anesthesia is considered safe and effective if performed by trained staff
with the proper instruments and equipment. Most frequently, nerve
blocks are performed by an anesthesiologist or pain management physician; a few are easily performed by a nonanesthesiologist with appropriate training. The benefits of regional anesthesia are dependent on
adequate coverage of the surgical area, the patient and family’s expectation of the block, and the expertise of the provider performing the
block. When procedures fail to provide adequate analgesia, it can lead
to the need to “catch up” with pain control after surgery.

Head and Neck Blocks

Primary pain syndromes of the head, such as trigeminal neuralgia, are
distinctly unusual in the pediatric population, and few surgical procedures in the head and neck are amenable to regional anesthesia. Headache disorders, very common in the pediatric age-­group, may respond
well to regional anesthesia of the greater occipital nerve. However, this
is not generally considered a first-­line treatment of pediatric headache.
The greater occipital nerve (second cervical, C2) provides sensation
to much of the cranial structures, from the upper cervical region, the
occiput to the apex of the head, or even to the hairline. The greater
occipital nerve can be blocked medial to the occipital artery, which can
usually be identified at the occipital ridge midway between the occipital prominence and the mastoid process by palpation, Doppler sound
amplification, or visualization by ultrasound. The short-­
term and
especially long-­lasting effects of nerve blocks for chronic headaches in
children have not been documented by research. Studies are needed to
determine which children with which types of headaches will benefit
most from occipital nerve blocks. Sphenopalatine blocks are increasingly used in the treatment of multiple types of headaches in adults,
including migraine and postdural puncture headache (PDPH). There
is some evidence to support the benefit of this procedure in children
and adolescents. The sphenopalatine ganglion (SPG) is a collection of
cells closely related to the trigeminal nerve that plays a role in headache
pathology. This block can be performed in a minimally invasive fashion through the nasal cavity. The procedure may be performed either
with the use of marketed devices or with the use of cotton-­tipped applicators. SPG blocks may be performed with or without fluoroscopic
guidance.

Onabotulinum toxin A (Botox) may also be used for the treatment
of chronic migraine in children and adolescents. As with many interventions, the available data for benefit of this treatment for pediatric
migraine are lacking compared with the adult data. However, many
children or adolescents, who may have experienced treatment failure
with medical management of headache, may be considered as candidates for the use of Botox.

Upper Extremity Blocks

The brachial plexus block controls pain of the upper extremity. These
blocks also protect the extremity from movement, reduce arterial
spasm, and block sympathetic tone of the upper extremity. The brachial plexus, responsible for cutaneous and motor innervation of the
upper extremity, is an arrangement of nerve fibers originating from
spinal nerves C5 through T1, extending from the neck into the axilla,
arm, and hand. The brachial plexus innervates the entire upper limb,
except for the trapezius muscle and an area of skin near the axilla.
If pain is located proximal to the elbow, the brachial plexus may be
blocked above the clavicle (roots and trunks); if the pain is located
distal to the elbow, the brachial plexus may be blocked at the axilla
(cords and nerves). The block may be given as a single injection with
a long-­acting anesthetic such as bupivacaine or ropivacaine. This may
provide up to 12-­16 hours of analgesia. Use of a catheter and infusion pump may increase duration and provide continuous analgesia
for several days.

Trunk and Abdominal Visceral Blocks

Trunk blocks provide somatic and visceral analgesia and anesthesia for
pain or surgery of the thorax and abdominal area. Sympathetic, motor,
and sensory blockade may be obtained. These blocks are often used
in combination to provide optimal relief. Intercostal and paravertebral blocks may be beneficial in patients for whom a thoracic epidural
injection or catheter is contraindicated (e.g., patient with coagulopathy). Respiratory function is maintained, and the side effects of opioid
therapy are eliminated.
The intercostal, paravertebral, erector spinae, rectus sheath, and
transverse abdominal plane blocks are most useful for pediatric chest
and somatic abdominal pain. The celiac plexus and splanchnic nerve
block can be useful for abdominal visceral pain, such as that caused
by malignancy or pancreatitis. These blocks are best performed by an
experienced anesthesiologist, pain physician, or interventional radiologist using ultrasound or CT imaging guidance.
The intercostal block is used to block the intercostal nerves, the
anterior rami of the thoracic nerves from T1 to T11. These nerves
lie inferior to each rib, between the inner and innermost intercostal
muscles with their corresponding vein and artery, where they can be
blocked, generally posterior to the posterior axillary line. Guidance
with either fluoroscopy or ultrasound is often employed to decrease
risks associated with this block. With use of ultrasound imaging, the
intercostal nerves and the pleura can be identified, which can decrease
risks such as pneumothorax or hemothorax that are associated with
this procedure. The erector spinae plane block has also shown to be
effective for blocking several levels of intercostal nerves while avoiding
the attendant risks of multilevel intercostal nerve blocks.
The paravertebral block, another alternative to intercostal nerve
block or epidural analgesia, is useful for pain associated with thoracotomy or with unilateral abdominal surgery, such as nephrectomy
or splenectomy. Essentially this block results in multiple intercostal
blocks with a single injection. The thoracic paravertebral space, lateral
to the vertebral column, contains the sympathetic chain, rami communicantes, dorsal and ventral roots of the spinal nerves, and dorsal
root ganglion. Because it is a continuous space, local anesthetic injection will provide sensory, motor, and sympathetic blockade to several
dermatomes. The paravertebral block may be performed as a single
injection or, for a very prolonged effect, as a continuous infusion over
several days or weeks via a catheter. This block is best performed by
an anesthesiologist or interventional pain physician under ultrasound
guidance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
Ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerve blocks are indicated with
surgery for inguinal hernia repair, hydrocele, or orchidopexy repair
and for chronic pain subsequent to these procedures. The first lumbar (L1) nerve divides into the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves,
which emerge from the lateral border of the psoas major muscle. The
iliohypogastric nerve supplies the suprapubic area as it pierces the
transversus abdominis muscle and runs deep to the internal oblique
muscle. The ilioinguinal nerve supplies the upper medial thigh and
superior inguinal region, as it also pierces the transversus abdominis
muscle and runs across the inguinal canal. Ultrasound guidance helps
ensure success for this nerve block.
The celiac plexus block is indicated for surgery or pain of the pancreas and upper abdominal viscera. The celiac plexus, located on each
side of the L1 vertebral body, contains one to five ganglia. The aorta
lies posterior, the pancreas anterior, and the inferior vena cava lateral
to these nerves. The celiac plexus receives sympathetic fibers from the
greater, lesser, and least splanchnic nerves, as well as from parasympathetic fibers from the vagus nerve. Autonomic fibers from the liver,
gallbladder, pancreas, stomach, spleen, kidneys, intestines, and adrenal
glands originate from the celiac plexus. This block is best performed
with CT guidance to provide direct visualization of the appropriate
landmarks, avoid vascular and visceral structures, and confirm correct
needle placement. The close proximity of structures such as the aorta
and vena cava make this a technical procedure best performed by an
anesthesiologist, interventional pain physician, or interventional radiologist. The evidence for use of this block for chronic pediatric pain
is lacking; as such, this block should not be routinely employed in the
treatment of chronic noncancer pain.
Nerve blocks have been used for the treatment of anterior cutaneous
nerve entrapment syndrome (ACNES). ACNES is characterized by pain
associated with use of abdominal muscles. On exam, this can be identified via Carnett sign. Pathology and causation in the pediatric population are not well understood. Treatment may include identification of
a specific pain source under ultrasound guidance with infiltration of a
local anesthetic or local anesthetic and steroid mixture. Evidence for
use of this procedure is limited.

Lower Extremity Blocks

Lumbar plexus and sciatic nerve blocks provide pain control for painful conditions or surgical procedures of the lower extremities, with the
benefit of providing analgesia to only one extremity while preserving
motor and sensory function of the other. The lumbosacral plexus is
Table 93.17  Budapest Criteria for Clinical Diagnosis
of CRPS
1.	Pain (ongoing and disproportionate to any inciting event)
2.	Symptoms (reported): At least one symptom in three out of four
of the following categories:

• Sensory – Hyperesthesia and/or allodynia
• Vasomotor – Temperature asymmetry and/or skin color changes and/or
skin color asymmetry
• Sudomotor/Edema – Edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating
asymmetry
• Motor/Trophic – Decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction
(weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)

3.	Signs (examined): At least one sign in two out of four of the
following categories:

• Sensory – Hyperalgesia (to pinprick) and/or allodynia (to light touch and/
or temperature sensation and/or deep somatic pressure and/or joint
movement)
• Vasomotor – Temperature asymmetry (>1°C) and/or skin color changes
and/or asymmetry
• Sudomotor/Edema – Edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating
asymmetry
• Motor/Trophic – Decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction
(weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)

4.	Diagnosis of exclusion: No other diagnosis better explains the
signs and symptoms.
CRPS, Complex regional pain syndrome
From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Box 25.1, p. 583.

695

an arrangement of nerve fibers originating from spinal nerves L2-­L4
and S1-­S3. The lumbar plexus arises from L2-­L4 and forms the lateral
femoral cutaneous, femoral, and obturator nerves. These nerves supply
the muscles and sensation of the upper leg, with a sensory branch of the
femoral nerve (saphenous nerve) extending below the knee to innervate the medial aspect of the foreleg, ankle, and foot. The sacral plexus
arises from L4-­S3 and divides into the major branches of the sciatic,
tibial, and common peroneal nerves. These nerves in turn supply the
posterior thigh, lower leg, and foot. Unlike the brachial plexus block,
blockade of the entire lower extremity requires more than one injection
because the lumbosacral sheath is not accessible. Separate injections
are necessary for the posterior (sciatic) and anterior (lumbar plexus)
branches, and the injections can be performed at any of several levels
during the course of the nerve, as is clinically expedient. The lumbar
plexus can be blocked in the back, resulting in analgesia of the femoral,
lateral femoral cutaneous, and obturator nerves. Alternatively, any of
these three nerves can be individually anesthetized, depending on the
location of the pain. Similarly, the sciatic nerve can be anesthetized
proximally as it emerges from the pelvis or, more distally, in the posterior thigh, or its major branches (tibial and peroneal nerves) can be
individually anesthetized. These nerve blocks are generally best performed by an anesthesiologist, pain physician, or radiologist.

Sympathetic Blocks

Sympathetic blocks were once thought to be useful in the diagnosis
and treatment of sympathetically mediated pain, CRPS (Table 93.17),
and other neuropathic pain conditions (Table 93.18), but large meta-­
analyses have shown their utility to be minimal. When blocks of the
sympathetic plexuses are performed, sympathectomy is obtained
Table 93.18  Examples of Neuropathic Pain Syndromes
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM FOCAL AND
MULTIFOCAL LESIONS
Postherpetic neuralgia
Cranial neuralgias (e.g., trigeminal neuralgia, glossopharyngeal
neuralgia)
Diabetic mononeuropathy
Nerve entrapment syndromes
Plexopathy from malignancy or irradiation
Phantom limb pain
Posttraumatic neuralgia (e.g., nerve root compression, after
thoracotomy)
Ischemic neuropathy
Complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2
Erythromelalgia
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM GENERALIZED
POLYNEUROPATHIES
Metabolic/nutritional: Diabetes mellitus, pellagra, beriberi, multiple
nutritional deficiency, hypothyroidism
Toxic: Alcohol-­, platinum-­, or taxane-­based chemotherapy; isoniazid;
antiretroviral drugs
Infective/autoimmune: HIV, acute inflammatory polyneuropathy
(Guillain-­Barré syndrome), neuroborreliosis (Bannwarth syndrome)
Hereditary: Fabry disease
Malignancy: Carcinomatosis
Others: Idiopathic small fiber neuropathy, erythromelalgia
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LESIONS
Spinal cord injury
Prolapsed disc
Stroke (brain infarction, spinal infarction)
Multiple sclerosis
Surgical lesions (e.g., rhizotomy, cordotomy)
Complex neuropathic disorders
Complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2
Adapted from Freynhagen R, Bennett MI. Diagnosis and management of neuropathic
pain. BMJ. 2009;339:b3002.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

696 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
without attendant motor or sensory anesthesia. Their use for pain management was grounded in the notion that many types of chronic pain
were mediated via the sympathetic nerves. This mechanistic model has
been proven to be false.
The stellate ganglion block was indicated for pain in the face or
upper extremity and for CRPS, phantom limb pain, amputation stump
pain, or circulatory insufficiency of the upper extremities. The lumbar sympathetic block addressed pain in the lower extremity, CRPS,
phantom limb pain, amputation stump pain, and pain from circulatory
insufficiency.
The analgesia produced by peripheral sympathetic blocks usually
outlives the duration of the local anesthetic, often persisting for weeks or
indefinitely. If analgesia is transient, the blocks may be performed with
catheter insertion for continuous local anesthesia of the sympathetic
chain over days or weeks. Because precise, radiographically guided
placement of the needle and/or catheter is required for safety and success, sympathetic blocks are generally best performed by an anesthesiologist, interventional pain physician, or interventional radiologist.
While all these procedures can be considered for the treatment of
certain chronic pediatric pain conditions, there is overall a lack of evidence to support routine use in children and adolescents. This information should be used for learning and awareness rather than as a
guide map for specific treatment of these conditions. When needed, a
dedicated pediatric pain provider should be consulted and these blocks
used judiciously when appropriate.
In addition, any time these procedures are considered for the treatment of chronic pain, special consideration should be given to potential risks and complications.

Epidural Anesthesia (Thoracic, Lumbar, and Caudal)

Epidural anesthesia and analgesia are indicated for pain below the
clavicles, management of regional pain syndromes, cancer pain unresponsive to systemic opioids, and pain limited by opioid side effects.
The three layers of the spinal meninges—dura mater (outer), arachnoid mater (middle), and pia mater (inner)—envelop the spinal neural
tissue. The subarachnoid space contains cerebrospinal fluid between
the arachnoid mater and pia mater. The epidural space extends from
the foramen magnum to the sacral hiatus and contains fat, lymphatics,
blood vessels, and the spinal nerves as they leave the spinal cord. The
epidural space separates the dura mater from the periosteum of the
surrounding vertebral bodies. In children, the fat in the epidural space
is not as dense as in adults, predisposing to greater spread of the local
anesthetic from the site of injection.
Epidural local anesthetics block both sensory and sympathetic fibers,
and if the local anesthetic is of sufficient concentration, they also block
motor fibers. Mild hypotension may occur, although it is unusual in
children <6 years of age. Epidural local anesthetics high in the thoracic
spine may also anesthetize the sympathetic nerves to the heart (the cardiac accelerator fibers), producing bradycardia. In addition to using
local anesthetics, it is routine to use opioids and sometimes α-­agonists
as adjunctive medications in the epidural space. Clonidine and opioids
have been well studied and shown not to be neurotoxic. Side effects
of epidural opioid administration include delayed respiratory depression, particularly when hydrophilic opioids such as morphine are used.
The risk of this effect requires that children receiving epidural opioids
by intermittent injection or continuous infusion be monitored by continuous pulse oximetry and nursing observation, particularly during
the first 24 hours of therapy or after significant dose escalations. Respiratory depression occurring after the first 24 hours of epidural opioid
administration is distinctly unusual.
Epidural clonidine (an α2-­agonist with μ-­opioid analgesic properties) is associated with minimal risk and side effects. Although product
labeling indicates use only in children with severe cancer pain, clonidine may be used for treatment of routine postoperative pain as well as
pain syndromes such as CRPS. Mild sedation is the most common side
effect of epidural clonidine, and it is not associated with respiratory
depression.
Because performing epidural blockade is technical and may result
in spinal cord injury, it is best done by an anesthesiologist or pain

physician skilled in the technique. Caution is advised in the use of epidural anesthesia/analgesia for CRPS in children because no published
RCTs have shown these procedures superior to a combination of less
invasive physical and psychologic therapy, with or without neuropathic
pain-­focused medications.

INTRATHECAL ANALGESIA

Intrathecal catheters infused with opioids, clonidine, ziconotide
(derived from a marine neurotoxin produced by the cone snail), and
local anesthetics are occasionally applicable in pediatric patients with
intractable pain from cancer or other life-­
threatening conditions.
Typically, intrathecal catheters are attached to an implanted electronic
pump containing a drug reservoir sufficient for several months of dosing. The technique is technical and best performed by an experienced
pain management physician or neurosurgeon.

NERVE ABLATION AND DESTRUCTION

In some cases, pain remains refractory despite maximal reliance on oral
and IV medications and nerve blockade. In these patients, temporary
(pulsed radiofrequency ablation) or permanent neurolytic destruction
(phenol or alcohol) of one or more nerves may be performed. The techniques should be carefully weighed against the consideration of permanent nerve destruction in a growing child with decades of life ahead. On
the other hand, when pain is severe in life-­limiting disease processes,
the long-­term considerations are less concerning, and these techniques
should be discussed with a skilled pain management specialist.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR SPECIAL
PEDIATRIC POPULATIONS
Pain Perception and Effects of Pain on
Newborns and Infants

Pain may result from a number of circumstances in the newborn
period, including acute pain (diagnostic and therapeutic procedures,
minor surgery, monitoring), continuous pain (pain from thermal/
chemical burns, postsurgical and inflammatory pain), and chronic or
disease-­related pain (necrotizing enterocolitis, nerve injury, chronic
conditions, thrombophlebitis). The most common sources of pain in
healthy infants are acute procedures, such as heel lances, surgical procedures, and in males, circumcision.
Many procedures are performed for premature infants in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). In the first week of life, approximately
94% of preterm infants <28 weeks gestational age are mechanically
ventilated; in these situations, heelsticks and airway suctioning are frequent, yet few of these procedures are preceded by any type of analgesia. Repeated handling and acute pain episodes sensitize the neonate
to increased reactivity and stress responses to subsequent procedures.
Typical stress responses include increases in heart rate, respiratory rate,
blood pressure, and intracranial pressure. Cardiac vagal tone, transcutaneous oxygen saturation, carbon dioxide levels, and peripheral blood
flow are decreased. Autonomic signs include changes in skin color,
vomiting, gagging, hiccupping, diaphoresis, dilated pupils, and palmar
and forehead sweating (see Table 93.4).
Untreated pain in the newborn has serious short-­and long-­term
consequences. There has been a shift in most NICUs to more liberal
use of opioids. Nonetheless, morphine, the traditional gold standard
of analgesia for acute pain, may not be effective and may have adverse
long-­term consequences. No differences have been found in the incidence of severe intraventricular hemorrhage or in the mortality rate
when infants receiving morphine are compared with a placebo group,
and there are no changes in assessed pain from tracheal suctioning in
ventilated infants receiving morphine compared with those receiving
a placebo infusion. Morphine may not alleviate acute pain in ventilated preterm neonates, although there are few data on the effects of
morphine and fentanyl in nonventilated newborns. The lack of opioid
effects for acute pain in neonates may result from immaturity of opioid receptors; acute pain may cause the uncoupling of μ-­opioid receptors in the forebrain. Repetitive acute pain may create central neural
changes in the newborn that may have long-­term consequences for
later pain vulnerability, cognitive effects, and opioid tolerance. Most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
Table 93.19  World Health Organization Analgesic Ladder
for Cancer Pain
STEP 1
Patients who present with mild to moderate pain should be treated
with a nonopioid.
STEP 2
Patients who present with moderate to severe pain or for whom
the step 1 regimen fails should be treated with an oral opioid for
moderate pain combined with a nonopioid analgesic.
STEP 3
Patients who present with very severe pain or for whom the step
2 regimen fails should be treated with an opioid used for severe
pain, with or without a nonopioid analgesic.

neonatologists use opioids in painful situations. Sucrose and pacifiers
are also being used in the NICU. The effects of 24% sucrose (Sweetease) are believed to be opioid mediated because the effect can be
reversed with naloxone. Sucrose, with or without a pacifier, may be
effective for acute pain and stress control. Other nonpharmacologic
strategies for stress and pain control include infant care by an individual primary nurse, tactile-­kinesthetic stimuli (massage), “kangaroo
care,” and soothing sensorial saturation.

Children With Cancer Pain

The World Health Organization (WHO) proposed an analgesic therapy model for cancer pain known as the analgesic ladder (Table 93.19).
Designed to guide therapy in care systems with limited access to analgesic experts, this ladder consists of a hierarchy of oral pharmacologic
interventions intended to treat pain of increasing magnitude. The hierarchy ignores modalities such as the use of nonconventional analgesics
and interventional pain procedures, which physicians in developed
countries are often able to prescribe. Nevertheless, because oral medications are simple and efficacious, especially for home use, the ladder
presents a framework for rationally using them, before applying other
drugs and techniques of drug administration.
Oral medications are the first line of analgesic treatment. Because
NSAIDs affect platelet adhesiveness, they are typically not used. As
noted earlier, celecoxib may be the exception to this rule. Opioid therapy is the preferred approach for moderate or severe pain. Nonopioid
analgesics are used for mild pain, a weak opioid is added for moderate
pain, and strong opioids are administered for more severe pain. Adjuvant analgesics can be added, and side effects and comorbid symptoms
are actively managed. Determining the type and sources of the pain
will help develop an effective analgesic plan. Certain treatments, such
as the chemotherapeutic agent vincristine, are associated with neuropathic pain. Such pain might require anticonvulsants or TCAs. Stretching pain from tumor growth within an organ might require strong
opioids and/or radiation therapy if the tumor is radiosensitive. Organ
obstruction, such as intestinal obstruction, should be diagnosed to
relieve or bypass the obstruction.
It is important to consider both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic strategies (e.g., CBT, family/parent support) to treat pain in children with cancer.

Children with Pain Associated with Advanced
Disease

Patients with advanced diseases, including cancer, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), neurodegenerative disorders, and
cystic fibrosis, need palliative care approaches that focus on optimal
quality of life. Nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic management
of pain and other distressing symptoms is a key component. Palliative
care should be offered to all children with serious diseases, whether
or not the diseases are potentially curable or long life expectancy is
predicted (see Chapter 8). Examples include young children diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (>90% posttreatment life

697

expectancy) and children undergoing organ transplantation. Palliative care in pediatrics connotes treatment that focuses on symptom
reduction, quality of life, and good family and clinical team communication. It is not only for patients in hospice care or those at the end
of life. Differences in the progression of underlying illness, associated
distressing symptoms, and common emotional responses in these
conditions should shape individual treatment plans. For end-­of-­life
care, >90% of children and adolescents with cancer can be made
comfortable by standard escalation of opioids according to the WHO
protocol. A small subgroup (5%) requires enormous opioid dose escalation to >100 times the standard morphine or other opiate infusion
rate. Most of these patients have spread of solid tumors to the spinal cord, roots, or plexus, and signs of neuropathic pain are evident.
Methadone given orally is often used in palliative care, not only end-­
of-­life care, because of its long half-­life and its targets at both opioid
and NMDA receptors.
The type of pain experienced by the patient (neuropathic, myofascial) should determine the need for adjunctive agents. Complementary
measures, such as massage, hypnotherapy, and spiritual care, must also
be offered in palliative care. Although the oral route of opioid administration should be encouraged, especially to facilitate care at home, if
possible, some children are unable to take oral opioids. Transdermal
and sublingual routes, as well as IV infusion with PCA, are likely next
choices. Small, portable infusion pumps are convenient for home use.
If venous access is limited, a useful alternative is to administer opioids (especially morphine or hydromorphone, but not methadone or
meperidine) through continuous SC infusion, with or without a bolus
option. A small (e.g., 22-­gauge) cannula is placed under the skin and
secured on the thorax, abdomen, or thigh. Sites may be changed every
3-­7 days, as needed. As noted, alternative routes for opioids include the
transdermal and oral transmucosal routes. These latter routes are preferred over IV and SC drug delivery when the patient is being treated
at home.

CHRONIC AND RECURRENT PAIN SYNDROMES

Chronic pain is defined as recurrent or persistent pain lasting longer
than the normal tissue healing time (3-­6 months). Children may experience pain related to injury (e.g., burns) or to a chronic or underlying
disease process (e.g., cancer, arthritis), or pain can also be the chronic
condition itself (e.g., CRPS, fibromyalgia, functional abdominal pain)
(see Chapter 212). During childhood, abdominal, musculoskeletal, and
headache pain are the most frequently occurring conditions. However,
definitions of chronic pain do not take into account standard criteria
for assessing particular pain symptoms or for evaluating the intensity or impact of pain and therefore include individuals with varying
symptoms and experiences. Consequently, in epidemiologic surveys,
prevalence estimates vary widely. Overall prevalence rates for different
childhood pains range from 4% to 88%. An average of 13.5–31.8% of
adolescents in a community sample reported having weekly abdominal, headache, or musculoskeletal pains. Most epidemiologic studies
report prevalence and do not report the severity or impact of the pain.
Research indicates that only a subset of children and adolescents with
chronic pain (approximately 5%) experience moderate to severe disability, and this likely better represents the estimated population for
whom help is needed to treat pain and associated problems.

Neuropathic Pain Syndromes

Neuropathic pain is caused by abnormal excitability in the peripheral or central nervous system that may persist after an injury heals
or inflammation subsides. The pain, which can be acute or chronic,
is typically described as burning or stabbing and may be associated
with cutaneous hypersensitivity (allodynia), distortion of sensation
(dysesthesia), and amplification of noxious sensations (hyperalgesia
and hyperpathia). Neuropathic pain conditions may be responsible
for >35% of referrals to chronic pain clinics, conditions that typically
include posttraumatic and postsurgical peripheral nerve injuries,
phantom pain after amputation, pain after spinal cord injury, and pain
caused by metabolic neuropathies (see Table 93.18). Patients with neuropathic pain typically respond poorly to opioids. Evidence supports

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

698 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the efficacy of antidepressants (nortriptyline, amitriptyline, venlafaxine, duloxetine) and anticonvulsants (gabapentin, pregabalin, oxcarbazepine) for treatment of neuropathic pain (see Table 93.16).
Complex regional pain syndrome is well described in the pediatric population (see Chapter 211 and Table 93.17). CRPS type 1 is a
syndrome of neuropathic pain that typically follows an antecedent and
usually minor injury or surgery to an extremity without identifiable
nerve injury. It is seen after injury such as sprain or fracture or even
in instances as minimal as an IV start. The syndrome of CRPS type 1
includes severe spontaneous neuropathic pain, hyperpathia, hyperalgesia, severe cutaneous allodynia to touch and cold, changes in blood
flow (typically extremity cyanosis), and increased sweating. In more
advanced cases, symptoms include dystrophic changes of the hair,
nails, and skin; immobility of the extremity (dystonia); and muscle
atrophy. In the most advanced cases, symptoms include ankylosis of
the joints of the extremity. Specific causal factors in CRPS type 1 in
both children and adults remain elusive, although coincidental events
may be noted. CRPS type 2 clinically appears the same with respect to
symptoms but is associated with a known nerve injury.
Treatment of CRPS in children has been extrapolated from that in
adults, with some evidence for efficacy of physical therapy, CBT, nerve
blocks, antidepressants, AEDs, and other related drugs. All experts in
pediatric pain management agree on the value of aggressive physical
therapy, including desensitization. Some centers provide aggressive
therapy without the use of pharmacologic agents or interventional
nerve blocks. Unfortunately, recurrent episodes of CRPS may be seen
in up to 25–50% of patients, particularly adolescent females. Physical
therapy can be extraordinarily painful for children to endure; it is tolerated only by the most stoic and motivated patients. If children have
difficulty enduring the pain, there is a well-­established role for pharmacologic agents, with or without peripheral or central neuraxial nerve
blocks, to render the affected limb sufficiently analgesic so that physical
therapy can be tolerated. Pharmacologic interventions include the use
of AEDs such as gabapentin and/or TCAs such as amitriptyline (see
Fig. 93.4). Although there is clear evidence of a peripheral inflammatory component of CRPS, with release of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators from the peripheral nervous system in the affected
limb, the use of antiinflammatory agents has been disappointing. Common nerve block techniques include IV regional anesthetics, epidural
analgesia, and peripheral nerve blocks. In extreme and refractory cases,

more invasive strategies have been reported, including surgical sympathectomy and spinal cord stimulation, although these are not generally
recommended in the pediatric population
Although an array of treatments has some benefit, the mainstay
of treatment remains physical therapy emphasizing desensitization,
strengthening, and functional improvement. Additionally, pharmacologic agents and psychologic and complementary therapies are important components of a treatment plan. Invasive techniques, although
not curative, can be helpful if they permit the performance of frequent
and aggressive physical therapy that cannot be carried out otherwise.
A good biopsychosocial evaluation will help determine the orientation
of the treatment components. There are insufficient data to indicate the
superior value of interventional blocks, such as epidural anesthesia, in
children with CRPS over physical and psychologic interventions, with
or without pharmacologic support.

Myofascial Pain Disorders and Fibromyalgia

Myofascial pain disorders are associated with tender points in the
affected muscles and with muscle spasms (tight muscles). Treatment
is targeted at relaxing the affected muscles through physical therapy,
Iyengar yoga, massage, and acupuncture. Rarely are pharmacologic
muscle relaxants helpful other than for creating tiredness at night for
sleep. Dry needling or injections of local anesthetic into the tender
points has been advocated, but the data do not support this as a standard treatment. Similarly, although botulinum toxin injections may
be used, no data support this practice in children. Often, poor body
postures, repetitive use of a body part not accustomed to that movement, or carrying heavy backpacks initiates pain. When it becomes
widespread, a diagnosis may be made of juvenile fibromyalgia, which
may or may not continue to subsequently become adult fibromyalgia.
Newer guidelines do not use “tender points” in the diagnosis of fibromyalgia. Instead, diagnosis relies on a model that assesses for widespread pain and symptom severity (see Chapter 211). Likely there are
different subtypes of widespread pain syndromes, and physical therapy
is a key component of treatment. Psychologic interventions may play
an important role to assist the child in resuming normal activities and
to manage any psychologic comorbidities. Any pain rehabilitation plan
should enhance return to full function. Because there is a high incidence of chronic pain in parents of children presenting with a chronic
pain condition, especially fibromyalgia, attention to parent and family

Table 93.20  Clinical Features of Human Disorders Caused by Pathologic Variants in Ion-­Channel Genes That Lead to Altered
Pain Perception and Are Inherited in a Mendelian Manner
AFFECTED GENE
(PROTEIN)

TYPE AND EFFECT OF
MUTATION

ADDITIONAL
FEATURES

Inherited erythromelalgia

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous, activating

Onset by age 20 yr; episodic pain
triggered by warmth; feet affected more
frequently than hands

Erythema of feet

Paroxysmal extreme pain
disorder

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous, activating

Onset at birth; episodic pain; sacral
region is affected most frequently, face
is affected more often than the limbs;
physical triggers include defecation

Erythema of the
sacrum; tonic
attacks

Small fiber neuropathy

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous, activating

Onset at any age but more common in
early adulthood; persistent burning pain;
feet affected more frequently than hands

Could be
autonomic
features

Small fiber neuropathy

SCN10A (Nav1.8)

Heterozygous, activating

Persistent burning pain

Could be autonomic
features

Familial episodic pain
syndrome type I

TRPA1 (TRPA1)

Heterozygous, activating

Onset at birth or in infancy; episodic chest
or arm pain; triggers are hunger and cold

—

Familial episodic pain
syndrome type III

SCN11A (Nav1.9)

Heterozygous, activating

Onset in first decade; episodic hand and
foot pain; triggers are intercurrent illness
or exercise

—

MAIN PHENOTYPE

Nav, Sodium ion channel.
Modified from Bennett DLH, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:587–599, Table 1, p. 590.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93 u Pediatric Pain Management
factors is important. Parent training may entail teaching the parent to
model more appropriate pain coping behaviors and to recognize the
child’s independent attempts to manage pain and function adaptively.
Parents may also need referrals to obtain appropriate pain management for their own pain condition.
Pregabalin and duloxetine are FDA approved for management of
fibromyalgia in adults; duloxetine is also approved for adolescents ages
13-­17. However, the best evidence for the treatment of adolescents
with fibromyalgia remains a multimodal approach including CBT and
physical therapy. This is generally considered superior to solitary use of
pharmacologic agents.

Erythromelalgia

Erythromelalgia in children is generally primary, whereas in adults it
may be either primary or secondary to malignancy or other hematologic disorders, such as polycythemia vera (see Chapter 211.5). Patients
with erythromelalgia exhibit red, warm, hyperperfused distal limbs.
The disorder is usually bilateral and may involve either or both the
hands and feet. Patients perceive burning pain and typically seek relief
by immersing the affected extremities in ice water, sometimes so often
and for so long so that skin pathology results. Primary erythromelalgia is caused by a gain of function pathogenic variant (autosomal
dominant) in the gene for the NaV1.7 neuronal sodium channel on
peripheral C nociceptive fibers, resulting in their spontaneous depolarization, and thus continuous burning pain. The most common pathogenic variant identified is in the SCN9A gene, although there are several
variants that affect the NaV1.7 channel (Table 93.20). Other ion channel pathologic gene variants are associated with rare pain syndromes
(see Table 93.20). Another pathogenic variant (loss of function) in the
NaV1.7 channel results in a rare but serious genetic condition, the congenital indifference to pain.
Although some similarities to CRPS may be present in erythromelalgia, there are differences to distinguish the two conditions. CRPS in
general is a unilateral phenomenon rather than bilateral. CRPS often
presents with a cold, cyanotic limb (although “hot” CRPS with a warm,
erythematous limb may occur as well). In addition, erythromelalgia
is associated with intermittent pain compared with the more continuous nature and symptoms seen in CRPS. In erythromelalgia, ice water
immersion is analgesic, the condition is bilateral and symmetric, and it
is associated with hyperperfusion of the distal extremity.
The evaluation of hyperperfused limbs with burning pain should
include genetic testing for Fabry disease (alpha-­galactosidase deficiency) and screening for hematologic malignancies, with diagnosis of primary erythromelalgia being one of exclusion. The definitive
treatment of Fabry disease includes enzyme replacement (as disease-­
modifying treatment) and administration of neuropathic pain medications such as gabapentin, although the success of antineuropathic pain
drugs in small fiber neuropathies has not been impressive. The treatment of erythromelalgia is much more difficult. Antineuropathic pain
medications (AEDs, TCAs) are typically prescribed but rarely helpful
(see Fig. 93.4). Although one might predict that sodium channel–blocking AEDs might be effective in this sodium channelopathy, oxcarbazepine has not proved to be a particularly effective modality. The pain
responds well to regional anesthetic nerve blocks, but it returns immediately when the effects of the nerve block resolve. In contrast, in other
neuropathic syndromes, the analgesia usually (and inexplicably) persists well after the resolution of the pharmacologic nerve block. Aspirin
and even nitroprusside infusions have been anecdotally reported to be
of benefit with secondary erythromelalgia but have not been reported
to be helpful in children with primary erythromelalgia. Case reports in
adults and clinical experience in children suggest that periodic treatment with high-­dose capsaicin cream (8%) may be effective in alleviating the burning pain and disability of erythromelalgia. Capsaicin
(essence of chili pepper) cream is a vanilloid receptor (TRPV1) agonist
that depletes small fiber peripheral nerve endings of the neurotransmitter substance P, an important neurotransmitter in the generation
and transmission of nociceptive impulses. Once depleted, these nerve
endings are no longer capable of generating spontaneous pain until the
receptors regenerate, a process that takes many months.

699

Other Chronic Pain Conditions in Children

A variety of genetic and other medical/surgical conditions are often
associated with chronic pain. Examples include Fabry disease, Chiari
malformation/syringomyelia, epidermolysis bullosa, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, porphyria, mitochondrial disorders, degenerative
neurologic diseases, cerebral palsy, ASD, intestinal pseudoobstruction,
inflammatory bowel disease, chronic migraine/daily headaches, and
irritable bowel disease. In many cases, treating the underlying disease,
such as with enzyme replacement in Fabry disease and in other lysosomal disorders, will reduce what otherwise might be progression of
symptoms but may not totally reduce pain and suffering, and other
modalities will be needed. Pain that persists and is not well treated can
lead to central sensitization and widespread pain, such as seen in children with one pain source who then develop fibromyalgia.

MANAGING COMPLEX CHRONIC PAIN PROBLEMS

Some patients with chronic pain have a prolonged course of evaluation in attempts to find what is expected as the singular “cause” of
the pain and thus also undergo many failed treatments (see Chapter
212). Parents worry that the doctors have not yet discovered the cause
that may be serious and life threatening, and children often feel not
believed, that others perceive they are faking their pain or are “crazy.”
There may be no identifiable or diagnosable condition, and families
may seek opinions from multiple treatment facilities to find help for
their suffering child. For some children, what may have begun as an
acute injury or infectious event may result in a chronic pain syndrome,
with changes in the neurobiology of the pain-­signaling system.
In the context of disabling chronic pain, it is very important for
the pediatrician to avoid overmedication, because this can exacerbate
associated disability. In addition, it is important to maintain an open
mind and reassess the diagnosis if the clinical presentation changes. It
is essential to communicate to the family that pain has a biologic basis
(likely related to neural signaling and neurotransmitter dysregulation)
and that the pain is naturally distressing to the child and family. All
patients and families should receive a simple explanation of pain physiology that helps them understand the importance of (1) functional
rehabilitation to normalize pain signaling, (2) the low risk of causing
further injury with systematic increases in normal functioning, and (3)
the likely failure of treatment if pain is managed as if it were acute.
Because it is counterintuitive for most people to move a part of the
body that hurts, many patients with chronic pain have atrophy or contractures of a painful extremity from disuse. Associated increases in
worry and anxiety may exacerbate pain and leave the body even more
vulnerable to further illness, injury, and disability.
Pain can have a significant impact on many areas of normal functioning and routines for children, and school absenteeism and related
consequences of missed schooling are often significant problems.
Appropriate assessment and evaluation of the child with chronic pain
and the family is the critical first step in developing a treatment plan.
For example, a high–academically functioning child might have an
acute injury that leads to chronic pain and significant school absenteeism. Although many downstream contributors to pain and disability maintenance can accumulate the more school that is missed,
often previously unrecognized focal learning disabilities may become
the increasing trigger for a downhill cascade of pain, disability, and
school absenteeism. Even for the child with outstanding grades, it may
be helpful to learn about the amount of time spent on each subject.
As certain subjects become more complicated, such as math, the child
with a previously unrecognized math learning disability may be spending hours on math homework each night, even with good grades in
math. In this case, the acute illness or injury becomes the “final straw”
that breaks down the child’s coping and turns the acute pain into a
chronic problem.
Interdisciplinary pediatric pain programs have become the standard of care for treating complex chronic pain problems in youth.
Although available in many parts of the United States, Canada, Europe,
Australia, and New Zealand, the overall number of programs is still
small. Therefore many children and adolescents with chronic pain will

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

700 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
be unable to receive specialized pain treatment in their local communities. In recognition of the severity and complexity of pain and disability
for some children, different settings and treatment delivery models for
providing pain care have been explored. One option is inpatient and day
hospital treatment programs, which often address barriers to access to
outpatient treatment and coordination of care. In addition, these programs provide an intensive treatment option for children who do not
make adequate progress in outpatient treatment or who are severely disabled by pain. Early programs developed in the 1990s focused on CRPS
treatment through intensive inpatient rehabilitation and exercise-­based
programs. Later programs expanded to other clinical populations and
broadened the treatment focus to incorporate a range of rehabilitation
and psychologic therapies delivered both individually and in groups.
The typical length of inpatient admissions for children with chronic pain
in such programs is 3-­4 weeks, and emerging evidence suggests benefit
from these programs. A major problem that limits such care for children
with complex chronic disabling pain is the long waiting list for entry into
these programs, as well as obtaining financial coverage for the treatment.
Additional, more widespread models of care are needed.
Another intervention delivery option is remote management, referring to pain interventions used outside the clinic/hospital setting to
reach children in their homes or communities. Interventions are typically delivered using some form of technology, such as the internet,
or may rely on other media, such as telephone counseling or written
self-­help materials. Typically, remote management of pain includes
monitoring, counseling, and delivery of behavioral and CBT interventions. Internet interventions have received the most research attention
to date, with published examples of several different pediatric chronic
pain conditions with promising findings for pain reduction. Telemedicine may offer additional ways to connect experts in pediatric pain with
patients in remote communities. Within any community, the pediatrician will need to locate appropriate referral sources for patients with
complex chronic pain. However, although psychologic interventions
can be delivered through these telemedicine strategies, the pediatrician is still relied on to obtain the needed biopsychosocial history,
complete a thorough physical examination, and provide the pharmacologic management as needed. The pediatrician also communicates
with the family to help the child and family understand the pain and
how the different pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatments
will enhance function and alter the long-­term neural processes underlying pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography

Chapter 94

Poisoning
Jillian L. Theobald and Justin N. Corcoran
Poisoning is the leading cause of injury-­related death in the United
States, surpassing that from motor vehicle crashes. Most of these
deaths are unintentional (i.e., not suicide). In adolescents, poisoning
is the second leading cause of injury-­related death. Of the more than 2
million human poisoning exposures reported annually to the National
Poison Data System (NPDS) of the American Association of Poison
Control Centers (AAPCC), approximately 50% occur in children <6
years old, with the highest number of exposures occurring in 1-­and
2-­year-­olds. Almost all these exposures are unintentional and reflect
the propensity for young children to put virtually anything in their
mouth. Fortunately, children <6 years old account for <2% of all poisoning fatalities reported to NPDS.

More than 90% of toxic exposures in children occur in the home,
and most involve a single substance. Ingestion accounts for the majority of exposures, with a minority occurring by the dermal, inhalational,
and ophthalmic routes. Approximately 40% of cases involve nondrug
substances, such as cosmetics, personal care items, cleaning solutions,
plants, and foreign bodies. Pharmaceutical preparations account for
the remainder of exposures, and analgesics, topical preparations, vitamins, and antihistamines are most commonly reported.
The majority of poisoning exposures in children <6 years old can
be managed without direct medical intervention beyond a call to
the regional poison control center (PCC). This is because the product involved is not inherently toxic or the quantity of the material
is not sufficient to produce clinically relevant toxic effects. However, a number of substances can be highly toxic to toddlers in small
doses (Table 94.1). In 2019, carbon monoxide (CO), batteries, and
analgesics (mainly opioids) were the leading identifiable causes of
poison-­related fatalities in young children (<6 years). In addition,
anesthetics, antihistamines, chemicals, cough and cold preparations,
tobacco/nicotine/e-­cigarette products, and hydrocarbons were significant causes of mortality.
Poison prevention education should be an integral part of all well-­
child visits, starting at the 6-­month visit. Counseling parents and other
caregivers about potential poisoning risks, poison-­proofing a child’s
environment, and actions in the event of an ingestion diminish the likelihood of serious morbidity or mortality. Poison prevention education
materials are available from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
and regional PCCs. Through a U.S. network of PCCs, anyone at any
time can contact a regional poison center by calling the toll-­free number
1-­800-­222-­1222. Parents should be encouraged to share this number
with grandparents, relatives, babysitters, and any other caregivers.
Product safety measures, poison prevention education, early recognition of exposures, and around-­the-­clock access to regionally based
PCCs all contribute to the favorable exposure outcomes in young
children. Poisoning exposures in children 6-­12 years are much less
common, involving only approximately 10% of all reported pediatric
exposures. A second peak in pediatric exposures occurs in adolescence. Exposures in the adolescent age-­group are primarily intentional
(suicide or abuse or misuse of substances) and thus often result in
more severe toxicity (see Chapter 157). Families should be informed
and given anticipatory guidance that nonprescription and prescription
medications, and even household products (e.g., inhalants), are common sources of adolescent exposures. Although adolescents (age 13-­19
years) account for only about 16% of pediatric exposures, they constitute a larger proportion of deaths. Of the 159 poison-­related pediatric deaths in 2021 reported to NPDS, 86 were adolescents (2% of all
fatalities called in to poison centers). Pediatricians should be aware of
the signs of drug abuse or suicidal ideation in adolescents and should
aggressively intervene (see Chapter 40).

PREVENTION

Deaths caused by unintentional poisoning among younger children
have decreased dramatically over the past 2 decades, particularly
among children <5 years old. In 1970, when the U.S. Poison Packaging Prevention Act was passed, 226 poisoning deaths of children <5
years old occurred, compared with only 25 in 2021. Poisoning prevention demonstrates the effectiveness of passive strategies, including the
use of child-­resistant packaging and limited doses per container. Difficulty using child-­resistant containers by adults is an important cause
of poisoning in young children today. In 18.5% of households in which
poisoning occurred in children <5 years old, the child-­resistant closure
was replaced, and 65% of the packaging used did not work properly.
Almost 20% of ingestions occur from drugs belonging to grandparents,
who have difficulty using traditional child-­resistant containers and
often put their medications in pill organizers that are not childproof.
Even though there has been success in preventing poisoning in
young children, there has been a remarkable rise in adolescent poison-­
related death over the past 20 years. This has mirrored the increasing
rate of antidepressant prescriptions written by healthcare providers
and the epidemic increase in opioid-­related fatalities.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
Table 94.1  Common Agents Potentially Toxic to Young
Children (<6 yr) in Small Doses*
SUBSTANCE

TOXICITY

Aliphatic hydrocarbons (e.g.,
gasoline, kerosene, lamp oil)

Acute lung injury

Antimalarials (chloroquine,
quinine)

Seizures, dysrhythmias

Benzocaine

Methemoglobinemia

β-­Adrenergic receptor blockers†

Bradycardia, hypotension

Calcium channel blockers

Bradycardia, hypotension,
hyperglycemia

Camphor

Seizures

Caustics (pH <2 or >12)

Airway, esophageal and gastric
burns

Clonidine

Lethargy, bradycardia,
hypotension

Diphenoxylate and atropine
(Lomotil)

CNS depression, respiratory
depression

Ethylene glycol

Altered mental status, seizures

Hypoglycemics, oral
(sulfonylureas and meglitinides)

Hypoglycemia, seizures

Imidazolines (oxymetazoline,
tetrahydrozoline)

CNS depression, respiratory
depression

Laundry detergent packets
(pods)

Airway issues, respiratory distress,
altered mental status

Lindane

Seizures

Marijuana (cannabis, THC)

Lethargy, seizures, coma

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Hypertension followed by delayed
cardiovascular collapse

Methyl salicylate

Tachypnea, metabolic acidosis,
seizures

Opioids (especially methadone,
buprenorphine)

CNS depression, respiratory
depression

Organophosphate pesticides

Cholinergic crisis

Phenothiazines (especially
chlorpromazine, thioridazine)

Seizures, dysrhythmias

Sulfonylureas (glipizide,
glyburide)

Hypoglycemia

Theophylline

Seizures, dysrhythmias

Tricyclic antidepressants

CNS depression, seizures,
dysrhythmias, hypotension

*“Small dose” typically implies one to two pills or 5 mL.

†Lipid-­soluble β blockers (e.g., propranolol) are more toxic than water-­soluble β

blockers (e.g., atenolol).
CNS, Central nervous system.

APPROACH TO THE POISONED PATIENT

The initial approach to the patient with a witnessed or suspected poisoning should be no different than that in any other sick child, starting with stabilization and rapid assessment of the airway, breathing,
circulation (pulse, blood pressure), and mental state. In any patient
with altered mental status, a serum glucose concentration should be
obtained early, and naloxone administration should be considered if
there is coma or respiratory depression. A targeted history and physical examination serve as the foundation for a thoughtful differential

701

diagnosis, which can then be further refined through laboratory testing
and other diagnostic studies.

History

Obtaining an accurate problem-­oriented history is of paramount importance. Intentional poisonings (suicide attempts, drug abuse/misuse) are
typically more severe than unintentional, exploratory ingestions. In
patients without a witnessed exposure, historical features such as age
of the child (toddler or adolescent), acute onset of symptoms without
prodrome, multisystem organ dysfunction, or high levels of household
stress should suggest a possible diagnosis of poisoning. In patients with
a witnessed exposure, determining exactly what the child was exposed
to and the circumstances surrounding the exposure is crucial to initiating directed therapy quickly. For household and workplace products,
names (brand, generic, chemical) and specific ingredients, along with
their concentrations, can often be obtained from the labels. PCC specialists can also help to identify possible ingredients and review the
potential toxicities of each component. Poison center specialists can
also help identify pills based on markings, shape, and color. If referred
to the hospital for evaluation, parents should be instructed to bring the
products, pills, and/or containers with them to assist with identifying
and quantifying the exposure. If a child is found with an unknown pill,
a list of all medications in the child’s environment, including medications that grandparents, parents, siblings, caregivers, or other visitors
might have brought into the house, must be obtained. In the case of an
unknown exposure, clarifying where the child was found (e.g., garage,
kitchen, laundry room, bathroom, backyard, workplace) can help to
generate a list of potential toxins.
Next, it is important to clarify the timing of the ingestion and to
obtain some estimate of how much of the substance may have been
ingested. It is better to overestimate the amount ingested to prepare
for the worst-­case scenario. Counting pills or measuring the remaining
volume of a liquid ingested can sometimes be useful in generating estimates. For inhalational, ocular, or dermal exposures, the concentration
of the agent and the length of contact time with the material should be
determined, if possible.

Symptoms

Obtaining a description of symptoms experienced after ingestion,
including their timing of onset relative to the time of ingestion and
their progression, can generate a list of potential toxins and help anticipate the severity of the ingestion. Coupled with physical exam findings,
reported symptoms assist practitioners in identifying toxidromes, or
recognized poisoning syndromes, suggestive of toxicity from specific
substances or classes of substances (Tables 94.2 to 94.5).

Past Medical and Developmental History

Underlying diseases can make a child more susceptible to the effects
of a toxin. Concurrent drug therapy can also increase toxicity because
certain drugs may interact with the toxin. A history of psychiatric illness can make patients more prone to substance abuse, misuse, intentional ingestions, and polypharmacy complications. Pregnancy is a
common precipitating factor in adolescent suicide attempts and can
influence both evaluation of the patient and subsequent treatment. A
developmental history is important to ensure that the exposure history
provided is appropriate for the child’s developmental stage (e.g., report
of 6-­month-­old picking up a large container of laundry detergent and
drinking it should indicate a “red flag”).

Social History

Understanding the child’s social environment helps to identify potential sources of exposure (caregivers, visitors, grandparents, recent parties or social gatherings) and social circumstances (new baby, parent’s
illness, financial stress) that might have contributed to the ingestion
(suicide or unintentional). Unfortunately, some poisonings occur in
the setting of serious neglect or intentional abuse.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

702 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.2  Selected Historical and Physical Findings in Poisoning
SIGN

TOXIN

ODOR
Bitter almonds
Acetone
Rotten eggs
Wintergreen
Garlic
Mothballs
Freshly mowed hay
Carrots
Gasoline

Cyanide
Isopropyl alcohol, methanol, paraldehyde, salicylates
Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, methyl mercaptans (additive to natural gas)
Methyl salicylate
Arsenic, thallium, organophosphates, selenium
Camphor, naphthalene
Phosgene
Water hemlock
Petroleum distillates

OCULAR SIGNS
Miosis

Opioids (except propoxyphene, meperidine, and pentazocine), organophosphates and other cholinergics,
clonidine, phenothiazines (typical antipsychotics), sedative-­hypnotics, olanzapine
Anticholinergics (e.g., antihistamines, TCAs, atropine), sympathomimetics (cocaine, amphetamines, PCP),
post–anoxic encephalopathy, opiate withdrawal, cathinones, MDMA
Anticonvulsants, sedative-­hypnotics, alcohols, PCP, ketamine, dextromethorphan
Organophosphates, irritant gas or vapors
Methanol

Mydriasis
Nystagmus
Lacrimation
Retinal hyperemia
CUTANEOUS SIGNS
Diaphoresis

Cyanosis (unresponsive to oxygen)
Bullae/blisters

Cholinergics (organophosphates), sympathomimetics, salicylates, phencyclidine (PCP), withdrawal
syndromes
Thallium, arsenic
Boric acid, elemental mercury, cyanide, carbon monoxide, disulfiram, scombroid, anticholinergics,
vancomycin
Methemoglobinemia (e.g., benzocaine, dapsone, nitrites, phenazopyridine), amiodarone, silver
Barbiturates, mustard gas, xylazine, snake, spiders

ORAL SIGNS
Salivation
Oral burns
Gum lines

Organophosphates, salicylates, corrosives, ketamine, PCP, strychnine
Corrosives, oxalate-­containing plants
Lead, mercury, arsenic, bismuth

GASTROINTESTINAL SIGNS
Diarrhea
Hematemesis
Constipation

Antimicrobials, arsenic, iron, boric acid, cholinergics, colchicine, opioid withdrawal
Arsenic, iron, caustics, NSAIDs, salicylates
Lead

Alopecia
Erythema

CARDIAC SIGNS
Tachycardia

Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, antidepressants, antipsychotics, methylxanthines (theophylline,
caffeine), salicylates, cellular asphyxiants (cyanide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide), withdrawal
(ethanol, sedatives, clonidine, opioids), serotonin syndrome, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, MDMA,
cathinones
β Blockers, calcium channel blockers, digoxin, clonidine, organophosphates, opioids, sedative-­hypnotics
xylazine
Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, serotonin syndrome, nicotine,
caffeine, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, clonidine withdrawal
β Blockers, calcium channel blockers, cyclic antidepressants, iron, antipsychotics, barbiturates, clonidine,
opioids, arsenic, amatoxin mushrooms, cellular asphyxiants (cyanide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen
sulfide), snake envenomation, xylazine

Bradycardia
Hypertension
Hypotension

RESPIRATORY SIGNS
Depressed respirations
Tachypnea

Opioids, sedative-­hypnotics, alcohol, clonidine, marijuana, barbiturates, xylazine
Salicylates, sympathomimetics, caffeine, metabolic acidosis, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon aspiration

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM SIGNS
Ataxia
Alcohols, anticonvulsants, sedative-­hypnotics, lithium, dextromethorphan, carbon monoxide, inhalants
Coma
Opioids, sedative-­hypnotics, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics, ethanol, anticholinergics,
clonidine, GHB, alcohols, salicylates, barbiturates, hypoglycemics, lead, arsenic, rohypnol, carbon
monoxide
Seizures
Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, antidepressants (especially TCAs, bupropion, venlafaxine),
cholinergics (organophosphates), isoniazid, camphor, lindane, salicylates, lead, nicotine, tramadol,
water hemlock, withdrawal (especially ethanol), strychnine, cocaine
Delirium/psychosis
Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, LSD, PCP, hallucinogens, lithium, dextromethorphan, steroids,
withdrawal, MDMA, cathinones
Peripheral neuropathy
Lead, arsenic, mercury, organophosphates, nicotine
Hypothermia
Carbon monoxide, opioids, oral hypoglycemics, liquor, sedative-­hypnotics
Hyperthermia
Antihistamines, amphetamines, salicylates, antidepressants (TCAs), antipsychotics, serotonin syndrome,
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, withdrawal (alcohol, baclofen)
GHB, γ-­Hydroxybutyrate; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MDMA, 3,4-­methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PCP, phencyclidine;
TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Bradycardia, BP and
temp typically normal

Respiratory depression,
bradycardia,
hypotension,
hypothermia

Respiratory
depression, HR
normal to decreased,
BP normal to
decreased, temp
normal to decreased

Hyperthermia,
tachycardia,
hypertension
or hypotension
(autonomic instability)

Tachypnea, hyperpnea,
tachycardia,
hyperthermia

Tachycardia, tachypnea,
hyperthermia

Tachycardia

Cholinergic

Opioids

Sedative-­
hypnotics

Serotonin
syndrome
(similar findings
with neuroleptic
malignant
syndrome)

Salicylates

Withdrawal
(sedative-­
hypnotic)

Withdrawal
(opioid)

MENTAL STATUS

Restlessness, anxiety

Agitation,
tremor, seizure,
hallucinosis,
delirium tremens

Agitation, confusion,
coma

Agitation, confusion,
coma

Somnolence, coma

Depression, coma,
euphoria

Confusion, coma,
fasciculations

Agitated, delirium,
coma, seizures

Agitation, psychosis,
delirium, violence

Dilated

Dilated

Normal

Dilated

Small or
normal

Pinpoint

Small

Dilated

Dilated

PUPILS

SKIN

Diaphoretic

Diaphoretic

Diaphoretic

Diaphoretic

Normal

Normal

Diaphoretic

Dry, hot,
flushed

Diaphoretic,
flushed

SIGNS
BOWEL SOUNDS

Hyperactive

Increased

Normal

Increased

Normal

Normal to
decreased

Hyperactive

Diminished

Normal to increased

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

Nausea, vomiting,
tinnitus, ABGs with
primary respiratory
alkalosis and primary
metabolic acidosis;
tinnitus or difficulty
hearing

Neuromuscular
hyperexcitability:
clonus,
hyperreflexia
(lower > upper
extremities)

Diarrhea, urination,
bronchorrhea,
bronchospasm,
emesis, lacrimation,
salivation

Ileus, urinary
retention

OTHER

POSSIBLE TOXINS

Lack of access to opioids or excessive
use of naloxone

Lack of access to ethanol,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates, GHB,
or excessive use of flumazenil

Aspirin and aspirin-­containing products,
methyl salicylate

SSRIs, lithium, MAOIs, linezolid, tramadol,
meperidine, dextromethorphan

Barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ethanol
xylazine

Methadone, buprenorphine, morphine,
oxycodone, heroin, etc.

Organophosphates (insecticides, nerve
agents), carbamates (physostigmine,
neostigmine, pyridostigmine)
Alzheimer medications, myasthenia
treatments

Antihistamines, TCAs, atropine,
jimsonweed

Amphetamines, cocaine, PCP, bath salts
(cathinones), ADHD medication

ABGs, Arterial blood gases; ADHD, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder; BP, blood pressure; GHB, γ-­hydroxybutyrate; HR, heart rate; MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; PCP, phencyclidine; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors; temp, temperature; TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants.

Hypertension,
tachycardia,
hyperthermia

Anticholinergic

VITAL SIGNS

Hypertension,
tachycardia,
hyperthermia

Sympathomimetic

TOXIDROME

Table 94.3  Recognizable Poison Syndromes (“Toxidromes”)

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
703

704 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.4  Mini-­Toxidromes
TOXIDROME

SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

EXAMPLES

α1-­Adrenergic receptor antagonists

CNS depression, tachycardia, miosis

Chlorpromazine, quetiapine, clozapine, olanzapine,
risperidone

α2-­Adrenergic receptor agonist

CNS depression, bradycardia, hypertension
(early), hypotension (late), miosis

Clonidine, oxymetazoline, tetrahydrozoline,
tizanidine, dexmedetomidine

Clonus/myoclonus

CNS depression, myoclonic jerks, clonus,
hyperreflexia

Carisoprodol, lithium, serotonergic agents, bismuth,
organic lead, organic mercury, serotonin or
neuroleptic malignant syndrome

Sodium channel blockers

CNS toxicity, wide QRS

Cyclic antidepressants and structurally related agents,
propoxyphene, quinidine/quinine, amantadine,
antihistamines, bupropion, cocaine

Potassium channel blockers

CNS toxicity, long QT interval

Antipsychotics, methadone, phenothiazines

Cathinones, synthetic cannabinoids

Hyperthermia, tachycardia, delirium, agitation,
mydriases

See Chapter 157.

CNS, Central nervous system.
From Ruha AM, Levine M. Central nervous system toxicity. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2015;32(1):205–221, p. 208.

Table 94.5  Predicting Toxicity from Vital Signs
BRADYCARDIA (PACED)
Propranolol (β blockers), poppies (opioids), propoxyphene,
physostigmine
Anticholinesterase drugs, antiarrhythmics
Clonidine, calcium channel blockers
Ethanol or other alcohols
Digoxin, digitalis
TACHYCARDIA (FAST)
Free base or other forms of cocaine, Freon
Anticholinergics, antihistamines, antipsychotics amphetamines,
alcohol withdrawal
Sympathomimetics (cocaine, caffeine, amphetamines, phencyclidine
[PCP]), solvent abuse, strychnine
Theophylline, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), thyroid hormones
HYPOTHERMIA (COOLS)
Carbon monoxide
Opioids
Oral hypoglycemics, insulin
Liquor (alcohols)
Sedative-­hypnotics
HYPERTHERMIA (NASA)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), nicotine
Antihistamines, alcohol withdrawal
Salicylates, sympathomimetics, serotonin syndrome
Anticholinergics, antidepressants, antipsychotics

HYPOTENSION (CRASH)
Clonidine, calcium channel blockers
Rodenticides (containing arsenic, cyanide)
Antidepressants, aminophylline, antihypertensives
Sedative-­hypnotics (xylazine)
Heroin or other opioids
HYPERTENSION (CT SCAN)
Cocaine
Thyroid supplements
Sympathomimetics
Caffeine
Anticholinergics, amphetamines
Nicotine
RAPID RESPIRATION (PANT)
PCP, paraquat, pneumonitis, phosgene
Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and other salicylates
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, nerve agents
Toxin-­induced metabolic acidosis
SLOW RESPIRATION (SLOW)
Sedative-­hypnotics (barbiturates, benzodiazepines, xylazine)
Liquor (alcohols)
Opioids
Weed (marijuana)

From Meehan TJ. Approach to the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche-­Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, Box
139.6, p. 1816.

Physical Examination

A targeted physical examination is important to identifying the
potential toxin and assessing the severity of the exposure. Initial
efforts should be directed toward assessing and stabilizing the airway, breathing, circulation, and mental status. Once the airway is
secure and the patient is stable from a cardiopulmonary standpoint,
a more extensive physical exam can help to identify characteristic
findings of specific toxins or classes of toxins.
In the poisoned patient, key features of the physical exam are vital
signs, mental status, pupils (size, reactivity), nystagmus, skin, bowel
sounds, and muscle tone. These findings might suggest a toxidrome,
which can then guide the differential diagnosis and management.

Laboratory Evaluation

A basic chemistry panel (electrolytes, renal function, glucose) is necessary for all poisoned or potentially poisoned patients. Any patient
with acidosis (low serum bicarbonate level on serum chemistry panel)
must have an anion gap calculated because of the more specific differential diagnoses associated with an elevated anion gap metabolic acidosis (Table 94.6). Patients with a known overdose of acetaminophen
should have liver transaminases (alanine transaminase [ALT], aspartate transaminase [AST]) and international normalized ratio (INR)
assessed. A serum creatinine kinase level is indicated on any patient
with a prolonged “down time” to evaluate for rhabdomyolysis. A urine
pregnancy test is mandatory for all postpubertal female patients. Based

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning

705

Table 94.6  Laboratory Clues in Toxicologic Diagnosis
ANION GAP METABOLIC ACIDOSIS (MNEMONIC = MUDPILES
CAT)
Methanol, metformin
Uremia
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Propylene glycol
Isoniazid, iron, massive ibuprofen
Lactic acidosis
Ethylene glycol
Salicylates
Cellular asphyxiants (cyanide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide)
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Tylenol (clinical significance depends upon presence or absence of
liver injury), toluene

HYPERGLYCEMIA
Salicylates (early)
Calcium channel blockers
Caffeine

ELEVATED OSMOLAR GAP
Alcohols: ethanol, isopropyl, methanol, ethylene glycol

RADIOPAQUE SUBSTANCE ON KUB (MNEMONIC = CHIPPED)
Chloral hydrate, calcium carbonate
Heavy metals (lead, zinc, barium, arsenic, lithium, bismuth)
Iron
Phenothiazines
Play-­Doh, potassium chloride
Enteric-­coated pills
Dental amalgam, drug packets

HYPOGLYCEMIA (MNEMONIC = HOBBIES)
Hypoglycemics, oral: sulfonylureas, meglitinides
Other: quinine, unripe ackee fruit
Beta Blockers
Insulin
Ethanol
Salicylates (late)

HYPOCALCEMIA
Ethylene glycol
Fluoride
RHABDOMYOLYSIS
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, serotonin syndrome
Statins
Mushrooms (Tricholoma equestre)
Any toxin causing prolonged immobilization (e.g., opioids,
antipsychotics) or excessive muscle activity or seizures (e.g.,
sympathomimetics)

KUB, Kidney-­ureter-­bladder radiograph.

on the clinical presentation and the presumed poison, additional laboratory tests may also be helpful. Acetaminophen is a widely available
medication and a commonly detected co-­ingestant with the potential
for severe toxicity. There is an effective antidote to acetaminophen
poisoning that is time dependent. Given that patients might initially
be asymptomatic and might not report or be aware of acetaminophen
ingestion, an acetaminophen level should be checked in all patients
who present after an intentional exposure or ingestion.
For select intoxications (e.g., salicylates, some anticonvulsants,
acetaminophen, iron, digoxin, methanol, ethanol, lithium, ethylene glycol, theophylline, CO, lead), quantitative blood concentrations are integral to confirming the diagnosis and formulating a
treatment plan. However, for most other exposures, quantitative
measurement is not readily available and is not likely to alter management. All intoxicant levels must be interpreted in conjunction
with the history. For example, a methanol level of 20 mg/dL 1 hour
after ingestion may be nontoxic, whereas a similar level 24 hours
after ingestion implies a significant poisoning. In general, patients
with multiple or chronic exposures to a drug or other chemical will
be more symptomatic at lower drug levels than those with a single
acute exposure.
Both the rapid urine drug-­of-­abuse screens and the more comprehensive drug screens vary widely in their ability to detect toxins
and generally add little information to the clinical assessment. This
is particularly true if the agent is known and the patient’s symptoms are consistent with that agent. If a drug screen is ordered, it is
important to know that the components screened for, and the lower
limits of detection, vary from laboratory to laboratory. In addition,
the interpretation of most drug screens is hampered by many false-­
positive and false-­negative results. Many opiate toxicology screens
poorly detect hydrocodone and do not detect the fully synthetic opioids at all (e.g., meperidine, methadone, buprenorphine, fentanyl,
carfentanil, furanylfentanyl, tramadol). Several common benzodiazepines (e.g., alprazolam and clonazepam) may not be detected;
synthetic cannabinoids or “bath salts” may also be missed. The
amphetamine screen, on the other hand, is typically overly sensitive

and often is triggered by prescription amphetamines and some over-­
the-­counter cold preparations. As such, the urine drug-­of-­abuse
screen is typically of limited utility for the poisoned patient but may
serve a useful function for other providers, including psychiatrists,
in their evaluation of the adolescent patient. Urine drug-­of-­abuse
screens are potentially helpful in patients with altered mental status
of unknown etiology, persistent unexplained tachycardia, and acute
myocardial ischemia or stroke at a young age. These screens can
also be useful in the assessment of a neglected or abused child. Consultation with a medical toxicologist can be helpful in interpreting
drug screens and directing which specific drug levels or other laboratory analyses might aid in patient management.
In the case of a neglected or allegedly abused child, a positive
toxicology screen can add substantial weight to a claim of abuse or
neglect. In these cases, and any case with medicolegal implications,
any positive screen must be followed by confirmatory testing (most
commonly via gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy), which is
considered the gold-­standard measurement for legal purposes.

Additional Diagnostic Testing

An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a quick and noninvasive bedside test
that can yield important clues to diagnosis and prognosis. Particular
attention should be paid to the ECG intervals (Table 94.7). A widened
QRS interval, putting the patient at risk for monomorphic ventricular tachycardia, suggests blockade of fast sodium channels. A widened QTc interval suggests effects at the potassium rectifier channels
and portends a risk of torsades de pointes (polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia).
Further diagnostic testing is based on the differential diagnosis and
pattern of presentation. For example, adjunctive chest radiography
may reveal signs of pneumonitis (e.g., hydrocarbon aspiration), noncardiogenic pulmonary edema (e.g., salicylate toxicity), or a foreign
body. Abdominal radiography is most helpful in screening for the presence of lead paint chips or other foreign bodies. It may detect a bezoar
(concretion), demonstrate radiopaque tablets, or reveal drug packets
in a “body packer.”

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

706 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.7  Electrocardiographic Findings in Poisoning
PR INTERVAL PROLONGATION
Digoxin
Lithium
Calcium channel antagonists
β-­Antagonists
QRS PROLONGATION
Tricyclic antidepressants
Diphenhydramine
Carbamazepine
Cardiac glycosides
Chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine
Cocaine
Lamotrigine
Quinidine, quinine, procainamide, disopyramide
Phenothiazines
Propoxyphene
Propranolol
Bupropion, venlafaxine (rare)
QTc PROLONGATION*
Amiodarone
Antipsychotics (typical and atypical)
Arsenic
Cisapride
Citalopram
Clarithromycin, erythromycin
Disopyramide, dofetilide, ibutilide
Fluconazole, ketoconazole, itraconazole
Methadone
Pentamidine
Phenothiazines
Sotalol
*This is a select list of important toxins; other medications are also associated with QTc
prolongation.

PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT

The principles of management of the poisoned patient are supportive
care, decontamination, directed therapy, and enhanced elimination. Few
patients meet criteria for all these interventions, although clinicians
should consider each option in every poisoned patient so as not to miss
a potentially lifesaving intervention. Antidotes are available for relatively few poisons (Tables 94.8 and 94.9), thus emphasizing the importance of meticulous supportive care and close clinical monitoring.
Poison control center personnel are specifically trained to provide
expertise in the management of poisoning exposures. Parents should
be instructed to call the poison control center (1-­800-­222-­1222) for
any concerning exposure. PCC specialists can assist parents in assessing the potential toxicity and severity of the exposure. They can further
determine which children can be safely monitored at home and which
children should be referred to the emergency department for further
evaluation and care. Although up to one third of calls to PCCs involve
hospitalized patients, 86% of PCC calls for exposures in children <6
years old are managed at home. The AAPCC has generated consensus statements for out-­of-­hospital management of common ingestions
(e.g., acetaminophen, iron, calcium channel blockers [CCBs]) that
serve to guide poison center recommendations.

Supportive Care

Careful attention is paid first to the “ABCs” of airway, breathing, and circulation; there should be a low threshold to aggressively manage the airway of a poisoned patient because of the patient’s propensity to quickly
become comatose. Endotracheal intubation is often the only significant
intervention needed in many poisoned patients. An important caveat
is the tachypneic patient with a clear lung examination and normal

oxygen saturation. This should alert the clinician to the likelihood that
the patient is compensating for an acidemia. Paralyzing such a patient
and underventilating might prove fatal. If intubation is necessary for
airway protection or a tiring patient, a good rule of thumb is to match
the ventilatory settings to the patient’s preintubation minute ventilation.
Hypotensive poisoned patients often are not hypovolemic, and
aggressive fluid resuscitation may lead to fluid overload. If hypotension persists after one to two standard boluses of crystalloid, infusion
of a direct-­acting vasopressor, such as norepinephrine or epinephrine,
is preferred. Dysrhythmias are typically managed in the standard manner. The exceptions are for dysrhythmias caused by agents that block
fast sodium channels of the heart, for which boluses of sodium bicarbonate are given; dysrhythmias caused by hydrocarbons, which should
be treated with β blockers; and an overall avoidance of amiodarone for
toxicologic-­induced arrythmias.
Seizures should primarily be managed with agents that potentiate
the γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) complex, such as benzodiazepines
or barbiturates. Using sodium channel blockers such as phenytoin
is likely to be ineffective and potentially harmful. The goal of supportive therapy is to support the patient’s vital functions until the
patient can eliminate the toxin. Patients with an elevated creatine
phosphokinase (CPK) should be aggressively hydrated with crystalloid, with a goal urine output of 1-­2 mL/kg/hr and close monitoring
of CPK trend.

Decontamination

Most poisonings in children are from ingestion, although exposures
can also occur by inhalational, dermal, and ocular routes (Table 94.10).
The goal of decontamination is to minimize absorption of the toxic
substance. The specific method employed depends on the properties
of the toxin itself and the route of exposure. Regardless of the decontamination method used, the efficacy of the intervention decreases
with increasing time since exposure. Decontamination should not be
routinely employed for every poisoned patient. Instead, careful decisions regarding the utility of decontamination should be made for each
patient and should include consideration of the toxicity and pharmacologic properties of the exposure, route of the exposure, time since the
exposure, and risks vs benefits of the decontamination method.
Dermal and ocular decontamination begins with removal of any
contaminated clothing and particulate matter, followed by flushing
of the affected area with tepid water or normal saline (NS). Treating
clinicians should wear proper protective gear when performing irrigation. Flushing for a minimum of 10-­20 minutes is recommended
for most exposures, although some chemicals (e.g., alkaline corrosives) require much longer periods of flushing. Dermal decontamination, especially after exposure to adherent or lipophilic (e.g.,
organophosphates) agents, should include thorough cleansing with
soap and water. Water should not be used for decontamination after
exposure to highly reactive agents, such as elemental sodium, phosphorus, calcium oxide, and titanium tetrachloride. After an inhalational exposure, decontamination involves moving the patient to
fresh air and administering supplemental oxygen if indicated.
Gastrointestinal (GI) decontamination strategies are most likely
to be effective in the 1-­2 hours after an acute ingestion. GI absorption may be delayed after ingestion of agents that slow GI motility (anticholinergic medications, opioids), massive amounts of
pills, sustained-­release (SR) preparations, and agents that can form
pharmacologic bezoars (e.g., enteric-­coated salicylates). GI decontamination more than 2 hours after ingestion may be considered in
patients who ingest toxic substances with these properties. However,
even rapid institution of GI decontamination with activated charcoal will bind only approximately 30% of the ingested substance. GI
decontamination should never supplant excellent supportive care
and should not be employed in an unstable or persistently vomiting patient. Methods of GI decontamination include induced emesis with ipecac, gastric lavage, cathartics, activated charcoal, and
whole-­bowel irrigation (WBI). Of these, only activated charcoal and
WBI are of potential benefit.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning

707

Table 94.8  Common Antidotes for Poisoning
POISON

ANTIDOTE

Acetaminophen

DOSAGE

ROUTE

ADVERSE EFFECTS, WARNINGS,
COMMENTS

N-­Acetylcysteine
(Mucomyst)
N-­Acetylcysteine
(Acetadote)

140 mg/kg loading, followed by 70 mg/kg q4h
for 17 additional doses (total of 72 hr)
150 mg/kg over 1 hr, followed by 50 mg/kg
over 4 hr, followed by 100 mg/kg over 16 hr

PO

Anticholinergics

Physostigmine

0.02 mg/kg over 5 min; may repeat q5-­10 min
to 2 mg max

IV/IM

Bradycardia, seizures, bronchospasm
Note: Relatively contraindicated if
conduction delays on ECG.

Benzodiazepines

Flumazenil

0.2 mg over 30 sec; if response is inadequate,
repeat q1min to 1 mg max

IV

Agitation, seizures from precipitated
withdrawal (doses over 1 mg)
Relatively contraindicated for
unknown or polypharmacy
ingestions

β Blockers

Glucagon

0.15 mg/kg bolus followed by infusion of
0.05-­0.15 mg/kg/hr

IV

Vomiting, relative lack of efficacy

Calcium channel
blockers

Insulin

1 unit/kg bolus followed by infusion
of 1-10 units/kg/hr

IV

Hypoglycemia
Follow serum potassium and glucose
closely.

Calcium salts

Dose depends on the specific calcium salt

IV

Carbon monoxide

Oxygen

100% Fio2 by non-­rebreather mask (or ETT if
intubated)

Inhalation

Some patients may benefit from
hyperbaric oxygen (see text).

Cyanide

Hydroxocobalamin
(Cyanokit)

70 mg/kg (adults: 5 g) given over 15 min

IV

Flushing/erythema, nausea, rash,
chromaturia, hypertension,
headache

Digitalis

Digoxin-­specific
Fab antibodies
(Digibind, DigiFab)

1 vial binds 0.6 mg of digitalis glycoside;
#vials = digitalis level × weight in kg/100

IV

Allergic reactions (rare), return of
condition being treated with
digitalis glycoside

Ethylene glycol,
methanol

Fomepizole

15 mg/kg load; 10 mg/kg q12h × 4 doses;
15 mg/kg q12h until ethylene glycol level is
<20 mg/dL

IV

Infuse slowly over 30 min
If fomepizole is not available, can
treat with oral ethanol (80 proof)

Iron

Deferoxamine

Infusion of 15 mg/kg/hr (max: 6 g/24 hr)

IV

Hypotension (minimized by titrating
dose up slowly)

Isoniazid (INH)

Pyridoxine

Empirical dosing: 70 mg/kg (max dose = 5 g)
If ingested dose is known: 1 g per gram of
INH

IV

May also be used for Gyromitra
mushroom ingestions

Lead and other
heavy metals
(e.g., arsenic,
inorganic
mercury)

BAL (dimercaprol)

3-­5 mg/kg/dose q4h, for the first day;
subsequent dosing depends on the toxin

Deep IM

Calcium disodium
EDTA

35-­50 mg/kg/day × 5 days; may be given as a
continuous infusion or 2 divided doses/day

IV

Dimercaptosuccinic
acid (succimer,
DMSA, Chemet)

10 mg/kg/dose q8h × 5 days, then 10 mg/kg
q12h × 14 days

PO

Local injection site pain and sterile
abscess, vomiting, fever, salivation,
nephrotoxicity
Caution: Prepared in peanut oil;
contraindicated in patients with
peanut allergy
Vomiting, fever, hypertension,
arthralgias, allergic reactions,
local inflammation, nephrotoxicity
(maintain adequate hydration;
follow UA and renal function)
Vomiting, hepatic transaminase
elevation, rash

Methemoglobinemia

Methylene blue, 1%
solution

0.1-­0.2 mL/kg (1-­2 mg/kg) over 5-­10 min; may
be repeated q30-­60 min

IV

Vomiting, headache, dizziness, blue
discoloration of urine

Opioids

Naloxone

1 mg if patient not likely to be addicted
0.04-­0.4 mg if possibly addicted; repeated
as needed; may need continuous infusion;
higher and prolonged dosing is required for
novel potent opioid overdose

IV, intranasal,
IO, IM,
nebulized

Acute withdrawal symptoms if given
to addicted patients
May also be useful for clonidine
ingestions (typically at higher
doses)

IV

Vomiting (patient-­tailored regimens
are the norm)
Anaphylactoid reactions (most
commonly seen with loading dose)
Higher doses of the infusion are
often recommended depending
on acetaminophen level or degree
of injury

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

708 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.8  Common Antidotes for Poisoning—cont’d
POISON
Organophosphates

ANTIDOTE

DOSAGE

ROUTE

Atropine

0.05-­0.1 mg/kg repeated q5-­10 min as needed IV/ET

Pralidoxime (2-­PAM)

25-­50 mg/kg over 5-­10 min (max: 200 mg/min);
can be repeated after 1-­2 hr, then q10-­12h
as needed

IV/IM

Salicylates

Sodium bicarbonate

Bolus 1-­2 mEq/kg followed by continuous
infusion

IV

Sulfonylureas

Octreotide and
dextrose

1-­2 μg/kg/dose (adults 50-­100 μg) q6-­8h

IV/SC

Tricyclic
antidepressants

Sodium bicarbonate

Bolus 1-­2 mEq/kg; repeated bolus dosing as
needed to keep QRS <110 msec

IV

ADVERSE EFFECTS, WARNINGS,
COMMENTS
Tachycardia, dry mouth, blurred
vision, urinary retention
Nausea, dizziness, headache,
tachycardia, muscle rigidity,
bronchospasm (rapid administration)
Follow potassium closely and replace
as necessary.
Goal urine pH: 7.5-­8.0

Indications: QRS widening
(≥110 msec), hemodynamic
instability; follow potassium.

BAL, British antilewisite; DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid; ECG, electrocardiogram; Fio2, fraction of inspired oxygen; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; ET, endotracheal tube;
IO, intraosseous; max, maximum; UA, urinalysis.

Syrup of Ipecac

Table 94.9  Other Antidotes
ANTIDOTES

TOXIN OR POISON

Latrodectus antivenin

Black widow spider

Botulinum antitoxin

Botulinum toxin

Diphenhydramine and/
or benztropine

Dystonic reactions

Calcium salts

Fluoride, calcium channel blockers

Intravenous lipid
emulsion (ILE)

Local anesthetics; consider for bupropion,
calcium channel blockers, β blockers,
and type I antidysrhythmics

Protamine

Heparin

Folinic acid

Methotrexate, trimethoprim,
pyrimethamine, methanol

Crotalidae-­specific Fab
antibodies

Rattlesnake envenomation

Sodium bicarbonate

Sodium channel blockade (tricyclic anti­
depressants, type 1 antiarrhythmics)

Table 94.10  Toxins Associated with Systemic Toxicity
After Dermal Absorption
Aniline dyes
Camphor
Dinitrophenol
Hexachlorophene
Hydrofluoric acid
Lindane (γ-­benzene hydrochloride)
Organophosphate insecticide
Nerve agents
Nitrobenzene
Organic mercury
Phenol
Thallium
From Shannon MW. Emergency management of poisoning. In: Shannon MW, Borron
SW, Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and
Drug Overdose, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007, Box 2A-­12, p. 28.

Syrup of ipecac contains two emetic alkaloids that work in both the
central nervous system (CNS) and locally in the GI tract to produce
vomiting. Many studies have failed to document a significant clinical
impact from the use of ipecac and have documented multiple adverse
events from its use. The AAP, the American Academy of Clinical Toxicology (AACT), and the AAPCC have all published statements in favor
of abandoning the use of ipecac.

Gastric Lavage

Gastric lavage involves placing a large tube orally into the stomach
to aspirate contents, followed by flushing with aliquots of fluid, usually water or NS. Although gastric lavage was used routinely for many
years, objective data do not document or support clinically relevant
efficacy. This is particularly true in children, in whom only small-­bore
tubes can be used. Lavage is time-­consuming and painful and can
induce bradycardia through a vagal response to tube placement. It can
delay administration of more definitive treatment (activated charcoal)
and under the best circumstances, only removes a fraction of gastric
contents. Thus, in most clinical scenarios, the use of gastric lavage is no
longer recommended.

Single-­Dose Activated Charcoal

Activated charcoal is a potentially useful method of GI decontamination. Charcoal is “activated” by heating to extreme temperatures, creating an extensive network of pores that provides a very large adsorptive
surface area that many (but not all) toxins will bind to, preventing
absorption from the GI tract. Charged molecules (i.e., heavy metals, lithium, iron) and liquids do not bind well to activated charcoal
(Table 94.11). Administration should also be avoided after ingestion
of a caustic substance, as it can impede subsequent endoscopic evaluation. Charcoal is most likely to be effective when given within 1 hour of
ingestion. A repeat dose of activated charcoal may be warranted in the
cases of ingestion of an extended-­release product or, more frequently,
with significant salicylate poisoning as a result of its delayed and erratic
absorption pattern.
The dose of activated charcoal, with or without sorbitol, is 1g/kg in
children or 50-­100 g in adolescents and adults. Before administering
charcoal, one must ensure that the patient’s airway is intact or protected and that the patient has a benign abdominal examination. In the
awake, uncooperative adolescent or child who refuses to drink the activated charcoal, there is little utility and potential morbidity associated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
Table 94.11  Substances Poorly Adsorbed by Activated
Charcoal
Alcohols
Caustics: alkalis and acids
Cyanide
Heavy metals (e.g., lead)
Hydrocarbons
Iron
Lithium

709

given over 3 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min until
recovery or until a total of 10 mL/kg has been infused. Lipophilic drugs,
those in which the logarithm of the coefficient describing the partition
between two solvents (hydrophobic phase and hydrophilic phase) is
>2, have the most potential to be bound by ILE. These include but are
not limited to CCBs (verapamil, diltiazem), bupropion, tricyclic antidepressants, and refractory β-­blocker overdose. Complications associated with ILE include significant lipemia that interferes with serum
laboratory tests, pancreatitis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS).

Enhanced Elimination
with forcing activated charcoal down a nasogastric (NG) tube, and
such practice should be avoided. In young children, practitioners can
attempt to improve palatability by adding flavorings (chocolate or
cherry syrup) or giving the mixture over ice cream. Approximately 20%
of children vomit after receiving a dose of charcoal, emphasizing the
importance of an intact airway and avoiding administration of charcoal after ingestion of substances that are particularly toxic when aspirated (e.g., hydrocarbons). If charcoal is given through a gastric tube
in an intubated patient, placement of the tube should be confirmed
before activated charcoal is given. Instillation of charcoal directly into
the lungs can have disastrous effects. Constipation is another common
side effect of activated charcoal, and in rare cases, bowel perforation
has been reported.
Cathartics (sorbitol, magnesium sulfate, magnesium citrate) have
been used in conjunction with activated charcoal to prevent constipation and accelerate evacuation of the charcoal-­toxin complex. There
are no data demonstrating their value and numerous reports of adverse
effects from cathartics, such as dehydration and electrolyte imbalance.

Whole-­Bowel Irrigation

WBI involves instilling large volumes (25 mL/kg/hr in children or 1-­2
L/hr in adolescents) of a polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution (e.g.,
GoLYTELY) to “wash out” the entire GI tract. This technique may have
some success for the ingestion of SR preparations, substances not well
adsorbed by charcoal (e.g., lithium, iron), transdermal patches, foreign bodies, and drug packets. WBI is most frequently administered
to decontaminate the gut of a child whose abdominal radiograph demonstrates multiple lead paint chips. Careful attention should be paid to
assessment of the airway and abdominal exam before initiating WBI.
WBI should never be given to a patient with signs of obstruction or
ileus or with a compromised airway. Given the rate of administration
and volume needed to flush the system, WBI is typically administered
by NG tube. WBI is continued until the rectal effluent is clear. If the
WBI is for a child with ingested paint chips, the end-­point will be clearing of the chips from the bowel based on repeat radiographs. Complications of WBI include vomiting, abdominal pain, and abdominal
distention. Bezoar formation might respond to WBI but may also
require endoscopy or surgery.

Directed Therapy
Antidotal Therapy

Antidotes are available for relatively few toxins (see Tables 94.8 and
94.9), but early and appropriate use of an antidote is a key element in
managing the poisoned patient.

Intravenous Lipid Emulsion Therapy

Intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) therapy is a potentially lifesaving
intervention. ILE therapy sequesters fat-­
soluble drugs, decreasing
their impact at target organs; this is known as a “lipid sink.” It also
enhances cardiac function by supplying an alternative energy source
to a depressed myocardium and acting on calcium channels in the
heart, increasing myocardial calcium and thus cardiac function. ILE is
most effective as a reversal agent for toxicity from inadvertent intravenous (IV) injection of bupivacaine. Using the same 20% lipid solution
used for total parenteral nutrition (TPN), a bolus dose of 1.5 mL/kg is

Enhancing elimination results in increased clearance of a poison that
has already been absorbed. It is only useful for a few toxins and in these
cases is a potentially lifesaving intervention. Methods of enhanced
elimination include urinary alkalinization, hemodialysis, and multidose activated charcoal.

Urinary Alkalinization

Urinary alkalinization enhances the elimination of drugs that are weak
acids by forming charged molecules, which then become trapped in
the renal tubules. Charged molecules, being polar and hydrophilic,
do not easily cross cellular membranes; thus they remain in the renal
tubules and are excreted. Urinary alkalinization is accomplished by a
continuous infusion of sodium bicarbonate–containing IV fluids, with
a goal urine pH of 7.5-­8. Alkalinization of the urine is most useful in
managing salicylate and methotrexate toxicity. Complications of urinary alkalinization include electrolyte derangements (e.g., hypokalemia, hypocalcemia), fluid overload, and excessive serum alkalinization.
Serum pH should be closely monitored and not exceed a pH >7.55.
Patients typically unable to tolerate the volumes required for alkalinization are those with heart failure, kidney failure, pulmonary edema,
or cerebral edema.

Hemodialysis

Few drugs or toxins are removed by dialysis in amounts sufficient to
justify the risks and difficulty of dialysis. Toxins amenable to dialysis have the following properties: low volume of distribution (<1
L/kg) with a high degree of water solubility, low molecular weight,
and low degree of protein binding. Hemodialysis may be useful for
toxicity from methanol, ethylene glycol, salicylates, theophylline,
bromide, lithium, and valproic acid. Hemodialysis is also used to
correct severe electrolyte disturbances and acid-­base derangements
resulting from the ingestion (e.g., severe metformin-­associated lactic acidosis).

Multidose Activated Charcoal

Whereas single-­
dose activated charcoal is used as a method of
decontamination, multidose activated charcoal (MDAC) can help to
enhance the elimination of certain toxins. MDAC is typically given
as 0.5 g/kg every 4-­6 hr (for four doses). MDAC enhances elimination by two proposed mechanisms: interruption of enterohepatic
recirculation and “GI dialysis.” The concept of GI dialysis involves
using the intestinal mucosa as a dialysis membrane and pulling toxins
from the bloodstream back into the intraluminal space, where they
are adsorbed to the charcoal. The AACT/European Association of
Poisons Centres and Clinical Toxicologists position statement recommends MDAC in managing significant ingestions of carbamazepine, dapsone, phenobarbital, quinine, and theophylline. As with
single-­dose activated charcoal, contraindications to the use of MDAC
include an unprotected airway and a concerning abdominal examination (e.g., ileus, distention, peritoneal signs). Thus the airway and
abdominal exam should be assessed before each dose. A cathartic (e.g.,
sorbitol) may be given with the first dose, but it should not be used
with subsequent doses because of the risk of dehydration and electrolyte derangements. Although MDAC reduces the serum level of an
intoxicant quicker than without MDAC, it has not been shown to have
a significant impact on outcome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

710 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
See other chapters for drug use (Chapter 157) and environmental
health hazards (Chapters 757-­763).

Pharmaceuticals
Analgesics

Acetaminophen. Acetaminophen (APAP) is the most widely used

(S.I. Units)
µM per L µg per mL
1,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000

500

2,000
1,300
1,000
900
800
700
600
500

200
150
100

Probable Hepatic Toxicity

400

50

le

ib

ss

300
250

Po

200

No Hepatic Toxicity

ty
ci

xi

To

100
90
80
70
60
50

ic

at

ep

H

analgesic and antipyretic in pediatrics, available in multiple formulations, strengths, and combinations. Consequently, APAP is commonly
available in the home, where it can be unintentionally ingested by
young children, taken in an intentional overdose by adolescents and
adults, or inappropriately dosed in all ages. In the United States, APAP
toxicity remains the most common cause of acute liver failure and one
of the leading causes of death from oral poisonings.
Pathophysiology. APAP toxicity results from the formation of a
highly reactive intermediate metabolite, N-­acetyl-­p-­benzoquinone
imine (NAPQI). In therapeutic use, only a small percentage of a dose
(approximately 5%) is metabolized by the hepatic cytochrome P450
enzyme CYP2E1 to NAPQI, which is then immediately conjugated
with glutathione to form a nontoxic mercapturic acid conjugate. In
overdose, glutathione stores are overwhelmed, and free NAPQI is able
to combine with hepatic macromolecules to produce hepatocellular
necrosis. The single acute toxic dose of APAP is generally considered
to be >200 mg/kg in children and >7.5-­10 g in adolescents and adults.
Repeated administration of APAP at supratherapeutic doses (>90 mg/
kg/day for consecutive days) can lead to hepatic injury or failure in
some children, especially in the setting of fever, dehydration, poor
nutrition, and other conditions that serve to reduce glutathione stores.
Any child with a history of acute ingestion of >200 mg/kg (unusual
in children <6 years) or with an acute intentional ingestion of any
amount should be referred to a healthcare facility for clinical assessment and measurement of a serum APAP level.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Classically, four general
stages of APAP toxicity have been described (Table 94.12). In the first
24 hours after ingestion, patients are most frequently asymptomatic,
although they may have nonspecific symptoms such as nausea/vomiting. Thus the diagnosis of APAP toxicity cannot be based on clinical
symptoms alone, but instead requires consideration of the combination
of the patient’s history, symptoms, and laboratory findings.
If a toxic ingestion is suspected, a serum APAP level should be measured 4 hours after the reported time of ingestion. For patients who
present to medical care more than 4 hours after ingestion, a stat APAP
level should be obtained. APAP levels obtained <4 hours after ingestion,
unless “nondetectable,” are difficult to interpret and cannot be used to
estimate the potential for toxicity. Other important baseline laboratory
tests include hepatic transaminases, bilirubin, renal function tests, and
coagulation parameters.

Treatment. When considering the treatment of a patient poisoned
or potentially poisoned with APAP, and after assessment of the ABCs, it
is helpful to place the patient into one of the following four categories:
1. Prophylactic. These patients have a normal AST. If the APAP level
is known and the ingestion is within 24 hours of the level being drawn,
treatment decisions are based on where the level falls on the Rumack-­
Matthew nomogram (Fig. 94.1). Any patient with a serum APAP level
in the possible or probable hepatotoxicity range per the nomogram
should be treated with N-­acetylcysteine (NAC). This nomogram is only
intended for use in patients who present within 24 hours of a single acute
APAP ingestion with a known time of ingestion. If treatment is recommended, they should receive NAC. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)–approved treatment regimens include a 21-­hour protocol for IV
administration and a 72-­hour protocol for oral administration. Several
shorter dosing regimens have been described and may be considered in
consultation with a toxicologist. Regardless of treatment duration, serial
transaminases and APAP level should be monitored. If the AST becomes
elevated while receiving NAC, the patient moves into the next category
of treatment (hepatic injury, see later). If AST remains normal but APAP
is still present, NAC should be continued until the level is nondetectable.
In the case of a patient with a documented APAP level, normal AST, and
an unknown time of ingestion, treatment should ensue until the level is
undetectable, with normal transaminases.
The importance of instituting therapy with either IV or oral NAC no
later than 8 hours from the time of ingestion cannot be overemphasized.

Acetaminophen Plasma Concentration

SELECT COMPOUNDS IN PEDIATRIC POISONING

10

40
30

Table 94.12  Classic Stages in Clinical Course of
Acetaminophen Toxicity
STAGE

TIME AFTER
INGESTION

I

0-­24 hr

Anorexia, vomiting, malaise
Laboratory tests typically normal, except
for acetaminophen level

II

24-­48 hr

Resolution of earlier symptoms; right
upper quadrant abdominal pain and
tenderness; elevated hepatic
transaminases (aspartate > alanine), INR

III

3-­5 days

Peak transaminase elevations;
development of liver failure, multiorgan
system failure, death or recovery begins

IV

4 days to 2 wk

Resolution of liver function abnormalities
Clinical recovery precedes histologic
recovery

25%

5

20

10

CHARACTERISTICS
0

4
8
12
16
Hours After Ingestion

20

24

Fig. 94.1 Rumack-­Matthew nomogram for acetaminophen poison-

ing, a semilogarithmic plot of plasma acetaminophen concentrations
vs time. Cautions for the use of this chart: The time coordinates refer
to time after ingestion; serum concentrations obtained before 4 hours
are not interpretable, and the graph should be used only in relation to a
single acute ingestion with a known time of ingestion. This nomogram
is not useful for chronic exposures or unknown time of ingestion and
should be used with caution in the setting of co-­ingestants that slow
gastrointestinal motility. The lower solid line is typically used in the United States to define toxicity and direct treatment, whereas the upper line
is generally used in Europe. (From Rumack BH, Hess AJ, eds. Poisindex, Denver: Micromedix; 1995. Adapted from Rumack BH, Matthew H.
Acetaminophen poisoning and toxicity. Pediatrics.1975;55:871–876.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
No patient, regardless of the size of the ingestion, who receives NAC
within 8 hours of overdose should die from liver failure. The longer
from the 8 hour-­mark that the initiation of therapy is delayed, the
greater the risk of acute liver failure. Any patient presenting close to or
beyond the 8-­hour mark after an APAP overdose should be empirically
started on NAC pending laboratory results.
2. Hepatic Injury. These patients exhibit evidence of hepatocellular
necrosis, manifested first as elevated liver transaminases (usually AST
first, then ALT), followed by a rise in the INR. Any patient in this category requires therapy with NAC (IV or oral). When to discontinue therapy in the clinically well-­appearing patient remains controversial, but in
general NAC can be discontinued when the transaminases and INR have
peaked and are declining significantly (they do not need to be normal).
Most patients’ liver enzymes will peak 3-­4 days after their ingestion.
3. Acute Liver Failure. The King’s College criteria are used to determine which patients should be referred for consideration of liver transplant. These criteria are met when a patient exhibits either acidemia
(serum pH <7.3) after adequate fluid resuscitation or all three of the
following: coagulopathy (INR >6.5), renal dysfunction (creatinine >3.4
mg/dL), and grade III or IV hepatic encephalopathy (see Chapter 412).
A serum lactic acid >3 mmol/L (after IV fluids) adds to both sensitivity
and specificity of the criteria to predict death without liver transplant.
The degree of transaminase elevation does not factor into this decision-­
making process.
4. Repeated Supratherapeutic Ingestion. APAP is particularly prone
to unintentional overdose through the ingestion of multiple medications containing the drug or simply because people assume it to be
safe at any dose. Ingestion of amounts significantly greater than the
recommended daily dose for several days or more puts one at risk for
liver injury. Because the Rumack-­Matthew nomogram is not helpful in
this scenario, a conservative approach is taken. In the asymptomatic
patient, if the AST is normal and the APAP is <10 μg/mL, no therapy is indicated. A normal AST and an elevated APAP warrant NAC
dosing for at least long enough for the drug to metabolize while the
AST remains normal. An elevated AST puts the patient in the “hepatic
injury” category previously described. A patient presenting with symptoms (i.e., right upper quadrant pain, vomiting, jaundice) should be
empirically started on NAC pending laboratory results.
NAC is available in oral and IV forms, and both are considered
equally efficacious (see Table 94.8 for the dosing regimens of the oral
and IV form). The IV form is used in patients with intractable vomiting, those with evidence of hepatic failure, and pregnant patients.
Oral NAC has an unpleasant taste and smell and can be mixed in a
soft drink or fruit juice or given by NG tube to improve tolerability of
the oral regimen. Administration of IV NAC (as a standard 3% solution to avoid administering excess free water, typically in 5% dextrose),
especially the initial loading dose, is associated in some patients with
the development of anaphylactoid reactions (non–immunoglobulin E
mediated). These reactions are typically managed by stopping the infusion; treating with diphenhydramine, albuterol, and/or epinephrine as
indicated; and restarting the infusion at a slower rate once symptoms
have resolved. IV NAC is also associated with mild elevation in measured INR (range: 1.2-­1.5) because of laboratory interference. IV dosing, however, delivers less medication to the liver compared with the
oral regimen. As a result, many toxicologists now recommend higher
doses of the IV formulation in patients with large overdoses. Transaminases, synthetic function, and renal function should be followed
at least daily while the patient is being treated with NAC. Patients with
worsening hepatic function or clinical status might benefit from more
frequent laboratory monitoring. A patient-­tailored approach is now
the norm for when to stop NAC therapy, for deciding whom to refer
for transplantation evaluation, and often for the dose of IV NAC in
patients with either very high APAP levels or signs of injury. Consultation with the regional PCC and medical toxicologist can help streamline the care of these patients, ultimately shortening their length of stay
with potentially improved outcomes.

Adjunctive Therapies

Although activated charcoal binds acetaminophen, risks of vomiting associated with large APAP overdoses as well as the likelihood of

711

co-­ingestion that may affect mental status must be considered. Activated charcoal may be considered in the first 1-­2 hours after ingestion
in an alert patient, but its use should not have bearing on the need
for NAC. Similarly, hemodialysis is not routinely used in APAP overdose but may be indicated in massive ingestions in consultation with
a toxicologist.
Salicylates. The incidence of salicylate poisoning in young children
has declined dramatically since APAP and ibuprofen replaced aspirin
as commonly used analgesics and antipyretics in pediatrics. However,
salicylates remain widely available not only in aspirin-­containing products but also in antidiarrheal medications, topical agents (e.g., keratolytics, sports creams), oil of wintergreen, and some herbal products. Oil of
wintergreen contains 5 g of salicylate in 5 mL, meaning ingestion of very
small volumes of this product has the potential to cause severe toxicity.
Pathophysiology. Salicylates lead to toxicity by interacting with a
wide array of physiologic processes, including direct stimulation of the
respiratory center, uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation, inhibition
of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and stimulation of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. The acute toxic dose of salicylates is generally considered
to be >150 mg/kg. More significant toxicity is seen after ingestions of
>300 mg/kg, and severe, potentially fatal, toxicity is described after
ingestions of >500 mg/kg.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Salicylate ingestions are
classified as acute or chronic, and acute toxicity is much more common
in pediatric patients. Early signs of acute salicylism include nausea,
vomiting, diaphoresis, and tinnitus. Moderate salicylate toxicity can
manifest as tachypnea and hyperpnea, tachycardia, and altered mental
status. The tachycardia largely results from marked insensible losses
from vomiting, tachypnea, diaphoresis, and uncoupling of oxidative
phosphorylation. Thus careful attention should be paid to volume status and early volume resuscitation in the significantly poisoned patient.
Signs of severe salicylate toxicity include mild hyperthermia, coma,
and seizures. Chronic salicylism can have a more insidious presentation, and patients can show marked toxicity (e.g., altered mental status,
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, acidemia) at significantly lower
salicylate levels than in acute toxicity.
Classically, laboratory values from a patient poisoned with salicylates
reveal a primary respiratory alkalosis and a primary, elevated anion
gap metabolic acidosis. Early in the course of acute salicylism, respiratory alkalosis dominates and the patient is alkalemic. As the respiratory stimulation diminishes, the patient will move toward acidemia.
Hyperglycemia (early) and hypoglycemia (late) have been described.
Abnormal coagulation studies and acute kidney injury may be seen but
are not common.
Serial serum salicylate levels should be closely monitored (every 2-­4
hours initially) until they are consistently downtrending (three consecutive levels <30 mg/dL and decreasing by at least 10–20% on each
subsequent measurement). Salicylate absorption in overdose is unpredictable and erratic, especially with an enteric-­coated product, and levels can rapidly increase into the highly toxic range, even many hours
after the ingestion. The Done nomogram is of poor value and should
not be used. Serum and urine pH and electrolytes should be followed
closely. An APAP level should be checked in any patient who intentionally overdoses on salicylates, because APAP is a common co-­ingestant,
and people often confuse or combine their nonprescription analgesic
medications. Salicylate toxicity can cause a noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema, especially in chronic overdose; consequently, a chest radiograph is recommended in any patient in respiratory distress.
Treatment. For the patient who presents soon after an acute ingestion, initial treatment should include gastric decontamination with
activated charcoal. Salicylate pills occasionally form bezoars, which
should be suspected if serum salicylate concentrations continue to rise
many hours after ingestion or are persistently elevated despite appropriate management. Gastric decontamination is typically not useful
after chronic exposure.
Initial therapy focuses on aggressive volume resuscitation and
prompt initiation of sodium bicarbonate therapy in the symptomatic patient, even before obtaining serum salicylate levels. Therapeutic salicylate levels are 10-­20 mg/dL, and levels >30 mg/dL warrant
treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

712 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The primary mode of therapy for salicylate toxicity is urinary
alkalinization. Urinary alkalinization enhances the elimination of
salicylates by converting salicylate to its ionized form, “trapping” it
in the renal tubules. In addition, maintaining an alkalemic serum pH
decreases CNS penetration of salicylates because charged particles are
less able to cross the blood-­brain barrier. Alkalinization is achieved by
administration of a sodium bicarbonate infusion at approximately two
times maintenance fluid rates. The goals of therapy include a urine pH
of 7.5-­8, a serum pH of 7.45-­7.55, and decreasing serum salicylate levels.
In general, the lower the patient’s serum pH, the greater the relative
amount of salicylate in the uncharged, nonpolar form and the greater
amount of salicylate penetration of the blood-­brain barrier. Salicylate
penetration of the brain leads to severe consequences such as cerebral
edema; therefore maintaining alkalemia is imperative. Careful attention should also be paid to serial potassium levels in any patient on
a bicarbonate infusion, because potassium will be driven intracellularly, and hypokalemia impairs alkalinization of the urine. For these
reasons, potassium is often added to the bicarbonate drip. Repeat
doses of charcoal may be beneficial because of the often delayed and
erratic absorption of aspirin. Parenteral glucose should be provided
to any salicylate-­poisoned patients with altered mental status because
they may have CNS hypoglycemia (i.e., neuroglycopenia) not seen in a
peripheral serum glucose test.
In patients with severe toxicity, hemodialysis may be required. Indications for dialysis include severe acid-­base abnormalities (specifically
severe acidosis and acidemia), a rising salicylate level (despite adequate
decontamination and properly alkalinized urine), pulmonary edema
or respiratory failure, cerebral edema, seizures, hepatic failure, and
renal failure. Serum salicylate concentrations alone are not a clear indicator of the need for dialysis and should always be interpreted along
with the clinical status of the patient.
Ibuprofen and Other Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
(NSAIDs). Ibuprofen and other NSAIDs are often involved in unin-

tentional and intentional overdoses because of their widespread availability and common use as analgesics and antipyretics. Fortunately,
serious effects after acute NSAID overdose are rare because of their
wide therapeutic index.
Pathophysiology. NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin synthesis by
reversibly inhibiting the activity of cyclooxygenase (COX), the primary
enzyme responsible for the biosynthesis of prostaglandins. In therapeutic use, side effects include GI irritation, reduced renal blood flow,
and platelet dysfunction. To minimize these side effects, NSAID analogs have been developed that are more specific for the inducible form
of COX (the COX-­2 isoform) than the constitutive form (COX-­1).
However, overdose of the more selective COX-­2 inhibitors (e.g., celecoxib [Celebrex]) is treated the same as overdose of nonspecific COX
inhibitors (e.g., ibuprofen) because at higher doses, COX-­2–selective
agents lose their COX inhibitory selectivity.
Ibuprofen, the primary NSAID used in pediatrics, is well tolerated,
even in overdose. In children, acute doses of <200 mg/kg rarely cause
toxicity, but ingestions of >400 mg/kg can produce more serious effects,
including altered mental status and metabolic acidosis.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Symptoms usually
develop within 4-­6 hours of ingestion and resolve within 24 hours. If
toxicity does develop, it is typically manifested as nausea, vomiting, and
abdominal pain. Although GI bleeding and ulcers have been described
with chronic use, they are rare in the setting of acute ingestion. After
massive ingestions, patients can develop marked CNS depression, anion
gap metabolic acidosis, renal insufficiency, and (rarely) respiratory
depression. Seizures have also been described, especially after overdose
of mefenamic acid. Specific drug levels are not readily available, nor do
they inform management decisions. Renal function studies, acid-­base
balance, complete blood count (CBC), and coagulation parameters
should be monitored after very large ingestions. Co-­ingestants, especially APAP, should be ruled out after any intentional ingestion.
Treatment. Supportive care, including use of antiemetics and
acid blockade as indicated, is the primary therapy for NSAID toxicity. Decontamination with activated charcoal should be considered if a
patient presents within 1-­2 hours of a potentially toxic ingestion. There

is no specific antidote for this class of drugs. Given the high degree of
protein binding and excretion pattern of NSAIDs, none of the modalities used to enhance elimination is particularly useful in managing
these overdoses. Unlike in patients with salicylate toxicity, urinary
alkalinization is not helpful for NSAID toxicity. Patients who develop
significant clinical signs of toxicity should be admitted to the hospital for ongoing supportive care and monitoring. Patients who remain
asymptomatic for 4-­6 hours after ingestion do not require further medical care but may need psychiatric assessment if their ingestion was
intentional.
Prescription Opioids. Opioids are a frequently abused class of
medications in both IV and oral forms. The opioid epidemic gripping
the United States and other countries is discussed in Chapter 157. Two
specific oral opioids, buprenorphine and methadone, merit mention
because of potential life-­threatening toxicity in toddlers with ingestion of even one pill. Both agents are used in managing opioid use disorder, although buprenorphine is the drug of choice. Methadone is
also widely used in the treatment of chronic pain, meaning multiday
prescriptions can be filled. Other agents commonly available in the
home include morphine, oxycodone, and hydrocodone, as they are frequently prescribed to patients after injuries or surgical procedures. All
of these drugs are also readily available for illicit purchase and potential
abuse. Opioids are of great potential toxicity to small children if not
dosed appropriately, especially buprenorphine because of its long half-­
life and high potency.
Pathophysiology. Opioids are well absorbed via multiple routes,
including the GI tract, which is the most common route of accidental
overdose in young children. At therapeutic dosing, opioids are typically absorbed within a few hours, but absorption may be slowed and
symptoms prolonged in overdose. Individual opioids cross the blood-­
brain barrier to varying degrees. Opioids all undergo hepatic metabolism with renal excretion.
Methadone is a lipophilic synthetic opioid with potent agonist effects
at μ-­opioid receptors, leading to both its desired analgesic effects and
undesired side effects, including sedation, respiratory depression, and
impaired GI motility. Methadone is thought to cause QTc interval prolongation through interactions with the human ether-­a-­go-­go–related
gene (hERG)–encoded potassium rectifier channel. Its duration of
effect for pain control averages only about 8 hours, whereas the dangerous side effects can occur up to 24 hours from the last dose and longer
after overdose. Methadone has an average half-­life >25 hours, which
may be extended to >50 hours in overdose.
Suboxone is a combination of buprenorphine, a potent opioid with
partial agonism at μ-­opioid receptors and weak antagonism at κ-­opioid
receptors, and naloxone. Naloxone has poor oral bioavailability but is
included in the formulation to discourage diversion for IV use, during
which it can precipitate withdrawal. Suboxone is formulated for buccal
or sublingual administration; consequently, toddlers can absorb significant amounts of drug even by sucking on a tablet. Buprenorphine
has an average half-­life of 37 hours.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. In children, opioid
ingestions can manifest with the classic toxidrome of respiratory
depression, sedation, and miosis. Signs of more severe toxicity can
include bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia. Many opioids
have clinical features that are unique to their chemical structure (Table
94.13). Even in therapeutic use, methadone is associated with a prolonged QTc interval and risk of torsades de pointes. Accordingly, an
ECG should be part of the initial evaluation after ingestion of methadone or any unknown opioid. Many prescription opioids, including
methadone and buprenorphine, are not detected on routine urine
opiate screens, although some centers have added a separate urine
methadone screen. Levels of many drugs can be measured, although
this is rarely done clinically and is seldom helpful in the acute setting.
An exception may be in the cases involving concerns about neglect or
abuse, at which point urine for gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy, the legal gold standard, should be sent to confirm and document
the presence of the drug.
Treatment. Patients with significant respiratory depression or
CNS depression should be treated with the opioid antidote naloxone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
Table 94.13  Clinical Properties of Select Prescription
Opioids
CLINICAL EFFECT

OPIOID

QRS widening, sodium
channel blockade

Propoxyphene

QT widening, potassium
channel blockade

Methadone

Seizures

Propoxyphene, meperidine

Serotonin syndrome

Meperidine, methadone, tramadol

Hearing loss, ototoxicity

Methadone, hydrocodone

Modified from Nikolaides JK, Thompson TM. Opioids. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS,
Gausche-­Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2018, Table 156.2, p. 1944.

(see Table 94.8). In pediatric patients who are not chronically taking
opioids, the full reversal dose of 1-­2 mg should be used. In contrast,
opioid-­dependent patients should be treated with smaller initial doses
(0.04-­0.4 mg), which can then be repeated as needed to achieve the
desired clinical response, avoiding abrupt induction of withdrawal.
Because the half-­life of many opioids is much longer than that of naloxone, patients can require multiple doses of naloxone. These patients
may benefit from a continuous infusion of naloxone, typically started
at two thirds of the reversal dose per hour and titrated to maintain an
adequate respiratory rate and level of consciousness. Patients who have
ingested methadone should be placed on a cardiac monitor and have
serial ECGs to monitor for the development of a prolonged QTc interval. If a patient does develop a prolonged QTc, management includes
close cardiac monitoring, repletion of electrolytes (potassium, calcium,
and magnesium), and having a defibrillator readily available should the
patient develop torsades de pointes.
Given the potential for clinically significant and prolonged toxicity,
any toddler who has ingested methadone, even if asymptomatic, should
be admitted to the hospital for at least 24 hours of monitoring. Duration
of observation after ingestion of other opioids depends on the half-­life
and dose of the agent ingested. All such cases should be discussed with a
PCC or medical toxicologist before determining disposition.

Cardiovascular Medications

β-­Adrenergic Receptor Blockers. β Blockers competitively inhibit
the action of catecholamines at the β-­adrenergic receptor. Therapeutically, β blockers are used for a variety of conditions, including hypertension, coronary artery disease, tachydysrhythmias, anxiety disorders,
migraines, essential tremor, and hyperthyroidism. Because of its lipophilicity and blockade of fast sodium channels, propranolol is considered to be the most toxic member of the β-­blocker class. Overdoses
of water-­soluble β blockers (e.g., atenolol) are associated with milder
symptoms.
Pathophysiology. In overdose, β blockers decrease chronotropy
and inotropy in addition to slowing conduction through atrioventricular (AV) nodal tissue. Clinically, these effects are manifested as
bradycardia, hypotension, and heart block. Patients with reactive
airway disease can experience bronchospasm as a result of blockade of β2-­mediated bronchodilation. β2 Blockers interfere with
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, which can sometimes lead to
hypoglycemia, especially in patients with poor glycogen stores (e.g.,
toddlers).
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Toxicity typically develops within 6 hours of ingestion, although it may be delayed after ingestion of sotalol or SR preparations. The most common features of severe
poisoning are bradycardia and hypotension. Lipophilic agents, including propranolol, can enter the CNS and cause altered mental status,
coma, and seizures. Overdose of β blockers with sodium channel–
blocking properties (e.g., propranolol) can cause QRS interval widening and ventricular dysrhythmias.

713

Evaluation after β-­blocker overdose should include an ECG, frequent
reassessments of hemodynamic status, and blood glucose. Serum levels
of β blockers are not readily available for routine clinical use and are
not useful in management of the poisoned patient.
Treatment. In addition to supportive care and GI decontamination
as indicated, glucagon is theoretically the preferred antidote of choice
for β-­blocker toxicity (see Table 94.8). Glucagon stimulates adenylate cyclase and increases levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) independent of the β-­receptor. Glucagon is typically given as
a bolus and, if this is effective, followed by a continuous infusion. In
practice, glucagon is often only marginally effective, limited by its pro-­
emetic effects, especially at the high doses typically required. Other
useful interventions include calcium, vasopressors, and high-­
dose
insulin. Seizures are managed with benzodiazepines, and QRS widening should be treated with sodium bicarbonate. Lipid emulsion therapy
(discussed earlier) may be considered in patients with signs of shock
who do not respond to conventional treatments. Children who ingest
one or two water-­soluble β blockers are unlikely to develop toxicity and
can typically be discharged to home if they remain asymptomatic over
a 6-­hour observation period. Children who ingest SR products, highly
lipid-­soluble agents, and sotalol require longer periods of observation
before safe discharge. Any symptomatic child should be admitted for
ongoing monitoring and directed therapy.
Calcium Channel Blockers. CCBs are used for a variety of therapeutic indications and have the potential to cause severe toxicity, even
after exploratory ingestions. Specific agents include verapamil, diltiazem, and the dihydropyridines (e.g., amlodipine, nifedipine). Of these,
diltiazem and verapamil are the most dangerous in overdose because of
their higher lipophilicity and direct cardiac suppressant effects.
type calcium channels,
Pathophysiology. CCBs antagonize l-­
inhibiting calcium influx into myocardial and vascular smooth muscle
cells. Verapamil works primarily by slowing inotropy and chronotropy
and in therapeutic dosing has no effect on systemic vascular resistance
(SVR). Diltiazem has effects both on the heart and the peripheral vasculature. The dihydropyridines exclusively diminish SVR. Verapamil
and diltiazem can significantly diminish myocardial contractility and
conduction, with diltiazem also lowering SVR. By contrast, dihydropyridines will decrease the SVR, leading to vasodilation and reflex
tachycardia, although this receptor selectivity may be lost after a large
overdose. Because the same l-­type calcium channels blocked by CCBs
are also on the pancreatic islet cells, any patient significantly poisoned
with a CCB may develop hyperglycemia.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Overdoses of CCBs
lead to hypotension, accompanied by bradycardia, normal heart rate,
or even tachycardia, depending on the agent. Other rhythm disturbances, including AV block, bundle branch blocks, QT prolongation,
and junctional rhythms, may also be seen. A common feature of CCB
overdose is the patient exhibiting profound hypotension with preserved consciousness.
Initial evaluation should include an ECG, continuous and careful hemodynamic monitoring, and rapid measurement of serum
glucose levels. Both the absolute degree of hyperglycemia and the
percentage increase in serum glucose have been correlated with the
severity of CCB toxicity in adults. The development of hyperglycemia can even precede the development of hemodynamic instability.
Blood levels of CCBs are not readily available and are not useful in
guiding therapy.
Treatment. Once initial supportive care has been instituted, GI
decontamination should begin with activated charcoal as appropriate.
WBI may be beneficial in a stable patient after ingestion of an SR product. Calcium channel blockade in the smooth muscles of the GI tract can
lead to greatly diminished motility; thus any form of GI decontamination
should be undertaken with careful attention to serial abdominal exams.
Calcium salts, administered through a peripheral IV line as calcium gluconate or a central line as calcium chloride, help to overcome
blocked calcium channels. High-­dose insulin euglycemia therapy is
considered the antidote of choice for CCB toxicity. An initial bolus of 1
unit/kg of regular insulin is followed by an infusion at 1-10 units/kg/hr
(see Table 94.8). The main mechanism of high-­dose insulin euglycemia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

714 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
is to improve the metabolic efficiency of a poisoned heart that needs
carbohydrates for energy (instead of the usual free fatty acids) but has
minimal circulating insulin. Blood glucose and serum potassium levels
should be closely monitored, and supplemental dextrose may be necessary to maintain euglycemia. Mild hypokalemia may be tolerated,
as this reflects intracellular shifting of potassium rather than whole-­
body potassium depletion; severe hypokalemia (e.g., K <2.8 mEq/L) is
treated with IV potassium supplementation.
Additional therapies include judicious IV fluid boluses and vasopressors (often in very high doses). Cardiac pacing is rarely of value. Lipid
emulsion therapy (discussed earlier) is a potentially lifesaving intervention, especially for patients poisoned with the more lipid-­soluble
CCBs, verapamil and diltiazem. In extreme cases an intraaortic balloon
pump or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) are potential
treatments. Given the potential for profound and sometimes delayed
toxicity in toddlers after ingestion of one or two CCB tablets, hospital
admission and 12-­24 hours of monitoring for all of these patients is
strongly recommended.
α2-­Adrenergic Agonists. Although originally intended for use as
antihypertensives, the number of clonidine and guanfacine prescriptions in the pediatric population has greatly increased because of its
reported efficacy in the management of attention-­deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), tic disorders, and other behavioral disorders. With
this increased use has come a significant rise in pediatric ingestions
and therapeutic misadventures. Clonidine is available in pill and transdermal patch forms, while guanfacine is available in pill form.
Pathophysiology. Clonidine, along with the closely related agent
guanfacine, is a centrally acting α2-­adrenergic receptor agonist with
a very narrow therapeutic index. Agonism at central α2 receptors
decreases sympathetic outflow, producing lethargy, bradycardia, hypotension, and apnea. Toxicity can develop after ingestion of only one pill
or after sucking on or swallowing a discarded transdermal patch. Even
a “used” transdermal patch might contain as much as one third to one
half the original amount of drug.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. The most common
clinical manifestations of toxicity are lethargy, miosis, and bradycardia. Hypotension, respiratory depression, and apnea may be seen in
severe cases. Very early after ingestion, patients may be hypertensive
in the setting of agonism at peripheral α-­receptors and resulting vasoconstriction. Symptoms develop relatively soon after ingestion and
typically resolve within 24 hours. Serum clonidine concentrations are
not readily available and are of no clinical value in the acute setting.
Although signs of clinical toxicity are common after clonidine or guanfacine overdose, death is extremely unusual.
Treatment. Given the potential for significant toxicity, most young
children warrant referral to a healthcare facility for evaluation after
unintentional ingestions of α2-­
adrenergic agonists. Gastric decontamination is of minimal value because of the small quantities ingested
and the rapid onset of serious symptoms. Aggressive supportive care
is imperative and is the cornerstone of management. Naloxone, often
in high doses (i.e., 10 mg IV), has shown variable efficacy in treating
clonidine toxicity. Other potentially useful therapies include atropine,
IV fluid boluses, and vasopressors. Symptomatic children should be
admitted to the hospital for close cardiovascular and neurologic monitoring. Also, in a patient receiving chronic clonidine or guanfacine
therapy, rapid discontinuation of the drug, or even missing one or two
doses, could lead to potentially dangerous elevations in blood pressure.
Digoxin. Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside extracted from the leaves
of Digitalis lanata. Other natural sources of cardiac glycosides include
Digitalis purpura (foxglove), Nerium oleander (oleander), Convallaria
majalis (lily of the valley), Siberian ginseng, and the Bufo marinus toad.
Therapeutically, digoxin is used in the management of heart failure and
some supraventricular tachydysrhythmias. Acute overdose can occur in
the setting of dosing errors (especially in younger children), unintentional or intentional medication ingestion, or exposure to plant material containing digitalis glycosides. Regarding exposure to such plants,
toxicity is unusual unless the poison is concentrated in the form of a tea.
Chronic toxicity can result from alteration of the digoxin dose, alteration
in digoxin clearance as a result of renal impairment, or drug interactions.

Pathophysiology. Digoxin blocks the sodium-­potassium adenosine triphosphatase (Na+,K+-­ATPase) pump, leading to intracellular
loss of K+ and gain of Na+ and calcium (Ca2+). This resulting rise in
Ca2+ available to the contractile myocardium improves inotropy. An
increase in myocardial automaticity leads to subsequent atrial, nodal,
and ventricular ectopy. Digoxin also affects nodal conduction, leading to a prolonged refractory period, decreased sinus node firing, and
slowed conduction through the AV node. Impaired Na+/K+ exchange
can lead to elevated serum K+. Overall, digoxin overdose manifests as
a combination of slowed or blocked conduction and increased ectopy.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Nausea and vomiting
are common initial symptoms of acute digoxin toxicity, manifesting
within 6 hours of overdose. Cardiovascular manifestations include
bradycardia, heart block, and a wide variety of dysrhythmias. CNS
manifestations consist of lethargy, confusion, and weakness. Chronic
toxicity (which is rare in children) is more insidious and may also manifest as altered mental status and visual disturbances.
Initial assessment should include an ECG, serum digoxin level,
serum potassium, and kidney function tests. The serum digoxin level
should be assessed at least 6 hours after ingestion and carefully interpreted in the setting of clinical symptoms, because the digoxin level
alone does not entirely reflect the severity of intoxication. In acute
ingestions, serum potassium is an independent marker of morbidity and mortality, with levels >5 mEq/L predicting poor outcomes. In
chronic toxicity, serum K+ concentration is less useful as a prognostic
marker and may be altered from concomitant use of diuretics or renal
dysfunction.
Digoxin has a very narrow therapeutic index. Therapeutic plasma
digoxin concentrations are 0.5-­2 ng/mL; a level >2 ng/mL is considered
toxic, and >6 ng/mL is considered potentially fatal (in chronic poisonings). As with all serum levels of intoxicants, one must be careful to
interpret the number in the context of the scenario of the poisoning
and the status of the patient. An acutely poisoned patient may have a
very high serum level and minimal to no symptoms, whereas a patient
with a chronic or acute-­on-­chronic poisoning will usually be sicker
with a lower serum level.
Numerous drug interactions affect plasma digoxin concentrations.
Medications known to increase serum digoxin concentrations include
the macrolides, erythromycin and clarithromycin, spironolactone,
verapamil, amiodarone, and itraconazole.
Treatment. Initial treatment includes good general supportive
care and gastric decontamination with activated charcoal if the ingestion was recent. An antidote for digoxin, digoxin-­specific antibody
fragments (Fab: Digibind or DigiFab) is available (see Table 94.8).
Fab fragments bind free digoxin in both the intravascular and the
interstitial spaces to form a pharmacologically inactive complex that
is subsequently eliminated renally. Indications for administration of
Fab fragments in children are listed in Table 94.14. Atropine is potentially useful in managing symptomatic bradycardia. Although dogma
states that patients on digoxin with severe hyperkalemia and QRS
widening on the ECG should not receive calcium salts, this has not
been supported in the literature. Once stabilized, consultation with a
cardiologist is recommended in the management of patients receiving chronic digoxin therapy, because administration of Fab fragments
can lead to recurrence of the patient’s underlying dysrhythmias or
dysfunction.
Iron. Historically, iron was a common cause of childhood poisoning deaths. However, preventive measures such as childproof packaging
have significantly decreased the rates of serious iron toxicity in young
children. Iron-­containing products remain widely available, with the
most potentially toxic being adult iron preparations and prenatal vitamins. The severity of an exposure is related to the amount of elemental iron ingested. Ferrous sulfate contains 20% elemental iron, ferrous
gluconate 12%, and ferrous fumarate 33%. Multivitamin preparations
and children’s vitamins rarely contain enough elemental iron to cause
significant toxicity. Furthermore, nonionic forms of iron, carbonyl iron
and iron polysaccharide, also do not cause significant toxicity.
Pathophysiology. Iron is directly corrosive to the GI mucosa,
leading to hematemesis, melena, ulceration, and potential perforation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
Table. 94.14  Indications for Administration of Digoxin
Antibody Fragments in Children
Ingestion of >0.1-­0.3 mg/kg or steady-­state digoxin concentration
>5 ng/mL PLUS one of the following:
• Rapidly progressive symptoms
• Signs of cardioactive steroid intoxication
• Potentially life-­threatening dysrhythmias or conduction blocks
• Serum potassium concentration >5 mEq/L
Co-­ingestion of other cardiotoxic drugs with additive or synergistic
toxicity
Ingestion of plant known to contain cardioactive steroids plus severe
dysrhythmias
Modified from Cole JB. Cardiovascular drugs. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche-­
Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018,
Box 147.4, p. 1879.

Table 94.15  Clinical Manifestations of Iron Toxicity After
Acute Overdose
PHASE

CLINICAL FEATURES

1. Gastrointestinal (6 hr)

Vomiting
Diarrhea
Hematemesis
Hematochezia

2. Latent (6-­24 hr)

Resolution of GI symptoms
Tachycardia
Acidosis
Depressed mental status

3. Systemic (12-­24 hr)

Return of GI symptoms
Acidosis
Leukocytosis
Coagulopathy
Renal failure
Lethargy or coma
Cardiovascular collapse

4. Hepatic (2-­5 days)

Fulminant liver failure
Coagulopathy

5. Obstructive (3-­6 wk)

Pyloric or bowel scarring
Obstruction

GI, Gastrointestinal.
Modified from Theobald JL, Mycyk MB. Iron and heavy metals. In: Walls RM,
Hockberger RS, Gausche-­Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, Table 151.2, p. 1913.

Early iron-­induced hypotension is caused by massive volume losses,
increased permeability of capillary membranes, and vasodilation
mediated by free iron. Iron accumulates in tissues, including the
Kupffer cells of the liver and myocardial cells, leading to hepatotoxicity,
coagulopathy, and cardiac dysfunction. Metabolic acidosis develops in
the setting of hypotension, hypovolemia, and iron’s direct interference
with oxidative phosphorylation and the Krebs cycle. Pediatric patients
who ingest >40 mg/kg of elemental iron should be referred to medical
care for evaluation, although moderate to severe toxicity is typically
seen with ingestions >60 mg/kg.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Iron toxicity is
described in five often-­overlapping stages (Table 94.15). Patients who
do not develop GI symptoms within 6 hours of ingestion are unlikely to
develop serious toxicity. Symptomatic patients and patients with a large
exposure by history should have serum iron levels drawn 4-­6 hours
after ingestion. Serum iron concentrations of <350 μg/dL 4-­8 hours
after ingestion suggest a low risk of significant toxicity, concentrations
of 350-­500 μg/dL suggest moderate toxicity, and concentrations of >500
μg/dL indicate that significant toxicity is likely. Additional laboratory
evaluation in the ill patient should include arterial or venous blood gas,

715

lactate, CBC, serum glucose level, liver transaminases, and coagulation
parameters. Careful attention should be paid to the patient’s hemodynamic status. An abdominal radiograph may reveal the presence of
iron tablets, although not all formulations of iron are radiopaque.
Treatment. Close clinical monitoring, combined with aggressive
supportive and symptomatic care, is essential to the management of
iron poisoning. Activated charcoal does not adsorb iron, and WBI
remains the decontamination strategy of choice. Deferoxamine, a specific chelator of iron, is the antidote for moderate to severe iron intoxication (see Table 94.8). Indications for deferoxamine treatment include
a serum iron concentration >500 μg/dL or moderate to severe symptoms of toxicity (e.g., acidosis), regardless of serum iron concentration.
Deferoxamine is preferably given by continuous IV infusion at 15 mg/
kg/hr. Hypotension is a common side effect of deferoxamine infusion
and is managed by slowing the rate of the infusion and administering
fluids and vasopressors as needed. Prolonged deferoxamine infusion
(>24 hours) has been associated with pulmonary toxicity (ARDS) and
Yersinia sepsis. The deferoxamine-­iron complex can color the urine
reddish (“vin rosé”), although the degree of this coloration should not
guide therapy. Deferoxamine is typically continued until clinical symptoms and acidosis resolve. Consultation with a PCC or medical toxicologist can yield guidelines for discontinuing deferoxamine.

Oral Hypoglycemics

Oral medications used in the management of type 2 diabetes include
sulfonylureas, biguanides (e.g., metformin), thiazolidinediones, and
meglitinides. Of these, only the sulfonylureas and meglitinides have the
potential to cause profound hypoglycemia in both diabetic and nondiabetic patients. These classes of medications are widely prescribed and
thus readily available. In toddlers, unintentional ingestion of a single
sulfonylurea tablet can lead to significant toxicity.
Pathophysiology. Sulfonylureas work primarily by enhancing
endogenous insulin secretion. In binding to the sulfonylurea receptor,
these drugs induce closure of K+ channels, leading to membrane depolarization, opening of Ca2+ channels, and stimulation of Ca2+-­mediated
insulin release. Even in therapeutic use, the duration of hypoglycemic
action can last up to 24 hours.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Hypoglycemia and
symptoms associated with hypoglycemia are the primary clinical manifestations of sulfonylurea toxicity. These signs and symptoms can include
diaphoresis, tachycardia, lethargy, irritability, coma, seizures, and even
focal neurologic findings. As with other hyperinsulinemic states, sulfonylurea overdoses are associated with a nonketotic hypoglycemia. In the
majority of patients, hypoglycemia develops within 6 hours of ingestion
but can be delayed up to 16-­18 hours after ingestion. Toddlers are particularly susceptible to hypoglycemia during an overnight fast.
Treatment. Patients with symptomatic hypoglycemia should be
promptly treated with dextrose. In patients with mild symptoms, oral
dextrose may be sufficient. However, patients with severe symptoms
or profound hypoglycemia should be treated with a bolus of IV dextrose. Continuous dextrose infusions and repeated IV dextrose boluses
should be avoided, if possible, because this can stimulate further insulin release and lead to recurrent and prolonged hypoglycemia. Instead,
the preferred antidote for persistent (i.e., requiring ≥2 doses of IV dextrose) sulfonylurea toxicity is octreotide (see Table 94.8). Octreotide is
a somatostatin analog that inhibits insulin release. Octreotide is given
IV or subcutaneously (SC), typically in doses of 1-­2 μg/kg (50-­100 μg
in teens or adults) every 6-­8 hours.
Given the potential for significant hypoglycemia, toddlers with
witnessed or suspected sulfonylurea ingestions should be admitted to the hospital for serial glucose measurements for at least 12
hours, including an overnight fast. Patients of any age who develop
hypoglycemia are also candidates for admission, given the prolonged
duration of hypoglycemic activity with these medications. Prophylactic IV dextrose infusions are not recommended because they can
mask the symptoms of toxicity and stimulate further insulin secretion. Patients who require IV dextrose and/or octreotide should be
monitored until they can demonstrate euglycemia for at least 8 hours
off all therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

716 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
With the increasing numbers of adolescents with type 2 diabetes,
pediatricians should be familiar with the toxic effects of metformin as
well. Although metformin does not cause hypoglycemia, its association
with lactic acidosis is well documented (metformin-­associated lactic
acidosis [MALA]). This state typically arises after a large overdose in
which the agent interferes with the liver’s ability to clear lactic acid.
Dangerously high serum lactate levels can result, leading to hemodynamic instability. Hemodialysis is usually the best option for patients
with severe MALA.

Psychiatric Medications: Antidepressants

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalopram) are the most commonly prescribed class
of antidepressants. This trend largely results from their wide therapeutic index and more favorable side effect profile compared with older
agents such as tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs; amitriptyline, clomipramine, desipramine, doxepin, nortriptyline, imipramine) and
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Other agents include the
serotonin-­norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs; e.g., venlafaxine) and atypical antidepressants (e.g., bupropion).
Tricyclic Antidepressants. Although now prescribed less often
for depression, TCAs remain in use for a variety of other conditions,
including chronic pain syndromes, enuresis, ADHD, and obsessive-­
compulsive disorder. TCAs can cause significant toxicity in children,
even with ingestion of one or two pills (10-­20 mg/kg).
Pathophysiology. TCAs achieve their desired antidepressant
effects primarily through blockade of norepinephrine and serotonin
reuptake. TCAs have complex interactions with other receptor types.
Antagonism at muscarinic acetylcholine receptors leads to clinical
features of the anticholinergic toxidrome. Antagonism at peripheral
α-­receptors leads to hypotension and syncope. Key to the toxicity of
TCAs is their ability to block fast sodium channels, leading to impaired
cardiac conduction and arrhythmias.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Cardiovascular and
CNS symptoms dominate the clinical presentation of TCA toxicity.
Symptoms typically develop within 1-­2 hours of ingestion, and serious toxicity usually manifests within 6 hours of ingestion. Patients
can have an extremely rapid progression from mild symptoms to
life-­threatening dysrhythmias. Patients often develop features of
anticholinergic toxidrome, including delirium, mydriasis, dry
mucous membranes, tachycardia, hyperthermia, urinary retention,
and slow GI motility. CNS toxicity can include lethargy, coma, myoclonic jerks, and seizures. Sinus tachycardia is the most common
cardiovascular manifestation of toxicity; however, patients can also
develop widening of the QRS complex, premature ventricular contractions, and ventricular dysrhythmias. Refractory hypotension is
a poor prognostic indicator and is the most common cause of death
in TCA overdose.

An ECG can help determine the diagnosis and prognosis of the
TCA-­poisoned patient (Fig. 94.2; see Table 94.7). A QRS duration
>100 msec identifies patients who are at risk for seizures and cardiac
arrhythmias. An R wave in lead aVR of ≥3 mm is also an independent
predictor of toxicity. Both ECG parameters are superior to measured
serum TCA concentrations for identifying patients at risk for serious
toxicity, and obtaining levels is rarely helpful in management of the
acutely ill patient.
Treatment. Initial attention should be directed to supporting vital
functions, including airway and ventilation as needed. Gastric decontamination can be accomplished with activated charcoal in patients
who are alert and cooperative without clinical signs of toxicity. Treating
clinicians should obtain an ECG as soon as possible and follow serial
ECGs to monitor for progression of toxicity. The four primary effects
described next may be seen at the bedside.
1. Altered Mental State. TCA-­poisoned patients can become
deeply comatose relatively quickly, so careful and prompt attention
to the airway and placement of an endotracheal tube is of paramount
importance.
2. Widened QRS on ECG. TCAs, as well as other agents (e.g.,
diphenhydramine, cocaine), block the fast Na+ channels on the myocardial cells, slowing the upstroke of the QRS complex. Because the
effect on Na+ channels is greatest within the first 6 hours, frequent
ECGs (i.e., every 20-­30 minutes) during this period are important. As
the QRS approaches 160 msec, the risk of the patient developing monomorphic ventricular tachycardia rises to 30%. Sodium, usually in the
form of sodium bicarbonate, is the antidote of choice. Indications for
sodium bicarbonate include a QRS duration ≥100 msec, ventricular dysrhythmias, and hypotension. Multiple bolus doses of sodium bicarbonate, 1-­2 mEq/kg each, may be needed to narrow the QRS to <100 msec.
Some prefer then to place the patient on an infusion of sodium bicarbonate, but this may not be necessary if the QRS is carefully monitored
after the initial doses and repeat bolus dosing is provided as needed
during the first 6-­12 hours. Hypertonic (3%) saline and/or lipid emulsion therapy may be beneficial in refractory cases.
3. Hypotension. A direct-­acting vasopressor such as norepinephrine or epinephrine is the agent of choice. Boluses of IV crystalloid
fluids should be used with caution to prevent fluid overload.
4. Seizures. Seizures are relatively common and likely the result
of multiple factors, including increased synaptic monoamines,
sodium channel inhibition, and GABA receptor antagonism. Seizures are typically brief and should be treated with agents targeting
the GABA-­receptor complex in the brain. Benzodiazepines are the
agent of choice.
Asymptomatic children should receive appropriate decontamination
and have continuous cardiac monitoring and serial ECGs for at least
6 hours after exposure. If any manifestations of toxicity develop, the
child should be admitted to a monitored setting. Children who remain

Fig. 94.2 Electrocardiographic findings in tricyclic antidepressant toxicity. Note the tachycardia, widened QRS interval (144 msec), and prominent
R wave in lead aVR. These findings are consistent with blockade of fast sodium channels.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
completely asymptomatic with normal serial ECGs may be candidates
for discharge after that monitoring period.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors. In overdose, SSRIs
are considerably less toxic than TCAs. SSRIs are unlikely to cause
significant toxicity in exploratory ingestions. Some data suggest that
initiating SSRI therapy is associated with an increased risk of suicidal
ideation and behavior (see Chapter 40).
Pathophysiology. SSRIs selectively block the reuptake of serotonin in the CNS. In contrast to TCAs and atypical antidepressants,
SSRIs do not directly interact with other receptors.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Although seen more
often after therapeutic use or overdose of several serotonergic agents
in combination, serotonin syndrome has also been described in
ingestion of SSRIs alone (Table 94.16). Clinically, serotonin syndrome
describes a spectrum of altered mental status, autonomic instability,
fever, and neuromuscular hyperactivity (hyperreflexia, tremors, clonus
in lower extremities > upper extremities) (Table 94.17). One or all of
these signs may be present to varying degrees.
In overdose, the principal clinical manifestations of toxicity are
sedation and tachycardia. Cardiac conduction abnormalities (primarily QTc prolongation) and seizures have been described in significant
overdoses, especially after ingestions of citalopram. An ECG should
be part of the initial assessment after SSRI ingestion. Serum creatine kinase (CK) levels are almost always elevated in a patient with
clinically significant serotonin syndrome. The differential diagnosis
includes neuroleptic malignant syndrome and malignant hyperthermia (Table 94.18).

Table 94.16  Drugs Associated with Serotonin Syndrome
DRUG TYPE

DRUGS

Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors

Sertraline, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine,
paroxetine, citalopram, escitalopram

Antidepressant drugs

Trazodone, nefazodone, buspirone,
clomipramine, venlafaxine,
amitriptyline, nortriptyline

Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors

Phenelzine, moclobemide, clorgyline,
isocarboxazid

Anticonvulsants

Valproate

Analgesics

Meperidine, fentanyl, tramadol,
pentazocine

Antiemetic agents

Ondansetron, granisetron,
metoclopramide

Antimigraine drugs

Sumatriptan

Bariatric medications

Sibutramine

Antibiotics

Linezolid (a monoamine oxidase inhibitor),
ritonavir (through inhibition of
cytochrome P450 enzyme isoform 3A4)

Nonprescription cough
and cold remedies

Dextromethorphan

Drugs of abuse

Methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA, “ecstasy”), lysergic
acid diethylamide (LSD),
5-­methoxydiisopropyltryptamine (“foxy
methoxy”), Syrian rue (contains harmine
and harmaline, both monoamine
oxidase inhibitors)

Dietary supplements and
herbal products

Tryptophan, Hypericum perforatum
(St. John’s wort), Panax ginseng (ginseng)

Other

Lithium

From Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1112–
1120.

717

Treatment. Initial management includes a careful assessment
for signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome and an ECG. Most
patients simply require supportive care and observation until their
mental status improves and tachycardia, if present, resolves. Management of serotonin syndrome is directed by the severity of symptoms;
possible therapeutic interventions include benzodiazepines in mild
cases and intubation, sedation, and paralysis in patients with severe
manifestations (e.g., significant hyperthermia). Because agonism at the
5-­HT2A serotonin receptor is thought to be primarily responsible for
the development of serotonin syndrome, use of the 5-­HT2A receptor
antagonist cyproheptadine has been considered a possible antidote;
the efficacy of cyproheptadine in managing serotonin syndrome is not
well-­supported by the available literature. Furthermore, cyproheptadine should be used with caution when the diagnosis is unclear, as it
can worsen anticholinergic toxicity.
Atypical Antidepressants. The atypical antidepressant class
includes agents such as venlafaxine and duloxetine (SNRIs), bupropion
(dopamine, norepinephrine, and some serotonin reuptake blockade),
and trazodone (serotonin reuptake blockade and peripheral α-­receptor
antagonism). The variable receptor affinities of these agents lead to
some distinctions in their clinical manifestations and management.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. In overdose, venlafaxine and other SNRIs have been associated with cardiac conduction
defects, including QRS and QTc prolongation, and seizures (typically within a few hours of ingestion). Bupropion warrants special
consideration because it is one of the most common etiologies of
toxicant-­induced seizures in the United States. After ingestion of SR or
extended-­release (ER) preparations of bupropion, seizures can occur
as late as 18-­20 hours after ingestion. In addition, bupropion can cause
tachycardia, agitation, and QRS and QTc prolongation. These cardiac
effects are thought to result from a reduction in cardiac intracellular
coupling caused by inhibition at gap junctions in the heart. Mortality
results from not only status epilepticus but also the cardiac conduction disturbances causing ventricular tachycardia and dysrhythmias.
In addition to sedation and signs of serotonin excess, trazodone overdose may be associated with hypotension from blockade of peripheral
α-­receptors.
Treatment. Management is directed at clinical signs and symptoms.
QRS and QTc interval prolongation after bupropion poisoning is typically resistant to the standard treatments of sodium bicarbonate and
magnesium. Seizures are often brief and self-­limited but can be treated
with benzodiazepines if necessary. A patient poisoned with bupropion
who shows unstable hemodynamics with prolonged ECG intervals or
persistent seizure activity after the appropriate therapies should be discussed with a toxicologist for possible lipid emulsion therapy. Because
of the potential for delayed seizures, asymptomatic patients who have
ingested an SR preparation of bupropion should be admitted to a monitored setting for at least 20-­24 hours. Trazodone-­associated hypotension typically responds to fluids, though it can require vasopressors in
extreme cases.
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors. Although now rarely used
therapeutically, MAOIs remain important agents given their potential
for serious and delayed toxicity. Ingestions of only one or two pills (6
mg/kg) are associated with toxicity in children. Clinical manifestations initially include hypertension, hyperthermia, tachycardia, muscle
rigidity, and seizures, followed up to 24 hours later by hemodynamic
instability and cardiovascular collapse. Any child who ingests a MAOI
should be admitted to a monitored setting for at least 24 hours, regardless of symptoms. Management includes blood pressure control, cooling
and benzodiazepines for hyperthermia, serial monitoring of CK and
renal function, and fluid and vasopressor therapy for hemodynamic
instability.

Psychiatric Medications: Antipsychotics

Clinicians are increasingly prescribing antipsychotic medications in
the pediatric population. Antipsychotics are usually classified as either
typical or atypical. In general, typical agents are associated with more
side effects and toxicity than the atypical agents.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

718 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.17  Spectrum of Symptoms of Serotonergic Toxicity
SEVERITY

NEUROMUSCULAR EXCITATION

ALTERED MENTAL STATUS

AUTONOMIC DYSFUNCTION

Mild

Hyperreflexia
Tremor
Myoclonus

Anxiety
Restlessness
Insomnia

Diaphoresis
Mydriasis
Tachycardia

Moderate

Opsoclonus
Spontaneous or inducible clonus

Agitation

Hypertension
Hyperthermia (<40°C [<104°F])
Hyperactive bowel sounds
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting

Severe

Rigidity
Respiratory failure
Tonic-­clonic seizure

Coma
Delirium
Confusion

Severe hyperthermia (≥40°C [≥104°F])
Dynamic blood pressure

Adapted from Wang RZ, Vashistha V, Kaur S, Houchens NW. Serotonin syndrome: Preventing, recognizing, and treating it. Clev Clinic J Med. 2016;83(11):810–817, Table 2, p. 812.

Table 94.18  Signs and Symptoms of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS)/Serotonin Syndrome/Malignant Hyperthermia
CLINICAL FEATURES

NMS

SEROTONIN SYNDROME

MALIGNANT HYPERTHERMIA

Triggering agent

Neuroleptic

Proserotonergic agent

Succinylcholine or inhaled anesthetic

Onset

Slow (hours to days)

Fast (minutes to hours)

Very fast to fast (minutes to hours)

Duration

Long (days to weeks)

Short (1-­2 days)

Short (1-­3 days)

Agitation

Sometimes

Yes

No

Confusion

Yes

Sometimes

Unusual

Hyperactivity

No

Yes

No

Bradykinesia/stupor

Yes

No

Unusual

Myoclonus

No

Yes

No

Shivering

No

Yes/sometimes

No

Tremor

Sometimes

Yes

No

Pupils

Mid-­sized

Large

Not specific

Hyperreflexia

No

Yes (especially lower extremities)

No

Rigidity

Severe

Sometimes

Severe

Rigidity type

Extrapyramidal (lead pipe)

Pyramidal (clasp-­knife)

Generalized

Hyperpyrexia

Yes

Yes

Severe

Tachypnea

Yes

Yes

Yes

Tachycardia

Yes

Yes

Yes (severe)

Hypertension

Sometimes

Yes

Sometimes

Leukocytosis

Yes

Uncommon

Not typical

Elevated creatine phosphokinase

Severe

Mild

Severe

Adapted from Gillman PK. The serotonin syndrome and its treatment. J Psychopharmacol 1999;13:100–109; Gillman K; Serotonin toxicity www.psychotropical.com/serotonin-­toxicity;
and Wappler F, Fiege M, Schulte am Esch J. Pathophysiological role of the serotonin system in malignant hyperthermia. Br J Anaesth. 2001;87(5):794–798.

Pathophysiology. Typical, or “traditional,” antipsychotics (haloperidol, droperidol, thioridazine, chlorpromazine, fluphenazine) are
characterized by their antagonism at D2 dopamine receptors. In therapeutic use, these agents are associated with extrapyramidal symptoms,
tardive dyskinesia, and, rarely, development of neuroleptic malignant
syndrome (NMS) (see Table 94.18). The atypical agents (aripiprazole,
clozapine, quetiapine, risperidone, ziprasidone) were developed with
relatively less dopamine (D2-­receptor) antagonism in the nigrostriatum to avoid these side effects and improve their efficacy in managing
the “negative” symptoms of schizophrenia. Instead, these agents have
complex and varied interactions with multiple receptor types, including α-­receptors, serotonin receptors, muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, and histamine receptors.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Typical antipsychotic
toxicity usually includes sedation, tachycardia, and QTc prolongation.

Patients can present with acute dystonia, akathisia, and NMS, although
these are seen less frequently in acute overdoses than in therapeutic
use. The phenothiazines (e.g., thioridazine) can cause widening of the
QRS interval from blockade of fast sodium channels. Clinically, NMS
can be difficult to distinguish from serotonin syndrome.
Although the presentation of atypical antipsychotic toxicity can vary
based on the receptor affinities of the specific agent, sedation, tachycardia, and QTc prolongation are common. Peripheral α-­receptor
blockade (e.g., with quetiapine) is associated with hypotension. In
therapeutic use, clozapine is associated with agranulocytosis. Atypical antipsychotics that antagonize muscarinic acetylcholine receptors
(e.g., olanzapine, quetiapine) may cause symptoms of anticholinergic
toxidrome.
Diagnostic testing should include an ECG. Patients with hyperthermia or muscle rigidity should have a serum CK level sent to monitor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
for possible rhabdomyolysis. CBC is indicated in patients with fever to
evaluate for neutropenia. Antipsychotic levels are not readily available
and are not helpful in managing acute poisoning.
Management. Initial management involves assessing and supporting vital functions. In some patients, CNS depression may be so
profound as to require intubation for airway control. Acute dystonia
is treated with diphenhydramine and benztropine. Management of
NMS includes aggressive supportive care, IV fluids, active cooling,
benzodiazepines, and bromocriptine or dantrolene in severe cases.
QTc prolongation is managed with repletion of electrolytes (especially
calcium, magnesium, and potassium), continuous cardiac monitoring,
prevention of bradycardia (overdrive pacing, isoproterenol, atropine),
and defibrillation if the patient develops torsades de pointes. Delirium
associated with anticholinergic toxicity may be managed with benzodiazepines, and a specific antidote (physostigmine) can be considered
in consultation with a medical toxicologist (see Table 94.8). Seizures
typically are well controlled with benzodiazepines. Hypotension usually responds to boluses of IV fluids, although vasopressor therapy is
necessary in some patients.

Household Products
Caustics

Caustics include acids and alkalis as well as a few common oxidizing
agents (see Chapter 373). Strong acids and alkalis can produce severe
injury even in small-­volume ingestions.
Pathophysiology. Alkalis produce a liquefaction necrosis, allowing further tissue penetration of the toxin and setting the stage for possible perforation. Acids produce a coagulative necrosis, which limits
further tissue penetration, although perforation can still occur. The
severity of the corrosive injury depends on the pH and concentration
of the product and the length of contact time with the product. Agents
with a pH of <2 or >12 are most likely to produce significant injury.
Clinical Manifestations. Ingestion of caustic materials can produce injury to the oral mucosa, posterior pharynx, vocal cords, esophagus, and stomach. Patients can have significant esophageal injury even
in the absence of visible oral burns. Symptoms include pain, drooling,
vomiting, abdominal pain, and difficulty swallowing or refusal to swallow. Laryngeal injury can manifest as stridor and respiratory distress,
necessitating intubation. In the most severe cases, patients can present
in shock after perforation of a hollow viscus. Circumferential burns of
the esophagus are likely to cause strictures when they heal, which can
require repeated dilation or surgical correction and long-­term follow­up for neoplastic changes in adulthood. Caustic exposures on the skin
or in the eye can cause significant tissue damage.
Treatment. Initial treatment of caustic exposures includes thorough removal of the product from the skin or eye by flushing with
water. Emesis and lavage are contraindicated. Activated charcoal should
not be used because it does not bind these agents, interferes with
endoscopy, and can predispose the patient to vomiting and subsequent
aspiration. Stridor or other signs of respiratory distress should alert
the provider to the need for a thorough evaluation of the airway for
potential intubation or surgical airway management. Endoscopy can
be performed within 12-­24 hours of ingestion in symptomatic patients
or those with suspected injury based on history and known characteristics of the ingested product. The role of endoscopy is purely diagnostic and is contraindicated in patients with severe oropharyngeal injury
with edema and necrosis, evidence of perforation, respiratory distress,
or hemodynamic instability, as these patients instead require immediate surgical consultation. Expectant management with a period of
nothing by mouth (NPO) and proton pump inhibitor therapy is likely
appropriate for most asymptomatic patients. Corticosteroids or prophylactic antibiotics are not beneficial.

Pesticides

Cholinesterase-­Inhibiting Insecticides. The most commonly used

insecticides in agriculture are organophosphates and carbamates;
both are inhibitors of cholinesterase enzymes: acetylcholinesterase
(AChE), pseudocholinesterase, and erythrocyte AChE. Most pediatric
poisonings occur as the result of unintentional exposure to insecticides

719

in and around the home or farm. The chemical warfare weapons known
as “nerve agents” are also organophosphate compounds with a similar
mechanism of action but much greater potency.
Pathophysiology. Organophosphates and carbamates produce
toxicity by binding to and inhibiting AChE, preventing the degradation of acetylcholine (ACh) and resulting in its accumulation at nerve
synapses. If left untreated, organophosphates form an irreversible bond
to AChE, permanently inactivating the enzyme. This process, called
aging, occurs over a variable period, depending on the characteristics of the specific organophosphate. A period of weeks to months is
required to regenerate inactivated enzymes. In contrast, carbamates
form a temporary bond with the enzymes, typically allowing reactivation of AChE within 24 hours.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Clinical manifestations
of organophosphate and carbamate toxicity relate to ACh accumulation
at peripheral nicotinic and muscarinic synapses and in the CNS. Symptoms of carbamate toxicity are usually less severe than those seen with
organophosphates. A commonly used mnemonic for the symptoms of
cholinergic excess at muscarinic receptors is DUMBBELS: diarrhea/
defecation, urination, miosis, bronchorrhea/bronchospasm, bradycardia, emesis, lacrimation, and salivation. Nicotinic signs and symptoms include muscle weakness, fasciculation, tremors, hypoventilation
(diaphragm weakness), hypertension, tachycardia, and dysrhythmias.
Severe manifestations include coma, seizures, shock, arrhythmias, and
respiratory failure.
Diagnosis of poisoning is based primarily on history and physical
exam findings. Red blood cell cholinesterase and pseudocholinesterase
activity levels can be measured in the laboratory. These are only helpful when compared with the patient’s known baseline. As such, these
assessments are typically limited to farmworkers undergoing ongoing
occupational surveillance.
Treatment. Basic decontamination should be performed, including washing all exposed skin with soap and water and immediately
removing all clothing. Activated charcoal is unlikely to be of benefit
because these are liquids that are rapidly absorbed. Basic supportive
care should be provided, including fluid and electrolyte replacement,
intubation, and ventilation if necessary. The use of succinylcholine for
rapid sequence intubation should be avoided because the same cholinesterase enzymes that are poisoned metabolize this neuromuscular
blocking agent, leading to prolonged paralysis.
Two antidotes are useful in treating cholinesterase inhibitor poisoning: atropine and pralidoxime (see Table 94.8). Atropine, which
antagonizes the muscarinic ACh receptor, is useful for both organophosphate and carbamate intoxication. Often, large doses of atropine
must be administered by intermittent bolus or continuous infusion
to control symptoms. Atropine dosing is primarily targeted to drying
the respiratory secretions. Pralidoxime breaks the bond between the
organophosphate and the enzyme, reactivating AChE. Pralidoxime is
only effective if it is used before the bond ages and becomes permanent.
Pralidoxime is not necessary for carbamate poisonings because the
bond between the insecticide and the enzyme degrades spontaneously.
Without treatment, symptoms of organophosphate poisoning can
persist for weeks, requiring continuous supportive care. Even with
treatment, some patients develop a delayed polyneuropathy and a
range of chronic neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids. Pyrethrins are derived from the
chrysanthemum flower and, along with synthetic derivatives, pyrethroids, are the most used pesticides in the home. Although >1,000
pyrethrins and pyrethroids exist, <20 are available in the United
States, with permethrin being the most common. Exposure to these
compounds occurs by inhalation, dermal absorption, or ingestion.
Ingestion is the predominant route and typically occurs by eating contaminated foods. Permethrin is also a prescribed medication for the
treatment of scabies and lice.
Pathophysiology. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids prolong the open
state of the voltage-­gated Na+ channel conduction, which is the main
mechanism resulting in its pesticide activity. Pyrethrins have minimal
toxicity in mammals because of rapid metabolism, higher affinity for
the insect Na+ channel, and decreased activity at higher temperatures

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

720 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
seen in warm-­blooded animals. Because pyrethroids were specifically
manufactured to be more stable in the environment, they have a higher
likelihood of toxicity.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Pyrethrin exposures
can lead to allergic reactions ranging from dermatitis to urticaria to
anaphylaxis. Acute pyrethroid exposure can result in headache, nausea, dizziness, tremors, ataxia, choreoathetosis, loss of consciousness,
and seizures. The severity of the symptoms depends on the magnitude
of the exposure. Reports of acute lung injury have also occurred after
pyrethroid exposures, although this is likely from the other components of the insecticide, such as surfactants and solvents. Paresthesias
limited to the cutaneous exposure area can also occur after a dermal
exposure. Chronic exposures have not been shown to result in any
clinical manifestations. Although one can test for urinary pyrethroid
metabolites, this is only useful for monitoring occupational exposure
and has no role in the acute exposure.
Treatment. Initial treatment should focus on decontamination,
which involves removing all clothing and irrigation of exposed areas.
Allergic reactions are treated with oral antihistamines and topical corticosteroids. Systemic toxicity should be treated with excellent supportive care, using benzodiazepines for tremors and seizures.

Hydrocarbons

Hydrocarbons include a wide array of chemical substances found in thousands of commercial products. Specific characteristics of each product
determine whether exposure will produce systemic toxicity, local toxicity,
both, or neither. Nevertheless, aspiration of even small amounts of certain
hydrocarbons can lead to serious, potentially life-­threatening toxicity.
Pathophysiology. The most important manifestation of hydrocarbon toxicity is aspiration pneumonitis through inactivation of the type
II pneumocytes and resulting in surfactant deficiency (see Chapter
446). Aspiration usually occurs during coughing and gagging at the
time of ingestion or vomiting after the attempted ingestion of an aliphatic hydrocarbon. The propensity of a hydrocarbon to cause aspiration pneumonitis is inversely proportional to its viscosity and directly
proportional to its volatility. Compounds with low viscosity and high
volatility, such as mineral spirits, naphtha, kerosene, gasoline, and
lamp oil, spread rapidly across surfaces and cover large areas of the
lungs when aspirated. Only small quantities (<1 mL) of such chemicals
need be aspirated to produce significant injury. Pneumonitis does not
result from dermal absorption of hydrocarbons or from ingestion in
the absence of aspiration. Gasoline and kerosene are poorly absorbed,
but they often cause considerable irritation of the GI mucosa as they
pass through the intestines.
Certain hydrocarbons have unique toxicities and can cause symptoms after ingestion, inhalation, or dermal exposures. Several chlorinated solvents, most notably carbon tetrachloride, can produce
hepatic toxicity. Methylene chloride, found in some paint removers,
is metabolized to carbon monoxide. Benzene is known to cause cancer, most often acute myelogenous leukemia, after long-­term exposure. Nitrobenzene, aniline, and related compounds can produce
methemoglobinemia. A number of volatile hydrocarbons, including
toluene, propellants, refrigerants, and volatile nitrites, are frequently
abused by inhalation. Some of these substances, principally the
halogenated hydrocarbons (which contain a chlorine, bromine, or
fluorine), can sensitize the myocardium to the effects of endogenous
catecholamines. This can result in dysrhythmias and “sudden sniffing death.” Chronic abuse of these agents can lead to cerebral atrophy,
neuropsychologic changes, peripheral neuropathy, and kidney disease
(see Chapter 157).
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Transient, mild CNS
depression is common after hydrocarbon ingestion or inhalation.
Aspiration is characterized by coughing, which usually is the first clinical finding. Chest radiographs may initially be normal, but they often
show abnormalities within 6 hours of exposure in patients who have
aspirated. Respiratory symptoms can remain mild or progress rapidly
to ARDS and respiratory failure. Fever and leukocytosis are common
accompanying signs in patients with pneumonitis and do not necessarily imply bacterial superinfection. Chest radiographs can remain

abnormal long after the patient returns to their clinical baseline. Pneumatoceles can appear on the chest radiograph 2-­3 weeks after exposure.
After inhalational exposures to halogenated hydrocarbons, patients
can present with ventricular dysrhythmias, often refractory to conventional management. Recurrent inhalation of the aromatic hydrocarbon
toluene can lead to a type IV renal tubular acidosis.
Treatment. Emesis and lavage are contraindicated given the risk of
aspiration. Activated charcoal is not useful because it does not bind the
common hydrocarbons and can also induce vomiting. If hydrocarbon-­
induced pneumonitis develops, respiratory treatment is supportive
(see Chapter 446). Neither corticosteroids nor prophylactic antibiotics
have shown any clear benefit. Standard mechanical ventilation, high-­
frequency ventilation, and ECMO have all been used to manage the
respiratory failure and ARDS associated with severe hydrocarbon-­
induced pneumonitis.
Patients with dysrhythmias in the setting of halogenated hydrocarbon inhalation should be treated with β blockers (usually esmolol)
to block the effects of endogenous catecholamines on the sensitized
myocardium.

Toxic Alcohols

Methanol is found in windshield washer fluids, deicers, paint removers, fuel additives, liquid fuel canisters, and industrial solvents. Ethylene glycol is found in antifreeze. Unintentional ingestion is the most
common exposure in children, and small-­volume ingestions of concentrated products can theoretically cause toxicity. The pathophysiology, acid-­base derangements, and treatment of both chemicals are
similar, although they differ in their primary end-­organ toxicity. In
both cases the metabolites of the parent compounds are responsible for
the serious clinical effects that can follow exposure.
Isopropyl alcohol (rubbing alcohol), found in hand sanitizers,
causes intoxication similar to that associated with ethanol but can also
cause a hemorrhagic gastritis and myocardial depression in massive
ingestions. Unlike ethylene glycol and methanol, isopropyl alcohol is
metabolized to a ketone and does not cause a metabolic acidosis. Management is similar to that of ethanol ingestions (see Chapter 157) and
is not further discussed here.
Methanol
Pathophysiology. Methanol is oxidized in the liver by alcohol dehy-

drogenase to formaldehyde, which is further oxidized to formic acid by
aldehyde dehydrogenase. Toxicity is caused primarily by formic acid,
which inhibits mitochondrial respiration.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Drowsiness, mild inebriation, nausea, and vomiting develop early after methanol ingestion. The
onset of serious effects, including profound metabolic acidosis and visual
disturbances, is often delayed up to 12-­24 hours as methanol undergoes
metabolism to its toxic metabolites. This metabolism is further slowed
if ethanol has also been ingested, because the liver will preferentially
metabolize ethanol. Visual disturbances include blurred or cloudy vision,
constricted visual fields, decreased acuity, and the “feeling of being in
a snowstorm” and appear only after acidosis is well established. These
visual defects may be reversible if treated early, but untreated can lead
to permanent blindness. On examination, dilated pupils, retinal edema,
and optic disc hyperemia may be noted. Initially, patients have an elevated osmolar gap, then develop an anion gap metabolic acidosis as the
parent compound is metabolized to formic acid.
In young children, determining if a significant exposure has occurred
is usually difficult based on history. Methanol blood levels are available
at some laboratories and should be sent after a concerning exposure. If
methanol blood levels are not readily available, estimation of an osmolar gap may be used as a surrogate marker, but a normal osmolar gap
does not rule out ingestion of any alcohol. Serum osmolality is measured by the freezing-­point depression method and compared with a
calculated serum osmolarity.
Treatment. Treatment is as discussed for ethylene glycol toxicity.
Ethylene Glycol
Pathophysiology. Ethylene glycol is oxidized by alcohol dehydro-

genase in the liver to glycolaldehyde, which is further converted to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
glycolic acid by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Glycolic acid is responsible
for the metabolic acidosis and is further metabolized to glyoxylic and
then to oxalic acid. Oxalic acid combines with serum and tissue calcium, forming calcium oxalate crystals that deposit throughout the
body, especially in the renal parenchyma, leading to acute tubular
necrosis.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Early symptoms
include nausea, vomiting, CNS depression, and inebriation. Delayed
manifestations include an anion gap metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia,
and acute kidney injury. Even later, patients can develop cranial nerve
palsies.
Both ethylene glycol and methanol can produce profound, life-­
threatening metabolic acidosis and acidemia, with measured serum
bicarbonates that may even be nondetectable. The onset of the acidosis
is delayed up to 4-­12 hours after ethylene glycol ingestion and may be
delayed further with any concomitant ingestion of ethanol. Ethylene
glycol blood concentrations are technically difficult to perform and
are available only at some larger reference laboratories. In the absence
of readily available ethylene glycol concentrations, calculation of the
osmolar gap may be helpful as a surrogate marker.
Examination of the urine with a Wood lamp is neither sensitive nor
specific for ethylene glycol ingestion. The earliest sign on a urinalysis of ethylene glycol poisoning is usually hematuria. Calcium oxalate
crystals can be seen on urine microscopy but might not be evident
early after exposure. Electrolytes (including calcium), acid-­base status,
kidney function, and ECG should be closely monitored in poisoned
patients.
Treatment. Because methanol and ethylene glycol are rapidly
absorbed, gastric decontamination is generally not of value. The classic antidote for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning was ethanol, a
preferential substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase, thus preventing the
metabolism of parent compounds to toxic metabolites. Fomepizole,
a potent competitive inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase, has almost
entirely replaced ethanol because of its ease of administration, lack of
CNS and metabolic effects, and overall excellent patient tolerability
profile (see Table 94.8). A serum concentration must be interpreted
along with the time removed from exposure. A patient with a methanol level of 20 mg/dL 24 hours after exposure had a much larger dose
than a patient with the same level only 1 hour after ingestion. Indications for fomepizole include ethylene glycol or methanol level >20
mg/dL (assuming no ethanol is present), history of potentially toxic
ingestion (e.g., any intentional overdose), or history of ingestion with
evidence of acidosis. There are few disadvantages to giving the initial
dose of fomepizole to patients with a concerning history of ingestion
or laboratory findings. Given the dosing schedule of fomepizole (every
12 hours), this strategy buys the clinician time to confirm or exclude
the diagnosis before giving a second dose. Adjunctive therapy includes
folate (methanol toxicity), pyridoxine (ethylene glycol toxicity), and
sodium bicarbonate infusion (if acidemic). If a child has had an unintentional exposure and the toxic alcohol level cannot be obtained, a
reasonable approach is to follow serum chemistries every 4 hours until
12 hours after the exposure. If the bicarbonate level on the chemistry
panel does not fall in that period, a toxic exposure is unlikely (assuming no ethanol is present).
Hemodialysis effectively removes ethylene glycol, methanol, and
their metabolites (except calcium oxalate) and corrects acid-­base and
electrolyte disturbances. Fomepizole should be given both before and
immediately after dialysis. Indications for dialysis include a methanol or ethylene glycol level >50 mg/dL, acidosis, severe electrolyte
disturbances, renal failure, and hemodynamic instability. However,
in the absence of acidosis and kidney failure, even massive ethylene
glycol ingestions have been managed without dialysis. Methanol, however, because its elimination in the setting of alcohol dehydrogenase
inhibition is prolonged, often warrants dialysis to remove the parent
compound. Therapy (fomepizole and/or dialysis) should be continued
until ethylene glycol and methanol levels are <20 mg/dL. Although
the visual effects from methanol poisoning are usually permanent,
the kidney injury from ethylene glycol injury is not. Patients requiring hemodialysis after ethylene glycol poisoning will almost always

721

recover complete renal function within 2-­6 weeks. Consultation with a
PCC, medical toxicologist, and nephrologist may be helpful in managing toxic alcohol ingestions.

Plants

Exposure to plants, both inside the home and outside in backyards
and fields, is one of the most common causes of unintentional poisoning in children. Fortunately, most ingestions of plant parts (leaves,
seeds, flowers) result in either no toxicity or mild, self-­limiting
effects. However, ingestion of certain plants can lead to serious toxicity (Table 94.19).
The potential toxicity of a particular plant is highly variable, depending on the part of the plant involved (flowers are generally less toxic
than the root or seed), the time of year, growing conditions, and the
route of exposure. Assessment of the potential severity after an exposure is also complicated by the difficulty in properly identifying the
plant. Many plants are known by several common names, which can
vary among communities. PCCs have access to professionals who can
assist in properly identifying plants. They also are well versed in the
common poisonous plants in their service area and the seasons when
they are more abundant. For these reasons, consultation with the local
PCC may be very helpful in the management of these ingestions.
For potentially toxic plant ingestions, consider decontamination
with activated charcoal in patients who present within 1-­2 hours of
ingestion; otherwise, treatment is primarily supportive and based on
symptoms. The most common manifestation of toxicity after plant
ingestion is GI upset, which can be managed with antiemetics and fluid
and electrolyte support. Table 94.19 outlines management strategies for
a few specific toxicities.

Herbal Remedies

Herbal remedies represent a relatively common exposure in children;
despite this, reports of life-­threatening toxicity are rare.
There are several mechanisms by which herbal remedies may be
poisonous. Many herbal remedies are inherently toxic; it is either the
dose used or specific processing of the remedy that renders them safe
for use. For example, oil of wintergreen used as a liniment contains a
high concentration of methyl salicylate, a concerning source of salicylate poisoning in small children. A remedy intended to contain one
compound may accidentally contain another; reports exist of contamination of skin creams with mercury, herbal remedies contaminated
with lead, and weight loss supplements contaminated with cardioactive
steroids. Herbal remedies may interfere with the metabolism of pharmaceuticals; an example is St. John’s wort, which by induction of the
cytochrome oxidase system (specifically, CYP3A4) may render certain
medications less effective.
Management of toxicity associated with herbal remedies remains
largely the same as for other organic compounds. Decontamination
with activated charcoal should be considered for patients arriving
within 1-­2 hours of an ingestion. Signs and symptoms should be
treated as outlined previously in this chapter, with excellent supportive care and therapy directed toward the suspected toxin. In
the rare case of concern for contamination with a heavy metal, specific assays may be obtained for confirmation of exposure. A list
of herbal remedies and their associated toxicities are provided in
Table 94.20.
In limited cases, specific antidotes are suggested based on the
pathophysiologic mechanism. Several plant and animal species
contain cardioactive steroids with digoxin-­like toxicity. Although
digoxin-­specific immune fragments are only evidence based for
the management of yellow oleander (Thevetia peruviana) toxicity,
it is reasonable to use this therapy in a critically ill patient who has
developed cardiac toxicity or hyperkalemia after ingestion of lily
of the valley, squill, or oleander. Several essential oils (pennyroyal
oil, clove oil) deplete glutathione as part of their toxic mechanism,
and thus treatment with NAC may be of benefit. Gingko causes a
depletion of active pyridoxine stores, and thus pyridoxine administration may be helpful in the setting of benzodiazepine-­refractory
seizures.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

722 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.19  Commonly Ingested Plants with Significant Toxic Potential
PLANT

SYMPTOMS

MANAGEMENT

Autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)

Vomiting
Diarrhea
Initial leukocytosis followed by bone marrow
failure
Multisystem organ failure

Activated charcoal decontamination
Aggressive fluid resuscitation and supportive
care

Belladonna alkaloids: jimsonweed (Datura
stramonium)
Belladonna (“deadly nightshade”; Atropa
belladonna)

Anticholinergic toxidrome
Seizures

Supportive care, benzodiazepines
Consider physostigmine; only use if no
conduction delays on ECG

Cardiac glycoside–containing plants
(e.g., foxglove, lily of the valley, oleander,
yellow oleander)

Nausea
Vomiting
Bradycardia
Dysrhythmias (AV block, ventricular ectopy)
Hyperkalemia

Digoxin-­specific Fab fragments

Jequirity bean and other abrin-­containing
species (e.g., rosary pea, precatory bean)

Oral pain
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Shock
Hemolysis
Renal failure

Supportive care, including aggressive volume
resuscitation and correction of electrolyte
abnormalities

Monkshood (Aconitum species)

Numbness and tingling of lips/tongue
Vomiting
Bradycardia

Atropine for bradycardia
Supportive care

Oxalate-­containing plants: Philodendron,
Dieffenbachia, Colocasia (“elephant ear”)

Local tissue injury
Oral pain
Vomiting

Supportive care, pain control

Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum)

Vomiting
Agitation followed by CNS depression
Paralysis
Respiratory failure

Supportive care

Pokeweed

Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
Burning of mouth and throat

Supportive care

Rhododendron

Vomiting
Diarrhea
Bradycardia

Atropine for symptomatic bradycardia
Supportive care

Tobacco

Vomiting
Agitation
Diaphoresis
Fasciculations
Seizures

Supportive care

Water hemlock (Cicuta species)

Abdominal pain
Vomiting
Delirium
Seizures

Supportive care, including benzodiazepines for
seizures

Yew (Taxus species)

GI symptoms
QRS widening
Hypotension
CV collapse

Supportive care
Atropine for bradycardia
Sodium bicarbonate does not appear to be
effective

AV, Atrioventricular; CNS, central nervous system; CV, cardiovascular; ECG, electrocardiogram; Fab, fragment, antigen binding; GI, gastrointestinal.

Toxic Gases
Carbon Monoxide

Although many industrial and naturally occurring gases pose a health
risk by inhalation, the most common gas involved in pediatric exposures is CO. CO is a colorless, odorless gas produced during the combustion of any carbon-­containing fuel; the less efficient the combustion,
the greater the amount of CO produced. Wood-­burning stoves, kerosene heaters, old furnaces, hot-­water heaters, closed-­space fires, and
automobiles are a few of the potential sources of CO.
Pathophysiology. CO binds to hemoglobin with an affinity
>200 times that of oxygen, forming carboxyhemoglobin (HbCO).

In doing so, CO displaces oxygen and creates a conformational
change in hemoglobin that impairs the delivery of oxygen to the tissues, leading to tissue hypoxia. HbCO levels are not well correlated
with clinical signs of toxicity, likely because CO interacts with multiple proteins in addition to hemoglobin. CO binds to cytochrome
oxidase, disrupting cellular respiration. CO displaces nitric oxide
(NO) from proteins, allowing NO to bind with free radicals to form
the toxic metabolite peroxynitrite, leading to lipid peroxidation
and cellular damage. NO is also a potent vasodilator, in part
responsible for clinical symptoms such as headache, syncope, and
hypotension.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning

723

Table 94.20  Clinical Toxicity of Selected Herbs
COMMON NAME

BOTANICAL NAME

THERAPEUTIC USES

POTENTIAL TOXICITY

Aconite (monkshood,
wolfsbane)

Aconitum spp.

Sedative, analgesic, antihypertensive

Cardiac arrhythmias

Aloe

Aloe spp.

Burns, skin diseases

Nephritis, GI upset

Betel nut

Areca catechu

Mood elevation

Bronchoconstriction, oral cancers

Bloodroot

Sanguinaria canadensis

Emetic, cathartic, eczema

GI upset, vertigo, visual disturbances

Chaparral (greasewood)

Larrea tridentata

Aging, free radical scavenging

Hepatitis

Compound Q

Trichosanthes kirilowii

Anthelmintic, cathartic

Diarrhea, hypoglycemia, CNS toxicity

Dandelion

Taraxacum officinale

Diuretic, heartburn remedy

Anaphylaxis

Figwort (xuan shen)

Scrophularia spp.

Antiinflammatory, antibacterial

Cardiac stimulation

Ginseng

Panax quinquefolium

Antihypertensive, aphrodisiac, stimulant,
mood elevation, digestive aid

Ginseng abuse syndrome

Goldenseal

Hydrastis canadensis

Digestive aid, mucolytic, antiinfective

Uterine, cardiac stimulation; GI upset,
leukopenia

Hellebore

Veratrum spp.

Antihypertensive

Vomiting, bradycardia, hypotension

Hyssop

Hyssopus officinalis

Asthma, mucolytic

Seizures

Juniper

Juniperus communis

Hallucinogen

GI upset, seizures, renal injury,
hypotension, bradycardia

Kava

Piper methysticum

Sedative

Inebriation

Stimulant

Metabolic acidosis, hepatotoxicity, death

Kombucha
Licorice

Glycyrrhiza spp.

Indigestion

Mineralocorticoid effects

Lily of the valley

Convallaria spp.

Cardiotonic

GI (nausea, vomiting), cardiac arrhythmias

Linn (willow)

Salix caprea

Purgative

Hemolysis with glucose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency

Lobelia (Indian tobacco)

Lobelia spp.

Stimulant

Nicotine intoxication

Ma Huang

Ephedra sinica

Stimulant

Sympathetic crisis, especially with
monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Mandrake

Mandragora officinarum

Hallucinogen

Anticholinergic syndrome

Mormon tea

Ephedra nevadensis

Stimulant, asthma, antipyretic

Hypertension, sympathomimetic

Nutmeg

Myristica fragrans

Hallucinogen, abortifacient

Hallucinations, GI upset

Oleander

Nerium oleander

Cardiac stimulant

Cardiac arrhythmias

Passionflower

Passiflora caeruliea

Hallucinogen

Hallucinations, seizures, hypotension

Periwinkle

Vinca spp.

Antiinflammatory, diabetes

Alopecia, seizures, hepatotoxicity

Pokeweed

Phytolacca spp.

Arthritis, chronic pain

GI upset, seizures, death

Sabah

Sauropus androgynus

Weight loss, vision

Pulmonary injury

Sage

Salvia spp.

CNS stimulant

Seizures

Snakeroot

Rauwolfia serpentina

Sedative, antihypertensive

Bradycardia, coma

Squill

Urginea maritima

Arthritis, cardiac stimulant

Seizures, arrhythmias, death

Thorn apple (jimsonweed)

Datura stramonium

Hallucinations

Anticholinergic

Tonka bean

Dipteryx odorata

Anticoagulant

Bleeding diathesis

Valerian root

Valeriana spp.

Sedative

Sedation, obtundation

Wild (squirting) cucumber

Ecballium elaterium

Constipation, antiinflammatory,
rheumatic disease

Airway obstruction

Wormwood (mugwort)

Artemisia spp.

Stimulant, hallucinogen

Hallucinations, seizures, uterine
stimulation

Yohimbine

Corynanthe yohimbe

Aphrodisiac, stimulant

Hypertension, sympathetic crisis

CNS, Central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal.
From Kingston RL, Foley C. Herbal, traditional, and alternative medicines. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning
and Drug Overdose, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007, Table 68.1, p. 1081.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

724 Part VII u Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Early symptoms are
nonspecific and include headache, malaise, nausea, and vomiting.
These symptoms are often misdiagnosed as indicating flu or food
poisoning. At higher exposure levels, patients can develop mental status changes, confusion, ataxia, syncope, tachycardia, and tachypnea.
Severe poisoning is manifested by coma, seizures, myocardial ischemia, acidosis, cardiovascular collapse, and potentially death. Physical examination should focus on the cardiovascular and neurologic
systems because these are the most detrimentally affected by CO.
Emergency department evaluation should include arterial or venous
blood gas analysis with HbCO determined by CO-­oximetry, CK level
in severely poisoned patients, pregnancy test, and ECG and troponin
in any patient with cardiac symptoms.
Treatment. Prevention of CO poisoning is paramount and
should involve educational initiatives and the use of home CO
detectors. Treatment of CO poisoning focuses on the administration
of 100% oxygen to enhance elimination of CO. In ambient air the
average half-­life of HbCO is 4-­6 hours. This is dramatically reduced
to 60-­90 minutes by providing 100% oxygen at normal atmospheric
pressures by non-­rebreather face mask. Severely poisoned patients
might benefit from hyperbaric oxygen (HBO), which decreases the
half-­life of HbCO to 20-­30 minutes and is thought also to decrease
the risk of delayed neurologic sequelae. Although the clinical benefits and referral guidelines for HBO therapy remain controversial,
frequently cited indications include syncope, coma, seizure, altered
mental status, evidence of myocardial ischemia, HbCO level >25%
(or >15% in pregnancy), and abnormal cerebellar examination.
Consultation with a PCC, medical toxicologist, or HBO facility
can assist clinicians in determining which patients could benefit
from HBO therapy. Sequelae of CO poisoning include persistent
and delayed cognitive and cerebellar effects. HBO advocates believe
that the risk of such sequelae is minimized through the delivery of
100% oxygen at 3 atm of pressure. Patients typically receive oxygen,
by non-­rebreather mask or hyperbaric chamber, for 6 hours.

Hydrogen Cyanide

Pathophysiology. Cyanide inhibits cytochrome-­
c oxidase, part

of the electron transport chain, interrupting cellular respiration and
leading to profound tissue hypoxia. Patients may be exposed to hydrogen cyanide (HCN) gas in the workplace (manufacturing of synthetic
fibers, nitriles, and plastics) by smoke inhalation in a closed-­space fire
or by ingestion of cassava flour.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Onset of symptoms
is rapid after significant exposure. Clinical manifestations of toxicity
include headache, agitation/confusion, sudden loss of consciousness,
tachycardia, cardiac dysrhythmias, and metabolic acidosis. Cyanide
levels can be measured in whole blood but are not readily available at
most institutions. A severe lactic acidosis (lactate >10 mmol/L) in fire
victims suggests cyanide toxicity. Impaired oxygen extraction by tissues
is implied by elevated mixed-­venous oxyhemoglobin saturation, another
laboratory finding suggesting cyanide toxicity.
Treatment. Treatment includes removal from the source of exposure, rapid administration of high concentrations of oxygen, and antidotal therapy.
Hydroxocobalamin is the preferred agent for use in known or suspected cyanide poisoning (see Table 94.8). This antidote reacts with cyanide to form the nontoxic cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12), which is then
excreted in urine. Side effects of hydroxocobalamin include red discoloration of the skin and urine, transient hypertension, and interference
with colorimetric laboratory assays. Other FDA-­approved treatments for
cyanide poisoning include sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate, either
alone or in combination. Sodium nitrite induces methemoglobinemia,
which may exacerbate symptoms of carboxyhemoglobinemia and thus
should be avoided in patients with smoke inhalation.

Miscellaneous Toxic Agents Found in the Home
Nicotine-­Containing Products

Nicotine poisoning has become increasingly common with the recent
advent of vaporizer (“vaping”) and e-­cigarette devices (see Chapter

157). Although there are many nicotine-­containing products (patches,
gums, snuff, chewing tobacco, sprays, lozenges), tobacco cigarettes
remain the main source of exposure. Prescription medications (varenicline and cytisine) are available that are partial nicotine receptor
agonists. For children, some of the most concerning exposures are
from the bottles of liquid nicotine used to refill vaping and e-­cigarette
devices. These bottles typically do not have childproof caps and contain
a large amount of concentrated nicotine.
Pathophysiology. Nicotine acts on nicotinic ACh receptors in
the nervous system, neuromuscular junctions, and adrenal medulla,
stimulating neurotransmitter release. Nicotine’s effects on the dopaminergic reward pathway play a significant role in its addictive properties.
The effects of nicotine are dose dependent; at lower doses it primarily
acts on the brain, causing stimulation. At higher doses, nicotine overstimulates receptors, leading to inhibition and resulting in neuromuscular and nervous system blockade.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations. Clinical effects of nicotine also depend on the dose. At low doses typically achieved through
smoking, nicotine results in cognitive and mood enhancement,
increased energy, and appetite suppression. Shortness of breath, cough,
and fever may be seen with e-­cigarette use–associated lung injury
(EVALI), an inflammatory response in the lungs triggered by vaping.
At higher doses, significant toxicity follows a biphasic pattern, where
cholinergic stimulation symptoms predominate and are later followed
by inhibition. The first signs of nicotine poisoning are nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and often muscle fasciculations. Tachycardia and hypertension
occur initially, although in severe poisoning these progress to bradycardia, hypotension, coma, and respiratory muscle failure, which typically
leads to death if not treated. Serum and urinary levels of nicotine and
its metabolite cotinine can be obtained, but these rarely are available in
real time and therefore have little effect on diagnosis and management.
Treatment. Treatment of nicotine poisoning focuses on maximizing symptomatic and supportive care. Aggressive airway management
should be the priority, especially in severe poisonings, because death
usually occurs from respiratory muscle paralysis. IV fluids with escalation to vasopressors should be used for hypotension. Seizures should
be managed with benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or propofol.

Single-­Use Detergent Sacs

Commonly known as laundry “pods” for clothing, these products
resemble candy to many children. When bitten into, a relatively
large dose of concentrated detergent is expelled under pressure onto
the posterior pharynx and vocal cords. This can lead to stridor and
other signs of respiratory distress. Occasionally, and for unknown
reasons, these children may also develop altered mental status. Supportive care with attention to any airway and breathing issues is warranted. Admission to the hospital is often indicated. Importantly,
these are not considered caustic ingestions; the pH of these products
is in the neutral zone. Upper GI endoscopy is rarely indicated. Curiously, laundry detergent ingested from a bottle is rarely of significant
concern.

Electric Dishwasher Detergent

Especially when in the form of crystals, these products are highly alkaline (pH >13), and exposure by ingestion can cause significant burns to
the vocal cords and GI tract. Admission for expectant management or
upper GI endoscopy is usually indicated.

Magnets

Most foreign body ingestions pass through the GI tract once known
to have passed into the stomach. However, ingestion of ≥2 magnets
(unless very weak refrigerator-­
style magnets) cause concern for
bowel obstruction and perforation (see Chapter 380). Admission
for attempted retrieval by endoscopy or clearance by WBI should be
considered.

Batteries

Any disk or button-­style battery lodged in the esophagus or airway
should be considered a true emergency warranting immediate referral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94 u Poisoning
to an endoscopist for removal (see Chapter 373). These batteries can
cause necrosis of the tissues in which they are lodged by continued
electrical discharge and leaking of their contents (the former is likely
the primary method of injury). Mucosal contact for even 2 hours might
induce necrosis. Once past the lower esophageal sphincter, button or

725

even larger batteries (e.g., AA, AAA) can usually be allowed to pass
through the GI tract with close follow-­up.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Genetics
Chapter 95

Genetics in Pediatric
Medicine
Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee
Since the completion of the Human Genome Project, there has been an
unprecedented expansion in the understanding of how human health
is impacted by variations in genomic sequence and epigenetic, non-­
sequence-­based changes that affect gene expression. There has also
been the development and implementation of accurate clinical tests
that makes it easier for physicians to detect pathogenic variant changes.
In addition, there has been a dramatic increase in the availability of
information about the genetic aspects of pediatric diseases, particularly
on the internet (Table 95.1).

THE BURDEN OF GENETIC DISORDERS IN
CHILDHOOD

Medical problems associated with genetic disorders can appear at any
age, with the most obvious and serious problems typically manifesting
in childhood. It has been estimated that 53/1,000 children and young
adults can be expected to have diseases with an important genetic
component. If congenital anomalies are included, the rate increases
to 79/1,000. In 1978 just over half of admissions to pediatric hospitals
were for a genetic condition. By 1996, because of changes in healthcare

PART

VIII
delivery and a greater understanding of the genetic basis of many disorders, that percentage increased to 71% in one large pediatric hospital
in the United States, with 96% of chronic disorders leading to admission having an obvious genetic component or influenced by genetic
susceptibility.
Major categories of genetic disorders include single-­gene, genomic,
chromosomal, and multifactorial conditions.
Individually, each single-­gene disorder is rare, but collectively they
represent an important contribution to childhood disease. The hallmark of a single-­gene disorder is that the phenotype is overwhelmingly
determined by changes that affect an individual gene. The character
and severity of a phenotype associated with some single-­gene disorders can vary from one patient to another. In some cases, this may
be due to differences in the severity of the change affecting the gene.
In other cases, variability is seen in individuals who carry the same
pathogenic variant or variants. This is termed variable expressivity; the same pathogenic variants in GJB2 can cause mild, moderate,
severe, or profound sensorineural hearing loss in different individuals.
This variability may be due to differences in other genetic, epigenetic,
environmental, and/or stochastic factors. If this variability results in
some individuals being completely unaffected, we say that the disorder
shows incomplete penetrance. Some single-­gene disorders are associated with phenotypes that affect different organ systems or biologic
functions that may appear unrelated. Pendred syndrome is caused by
pathogenic variants in SLC26A4 and is characterized by both hearing
loss and thyroid enlargement (goiter). This feature of some genetic diseases is referred to as pleiotropy.
Common single-­gene disorders include sickle cell anemia and cystic
fibrosis. Some identifiable syndromes and diseases can be caused by
more than one gene. Noonan syndrome can be caused by pathogenic
variants in at least 12 different genes. In addition, pathogenic variants

Table 95.1  Useful Internet Genetic Reference Sites
RESOURCE

WEB ADDRESS

National Center for Biotechnology Information
A general reference maintained by the National Library of Medicine

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
A useful resource for clinicians containing information on all known mendelian disorders and >12,000
genes. Information focuses on the relationship between phenotype and genotype.

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim

Genetic Testing Registry
A resource that provides information on individual genes, genetic tests, clinical laboratories, and medical
conditions. This resource also provides access to GeneReviews, a collection of expert-­authored reviews
on a variety of genetic disorders.

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/

Genetics — MedlinePlus
A resource that provides consumer-­friendly information about the effects of genetic variations on human
health

http://medlineplus.gov/genetics/

National Human Genome Research Institute
A resource for information about human genetics and ethical issues

www.genome.gov

Human Gene Mutation Database
A searchable index of all described pathogenic variants in human genes with phenotypes and references

www.hgmd.cf.ac.uk

DECIPHER
A database designed to aid physicians in determining the potential consequences of chromosomal
deletions and duplications

http://decipher.sanger.ac.uk

Database of Genomic Variants
A database of chromosomal alterations seen in normal controls

http://dgv.tcag.ca/dgv/app/home

American Society of Human Genetics

www.ashg.org

American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics

www.acmg.net

726
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 95 u Genetics in Pediatric Medicine
affecting a single gene may cause more than one disorder. Variants in
SCN5A can cause Brugada syndrome type 1, long QT syndrome type
3, dilated cardiomyopathy type 1E, familial atrial fibrillation type 10,
familial ventricular fibrillation type 1, progressive heart block type 1A,
nonprogressive heart block, and sick sinus syndrome type 1.
Single-­gene disorders tend to occur when changes in a gene have a
profound effect on the quantity of the gene product produced, either
too much or too little, or the function of the gene product, either a
loss of function or a harmful gain of function. Single-­gene disorders
can be caused by de novo sequence changes that are not found in the
unaffected parents of the affected individual, or they may be caused
by inheriting the affected gene. When a single-­gene disorder is known
to be caused by changes in only one gene, or a small number of individual genes, searching for deleterious changes is classically performed
by directly sequencing that gene and, in some cases, looking for small
deletions and/or duplications in that gene. When multiple genes can
cause a particular disorder, it is sometimes more efficient and cost-­
effective to screen large numbers of disease-­causing genes using a
disease-­specific panel, which takes advantage of massively parallel or
next-­generation sequencing technology, rather than screening genes
individually. When such panels are not available, or when the diagnosis
is in question, physicians may consider screening the protein-­coding
regions of all genes by exome sequencing (ES), also termed whole
exome sequencing (WES), on a clinical basis. In many circumstances,
ES is less expensive than sequencing multiple individual genes. Whole
genome sequencing (WGS), in which an individual’s entire genome is
sequenced, is another clinical option (see Chapter 98; Table 95.2).
The risk of having a child with a particular single-­gene disorder
can vary from one population to another. This may be the result of a
founder effect, in which a specific change affecting a disease-­causing
gene becomes relatively common in a population derived from a small
number of founder individuals. This high frequency is maintained
when there is relatively little interbreeding with persons outside that
population because of social, religious, or physical barriers. This is the
case for Tay-­Sachs disease in Ashkenazi Jews and French Canadians.
Other changes may be subject to positive selection when found in the
heterozygous carrier state. In this case, individuals who carry a single
copy of a genetic change (heterozygotes) have a survival advantage
over noncarriers. This can occur even when individuals who inherit
two copies of the change (homozygotes) have severe medical problems. This type of positive selection is evident among individuals in
sub-­Saharan Africa who carry a single copy of a hemoglobin pathogenic variant that confers relative resistance to malaria but causes sickle
cell anemia in homozygotes.
Genomic disorders are a group of diseases caused by alterations in the
genome, including deletions (copy number loss), duplications (copy
number gain), inversions (altered orientation of a genomic region), and
chromosomal rearrangements (altered location of a genomic region).
Contiguous gene disorders are caused by changes that affect two or
more genes that contribute to the clinical phenotype and are located
near one an other on a chromosome. DiGeorge syndrome, which is
caused by deletions of genes located on chromosome 22q11, is a common example. Some genomic disorders are associated with distinctive
phenotypes whose patterns can be recognized clinically. Other genomic
disorders do not have a distinctive pattern of anomalies but can cause
developmental delay, cognitive impairment, structural birth defects,
abnormal growth patterns, and changes in physical appearance.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) can provide information about the copy number and location of a specific genomic region.
Array-­based copy number detection assays, sometimes referred to as
chromosomal microarray analyses, can be used to screen for chromosomal deletions and duplications (large and small) across the genome
but do not provide information about the orientation or location of
genomic regions. A chromosome analysis (karyotype) can detect
relatively large chromosomal deletions and duplications and can
also be useful in identifying inversions and chromosomal rearrangements even when they are copy number neutral changes that do not
result in a deletion or duplication of genomic material (e.g., balanced
translocations).

727

Table 95.2  Indications for Single Gene, Gene Panel,
Exome, and Genome Sequencing
INDICATIONS
SINGLE GENE
Minimal locus heterogeneity
(only one or a small number
of genes known to cause the
condition)
Distinctive clinical findings that
clearly point to specific gene
GENE PANEL
Locus heterogeneity (multiple
genes are known to cause the
same or similar conditions)
Disorders with overlapping
phenotypes
Disorders that share one
manifestation but can have
very different presentations
Disorders associated with genes
from a common pathway or
structure
EXOME
Extreme heterogeneity and de
novo mutations common
Two or more unrelated
phenotypes in one patient
No distinctive phenotypic feature
present
Phenotype indistinct and
underlying cause not clear
GENOME
As above for Exome, plus:
Noncoding variation is
suspected as a cause
Structural variation is suspected
as a cause
Exome sequencing already
performed and was
nondiagnostic
Rapid generation of sequencing
data needed for patients who
are critically ill
Suspected mitochondrial
disorder: multisystem (heart,
brain, muscle, liver) disorder

EXAMPLES
CFTR for cystic fibrosis

PAH for phenylketonuria

Muscular dystrophy panel
Cardiomyopathy panel
Epilepsy panel
RASopathy panel

Autism, intellectual disability
Oculocutaneous albinism and
neutropenia
Kabuki syndrome
Congenital diarrhea, Zellweger
syndrome

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
DiGeorge syndrome
Undiagnosed Diseases Network
Neonates and children in
intensive care
Whole genome and/or
mitochondrial DNA (tissue)
sequencing

From Manolio TA, Rowley R, Williams MS, et al. Opportunities, resources,
and techniques for implementing genomics in clinical care. Lancet. 2019;394:511–520.
Table 2.

Deletions, duplications, and chromosomal rearrangements that
affect whole chromosomes, or large portions of a chromosome, are
typically referred to as chromosomal disorders. One of the most
common chromosomal disorders is Down syndrome, which is most
often associated with the presence of an extra copy, or trisomy, of an
entire chromosome 21. When all or part of a chromosome is missing,
the disorder is referred to as monosomy. Translocations are a type
of chromosomal rearrangement in which a genomic region from one
chromosome is transferred to a different location on the same chromosome or on a different (nonhomologous) chromosome. Translocations can be balanced, meaning that no genetic material has been lost
or gained, or they can be unbalanced, in which some genetic material
has been deleted or duplicated.
In some cases, only a portion of cells that make up a person’s body
are affected by a single-­gene defect, a genomic disorder, or a chromosomal defect. This is referred to as mosaicism and indicates that
the individual’s body is made up of two or more distinct cell populations. Through use of technologies with high sensitivity, it has become

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

728 Part VIII u Human Genetics
evident that there can be significant low-­level mosaicism in somatic
tissues.
Polygenic disorders are caused by the cumulative effects of variations in more than one gene. Multifactorial disorders are caused by
the cumulative effects of variations in multiple genes or the combined
effects of genetic, epigenetic, and/or environmental factors. Spina
bifida and isolated cleft lip or palate are common birth defects that
display multifactorial inheritance patterns. Multifactorial inheritance
is seen in many common pediatric disorders, such as asthma and diabetes mellitus. These traits can cluster in families but do not have a
mendelian pattern of inheritance (see Chapter 97). In these cases, the
genetic changes or variations that are contributing to a particular disorder are often unknown, and genetic counseling is based on empirical
data and estimates.

THE CHANGING PARADIGM OF GENETICS IN
MEDICINE

Genetic testing is increasingly available for a wide variety of both rare
and relatively common genetic disorders. Genetic testing is typically
used in pediatric medicine to resolve uncertainty regarding the underlying etiology of a child’s medical problems. Identifying a molecular
cause often provides the basis for improved genetic counseling, may
alter medical management, and may suggest that a specific therapy
should be employed. Even in cases where a specific treatment is not
available, identifying a genetic cause can aid physicians in providing
individuals and families with accurate prognostic and recurrence risk
information, can often help to relieve unfounded feelings of guilt, and
may stem the tide of misdirected blame.
Genetic tests are influencing an increasing number of medical
decisions and are becoming a seamless part of routine medical care.
Although most genetic testing is presently aimed at identifying or
confirming a diagnosis, in the future genetic testing may find wider
application as a means of determining whether an individual is predisposed to develop a particular disease. Another area in which genetic
testing could make a significant impact is on individualized drug
treatment (pharmacogenetics). It has long been known that genetic
variation in the enzymes involved in drug metabolism underlies differences in the therapeutic effect and toxicity of some drugs. When
the genetic changes that underlie these variations are identified, new
genetic tests can be developed that allow physicians to tailor treatments based on individual variations in drug metabolism, responsiveness, and susceptibility to toxicity. It is likely that the expansion of
such testing will depend, at least in part, on the extent to which such
tests can be linked to strategies to prevent disease or improve outcome
(see Chapter 98).
Long-­standing and highly successful carrier screening programs
have existed for disorders such as Tay-­Sachs disease and many other
rare, single-­gene disorders that are prevalent in specific populations.
Couples are usually offered screening for a variety of conditions based,
in part, on ancestry (Tay-­Sachs disease, hemoglobinopathies, cystic
fibrosis). Couples found to be at increased risk for such disorders can
be offered preconception or prenatal testing aimed at detecting specific
disease-­causing variants.
Prenatal screening is routinely offered for chromosomal disorders
such as trisomy 13, trisomy 18, and Down syndrome. Pregnancies
affected by these, and possibly other genetic disorders, are being recognized by noninvasive screening tests targeting fetal cell-­free DNA
in maternal blood and by fetal ultrasound. When genetic disorders
are suspected, chorionic villus sampling at 10-­12 weeks of gestation
or amniocentesis at 16-­18 weeks of gestation can provide material for
genetic testing. When a couple are at risk for a specific genetic defect,
preimplantation genetic diagnosis can sometimes be used to select
unaffected early embryos, which are then implanted as part of an
in vitro fertilization procedure.
Although prenatally obtained genetic material can be used to identify single-­
gene disorders, genomic disorders, and chromosomal
anomalies, the information obtained on any pregnancy depends on the
tests that are ordered. It is important that physicians select the most
appropriate prenatal tests and that couples understand the limitations

of these tests. No amount of genetic testing can guarantee the birth of
a healthy child.
Specific treatments are not available for most genetic disorders,
although some important exceptions exist (see Chapter 98). Inborn
errors of metabolism were the first genetic disorders to be recognized, and many are amenable to treatment by dietary manipulation
(see Chapter 104). These conditions result from genetically determined
deficiency of specific enzymes, leading to the buildup of toxic substrates and/or deficiency of critical end products.
Individual metabolic disorders tend to be very rare, but their combined impact on the pediatric population is significant. Tandem mass
spectrometry has made it relatively inexpensive to screen for a large
number of these disorders in the newborn period. Use of this technology not only dramatically increases the number of metabolic disorders
identified within a population but also allows treatment to be initiated at a much earlier stage in development. Broader screening in the
postnatal period, in the form of metabolomic screening, has increased
the potential for identifying an increasing list of rare inborn errors
of metabolism, especially when combined with exome or genome
sequencing.
Progress in genetic therapies has improved the treatment of some
lysosomal storage disorders (see Chapter 106.4). These metabolic diseases are caused by defects in lysosomal function. Lysosomes are cellular organelles that contain specific digestive enzymes. Some of these
disorders that were characterized by early lethal or intractable chronic
illness can now be treated using specially modified enzymes administered by intravenous infusion. These enzymes are taken up by cells and
incorporated into lysosomes. Conditions such as Gaucher disease and
Fabry disease are routinely treated using enzyme replacement; similar
therapies are being developed for other lysosomal disorders.
Therapeutic advances are also being made in the treatment of nonmetabolic genetic disorders. Improvements in surgical techniques and
intensive care medicine are extending the survival of children with life-­
threatening birth defects such as congenital diaphragmatic hernia and
severe cardiac defects. In many cases, the life expectancy of children
with debilitating genetic disorders is also increasing. Improvements
in nutrition and the management of chronic pulmonary disease in
patients with cystic fibrosis allow an increasing percentage of affected
patients to survive into adulthood, creating a need to transition care
from pediatric to adult providers.
Gene replacement therapies are being used in the treatment of a
variety of genetic disorders (see Chapter 98). Stem cell–based therapies have also been employed as a potential treatment for a number of
intractable disorders.

DIRECT-­TO-­CONSUMER GENETIC TESTING

In most cases, healthcare providers order genetic tests, interpret the
results, communicate these results to their patients, and then document these finding in the medical record. The costs of these tests are
often covered completely or in part by a health insurance company.
In contrast, some companies are offering direct-­to-­consumer genetic
tests in which individuals order their own tests and receive test results
directly from the company. The individual usually pays for these tests,
and the results are not recorded in their medical record unless the individual chooses to share this information with their healthcare providers. Some direct-­to-­consumer genetic tests only provide information
about common traits or information about an individual’s ancestry or
relationship to others (ancestry testing). Other direct-­to-­consumer
tests are designed to make predictions about health and/or to identify
pathogenic variants associated with specific genetic disorders. In some
cases, individuals ordering these tests may have the option of reviewing their results with a healthcare provider employed by the company
performing the test.
One of the main benefits of direct-­to-­consumer testing is that it
allows individuals to privately access their genetic information without
having to involve a healthcare provider or their insurance company.
Although this could be seen as a means of empowering individuals
with regards to their healthcare, the benefits derived from such testing
depend heavily on the appropriateness of the test ordered, the quality of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 95 u Genetics in Pediatric Medicine
the testing/reporting services, the capacity of the individual to understand the test results, and their ability to make informed choices based
on those results.

ETHICS ISSUES

Genetic testing, diagnosis, and treatment should be performed confidentially. Nothing is as personal as one’s genetic information, and all
efforts should be made to avoid any stigma for the patient. Many people worry that results of genetic testing will put them, or their child, at
risk for genetic discrimination. Genetic discrimination occurs when
people are treated unfairly because of a difference in their DNA that
suggests they have a genetic disorder or they are at an increased risk of
developing a certain disease. In the United States the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 protects individuals from genetic
discrimination at the hands of health insurers and employers but does
not extend protection against discrimination from providers of life,
disability, or long-­term care insurance.
The decisions about genetic testing should be based on a careful
evaluation of the potential benefits and risks. In the pediatric setting,
these decisions may be more difficult because physicians and parents
are often called on to make decisions for a child who cannot directly
participate in discussions about testing. Molecular diagnostic tests are
often used to diagnose malformation syndromes, cognitive delay, or
other disabilities in which there is a clear benefit to the child. In other
cases, such as genetic testing for susceptibility to adult-­onset diseases,
it is appropriate to wait until the child or adolescent is mature enough
to weigh the potential risks and benefits and make their own decisions
about genetic testing.
Policies regarding genetic testing of children have been developed
collaboratively by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG; Pediatrics 131[3]:620–622, 2013). These recommendations are outlined in
the following list.
General Recommendations
1.	Decisions about whether to offer genetic testing and screening
should be driven by the best interest of the child.
2.	Genetic testing is best offered in the context of genetic counseling. Genetic counseling can be performed by clinical geneticists, genetic counselors, or any other healthcare provider with
appropriate training and expertise. AAP and ACMG support
the expansion of educational opportunities in human genomics and genetics for medical students, residents, and practicing
pediatric primary care providers.
Diagnostic Testing
3.	In a child with symptoms of a genetic condition, the rationale
for genetic testing is similar to other medical diagnostic evaluations. Parents or guardians should be informed about the risks
and benefits of testing, and their permission should be obtained.
Ideally, and when appropriate, the assent of the child should be
obtained.
4.	When performed for therapeutic purposes, pharmacogenetic
testing of children is acceptable, with permission of parents or
guardians and, when appropriate, the child’s assent. If a pharmacogenetic test result carries implications beyond drug targeting
or dose responsiveness, the broader implications should be discussed before testing.
Newborn Screening
5.	AAP and ACMG support the mandatory offering of newborn
screening for all children. After education and counseling about
the substantial benefits of newborn screening, its remote risks,
and the next steps in the event of a positive screening result,
parents should have the option of refusing the procedure, and
an informed refusal should be respected.
Carrier Testing
6.	AAP and ACMG do not support routine carrier testing in
minors when such testing does not provide health benefits in
childhood. The AAP and ACMG advise against school-­based
testing or screening programs, because the school environment

729

is unlikely to be conducive to voluntary participation, thoughtful consent, privacy, confidentiality, or appropriate counseling
about test results.
7.	For pregnant adolescents or for adolescents considering reproduction, genetic testing and screening should be offered as clinically indicated, and the risks and benefits should be explained
clearly.
Predictive Genetic Testing
8.	Parents or guardians may authorize predictive genetic testing for
asymptomatic children at risk of childhood-­onset conditions.
Ideally, the assent of the child should be obtained.
9.	Predictive genetic testing for adult-­onset conditions generally
should be deferred unless an intervention initiated in childhood
may reduce morbidity or mortality. An exception might be
made for families for whom diagnostic uncertainty poses a significant psychosocial burden, particularly when an adolescent
and the parents concur in their interest in predictive testing.
10.	For ethical and legal reasons, healthcare providers should be
cautious about providing predictive genetic testing to minors
without the involvement of their parents or guardians, even if
a minor is mature. Results of such tests may have significant
medical, psychologic, and social implications, not only for the
minor but also for other family members.
Histocompatibility Testing
11.	Tissue compatibility testing of minors of all ages is permissible
to benefit immediate family members but should be conducted
only after thorough exploration of the psychosocial, emotional,
and physical implications of the minor serving as a potential
stem cell donor. A donor advocate or similar mechanism should
be in place from the outset to avert coercion and safeguard the
interests of the child.
Adoption
12.	The rationale for genetic testing of children in biological families
should apply for adopted children and children awaiting placement for adoption. If a child has a known genetic risk, prospective adoptive parents must be made aware of this possibility. In
rare cases, it may be in a child’s best interest to undergo predictive genetic testing for a known risk before adoption to ensure
the child’s placement with a family capable of and willing to accept the child’s potential medical and developmental challenges.
In the absence of such indications, genetic testing should not be
performed as a condition of adoption.
Disclosure
13.	At the time of genetic testing, parents or guardians should be
encouraged to inform their child of the test results at an appropriate age. Parents or guardians should be advised that, under
most circumstances, a request by a mature adolescent for test
results should be honored.
14.	Results from genetic testing of a child may have implications
for the parents and other family members. Healthcare providers
have an obligation to inform parents and the child, when appropriate, about these potential implications. Healthcare providers
should encourage patients and families to share this information
and offer to help explain the results to the extended family or
refer them for genetic counseling.
15.	Misattributed paternity, use of donor gametes, adoption, or
other questions about family relationships may be uncovered
“incidentally” whenever genetic testing is performed, particularly when testing multiple family members. This risk should be
discussed, and a plan about disclosure or nondisclosure should
be in place before testing.
Direct-­to-­Consumer Testing
16.	
AAP and ACMG strongly discourage the use of direct-­
to-­
consumer and home-­kit genetic testing of children because of
the lack of oversight on test content, accuracy, and interpretation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

730 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Chapter 96

Principles of Human
Genetics
Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee
THE HUMAN GENOME

The human genome has approximately 20,000 genes that encode the
wide variety of proteins found in the human body. Reproductive or
germline cells contain one copy (N) of this genetic complement and are
haploid, whereas somatic (nongermline) cells contain two complete
copies (2N) and are diploid. Genes are organized into long segments
of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which, during cell division, are compacted into intricate structures together with proteins to form chromosomes. Each somatic cell has 46 chromosomes: 22 pairs of autosomes,
or nonsex chromosomes, and one pair of sex chromosomes (XY in a
male, XX in a female). Germ cells (ova or sperm) contain 22 autosomes
and one sex chromosome, for a total of 23. At fertilization, the full diploid chromosome complement of 46 is again realized in the embryo.
Most of the genetic material is contained in the cell’s nucleus. The
mitochondria (the cell’s energy-­producing organelles) contain their
own unique genome. The mitochondrial chromosome consists of a
double-­stranded circular piece of DNA, which contains 16,568 base
pairs (bp) of DNA and is present in multiple copies per cell. The proteins that occupy the mitochondria are produced either in the mitochondria, using information contained in the mitochondrial genome,
or are produced outside of the mitochondria, using information contained in the nuclear genome, and then transported into the organelle. Sperm do not usually contribute mitochondria to the developing
embryo, so all mitochondria are maternally derived, and a child’s mitochondrial genetic makeup derives exclusively from the child’s biologic
mother (see Chapter 108).

FUNDAMENTALS OF MOLECULAR GENETICS

DNA consists of a pair of chains of a sugar-­phosphate backbone linked
by pyrimidine and purine bases to form a double helix (Fig. 96.1). The
sugar in DNA is deoxyribose. The pyrimidines are cytosine (C) and
thymine (T), and the purines are guanine (G) and adenine (A). The
bases are linked by hydrogen bonds such that A always pairs with T
and G with C. Each strand of the double helix has polarity, with a free
phosphate at one end (5′) and an unbonded hydroxyl on the sugar at
the other end (3′). The two strands are oriented in opposite polarity in
the double helix.
The replication of DNA follows the pairing of bases in the parent
DNA strand. The original two strands unwind by breaking the hydrogen bonds between base pairs. Free nucleotides, consisting of a base
attached to a sugar-­phosphate chain, form new hydrogen bonds with
their complementary bases on the parent strand; new phosphodiester bonds are created by enzymes called DNA polymerases. Replication of chromosomes begins simultaneously at multiple sites, forming
replication bubbles that expand bidirectionally until the entire DNA
molecule (chromosome) is replicated. Errors in DNA replication, or
pathogenic variants induced by environmental mutagens such as irradiation or chemicals, are detected and potentially corrected by DNA
repair systems.
Information encoded in DNA, predominantly located in the cell’s
nucleus, is transcribed into messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA),
which is then transported to the cytoplasm, where it is translated into
protein. A prototypical gene consists of a regulatory region, segments
called exons that encode the amino acid sequence of a protein, and
intervening segments called introns (Fig. 96.2).
Transcription is initiated by attachment of ribonucleic acid (RNA)
polymerase to the promoter site upstream of the beginning of the

coding sequence. Specific proteins bind to the region to repress or
activate transcription by compacting or opening chromatin, which
is a complex of DNA and histone proteins. It is the action of these
regulatory proteins (transcription factors) that determines, in large
part, when a gene is turned on or off. Some genes are also turned on
and off by methylation of cytosine bases that are adjacent to guanine
bases (cytosine-­phosphate-­guanine bases [CpGs]). Methylation is an
example of an epigenetic change, meaning a change that can affect gene
expression, and possibly the characteristics of a cell or organism, but
that does not involve a change in the underlying genetic sequence. Gene
regulation is flexible and responsive, with genes being turned on or
off during development and in response to internal and external environmental conditions and stimuli. Another epigenetic mechanism that
controls gene expression is the biochemical modification of histone
proteins around which DNA is wound. These modifications can affect
the relative accessibility of chromatin by enzymes for transcription.
Transcription proceeds through the entire length of the gene in a 5′
to 3′ direction to form an mRNA transcript whose sequence is complementary to that of one of the DNA strands. RNA is a sugar-­phosphate
chain with pyrimidines and purines. In RNA the sugar is ribose, and
uracil replaces the thymine found in DNA. A “cap” consisting of
7-­methylguanosine is added to the 5′ end of the RNA in a 5′-­5′ bond
and, for most transcripts, several hundred adenine bases are enzymatically added to the 3′ end after transcription.
mRNA processing occurs in the nucleus and consists of excision of
the introns and splicing together of the exons. Specific sequences at the
start and end of introns mark the sites where the splicing machinery
will act on the transcript. In some cases, there may be tissue-­specific
patterns to splicing, so that the same primary transcript can produce
multiple distinct proteins.
The processed transcript is next exported to the cytoplasm, where
it binds to ribosomes, which are complexes of protein and ribosomal
RNA (rRNA). The genetic code is then read in triplets of bases, each
triplet corresponding with a specific amino acid or providing a signal
that terminates translation. The triplet codons are recognized by transfer RNAs (tRNAs) that include complementary anticodons and bind
the corresponding amino acid, delivering it to the growing peptide.
New amino acids are enzymatically, sequentially attached to the growing peptide. Each time an amino acid is added, the ribosome moves
one triplet codon step along the mRNA. Eventually a stop codon is
reached, at which point translation ends and the peptide is released.
In some proteins, there are posttranslational modifications, such as
attachment of sugars (glycosylation). The protein is then delivered to
its destination within or outside the cell by trafficking mechanisms that
recognize portions of the peptide.
Another mechanism of gene regulation is noncoding RNAs, which
are RNAs transcribed from DNA but not translated into proteins. Noncoding RNAs function in many contexts, including mediating splicing, the processing of coding RNAs in the nucleus, and the translation
of coding mRNAs in ribosomes. The roles of long noncoding RNAs
(>200 bp) and short noncoding RNAs (<200 bp) extend beyond these
processes to impact a diverse set of biologic functions, including the
regulation of gene expression. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of
small RNAs that control gene expression in the cell by directly targeting specific sets of coding RNAs by direct RNA–RNA binding. This
RNA–RNA interaction can lead to degradation of the target-­coding
RNA or inhibition of translation of the protein specified by that coding
RNA. miRNAs often target and regulate several hundred mRNAs.

GENETIC VARIATION

The process of producing protein from a gene is subject to disruption at multiple levels because of alterations in the DNA sequence
(Fig. 96.3). Changes in the regulatory region can lead to altered gene
expression, including increased or decreased rates of transcription,
failure of gene activation, or activation of the gene at inappropriate times or in inappropriate cells. Changes in the coding sequence
can lead to substitution of one amino acid for another (missense
variant or nonsynonymous variant) or creation of a stop codon in
the place of an amino acid codon (nonsense or stop-­gain variant).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 96 u Principles of Human Genetics
5'

3'

One helical tum  3.4 nm

Sugar-phosphate
backbone

Bases

Adenine
Thymine
Guanine
Cytosine
3'

5'

Fig. 96.1 DNA double helix, with sugar-­phosphate backbone and nitrogenous bases. (From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, et al., eds.
Medical Genetics, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 1999: p. 8.)
Non-transcribed strand

Exons:

1

Overall, missense and nonsense variants are the most common (56%
of variants); small deletions or insertions represent approximately
24% of variants (Table 96.1). Some single-­base changes do not affect
the amino acid (silent, wobble, or synonymous variants) because
there may be several triplet codons that correspond to the same single
amino acid. Amino acid substitutions can have a profound effect on
protein function if the chemical properties of the substituted amino
acid are markedly different. Other substitutions can have a subtle or
no effect on protein function, particularly if the substituted amino
acid is chemically similar to the original. Single nucleotide changes,
whether silent or missense, are termed single nucleotide variants
(SNV).
Genetic changes can also include insertions or deletions (“in-­
dels”). Insertions or deletions of a nonintegral multiple of three bases
into the coding sequence leads to a frameshift, altering the grouping
of bases into triplets. This leads to translation of an incorrect amino
acid sequence and often a premature stop to translation. Insertion or
deletion of an integral multiple of three bases into the coding sequence
will insert or delete a corresponding number of amino acids from the
protein, leading to in-­frame alterations that maintain the amino acid
sequence outside the deleted or duplicated amino acids. Larger scale
insertions or deletions can disrupt a coding sequence or result in complete deletion of an entire gene or group of genes.
Pathogenic variants usually can be classified as causing a loss of function or a gain of function. Loss-­of-­function variants lead to a reduction in the level of protein function as a result of decreased expression
or production of a protein that does not work as efficiently. In some
cases, loss of protein function from one of two alleles is sufficient to
cause disease. Haploinsufficiency describes the situation in which
maintenance of a normal phenotype requires the proteins produced
by both alleles of a gene, and a 50% decrease in gene function results
in an abnormal phenotype. Haploinsufficient phenotypes are dominantly inherited. Loss-­of-­function variants can also have a dominant

2

3

5'
3'

3'
5'

3'

Transcribed strand

5'

731

RNA

1. Transcription 5' CAP

3'
polyA addition

2. RNA processing
and splicing

5'

A A A A 3'

Nucleus
5'

3. Transport

A A A A 3'

Cytoplasm
Growing polypeptide
chain
4. Translation

5'

A A A A 3'

Ribosomes

5. Protein assembly

Completed polypeptide

Fig. 96.2 Flow of information from DNA to RNA to protein for a hypothetical gene with three exons and two introns. Within the exons, colored regions indicate
coding sequences. Steps include transcription, RNA processing and splicing, RNA transport from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, translation, and protein assembly.
(From Nussbaum RL, McInnis RR, Willard HF, Hamosh A, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007: p. 31.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

732 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Promoter

Intron

Intron

Exon

Exon

Exon

Increased or decreased
level of transcription
Inclusion of intron in processed mRNA
TCC CAA ATC GTC CCT CGA GTT Wild type sequence
ser gln ile val pro arg val
TCC CAG ATC GTC CCT CGA GTT Silent variant
ser gln ile val pro arg val

Exon skip

TCC CAG ATC CTC CCT CGA GTT Conservative variant
ser gln ile leu pro arg val

Fig. 96.3 Various types of intra-

genic sequence variants. Promoter
variants alter rate of transcription
or disrupt gene regulation. Base
changes within exons can have
various effects, as shown. Variants
within introns can lead to inclusion
of some intronic sequence in the final processed mRNA, or it can lead
to exon skipping.

TCC CAG ATC CTC GCT CGA GTT Missense variant
ser gln ile leu ala arg val
TCC CAA ATC GTC CCT TGA GTT Nonsense variant
ser gln ile val pro stop
TCC CAG AAT CGT CCC TCG AGT Frameshift insertion
ser gln asn arg pro ser ser

Table 96.1  Main Classes, Groups, and Types of Sequence Variants and Their Effects on Protein Products
CLASS
Substitution

Deletion

Insertion

GROUP

TYPE

EFFECT ON PROTEIN PRODUCT

Synonymous

Silent*

Same amino acid

Nonsynonymous

Missense*

Altered amino acid—may affect protein function or stability

Nonsense or stop-­gain*

Stop codon—loss of function or expression from degradation of
mRNA

Splice site

Aberrant splicing—exon skipping or intron retention

Promoter

Altered gene expression

Multiple of three (codon)

In-­frame deletion of one or more amino acid(s)—may affect
protein function or stability

Not multiple of three

Frameshift

Likely to result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Large deletion

Partial gene deletion

May result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Whole gene deletion

Loss of expression

Multiple of three (codon)

In-­frame insertion of one or more amino acid(s)—may affect
protein function or stability

Not multiple of three

Frameshift

Likely to result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Large insertion

Partial gene duplication

May result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Whole gene duplication

May have an effect because of increased gene dosage

Dynamic pathogenic variant

Altered gene expression or altered protein stability or function

Expansion of trinucleotide
repeat

*Some have been shown to cause aberrant splicing.
From Turnpenny P, Ellard S, eds. Emery’s Elements of Medical Genetics, 14th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2012: p. 23.

negative effect when the abnormal protein product actively interferes
with the function of the normal protein product. Both situations lead
to diseases inherited in a dominant fashion. Haploinsufficiency of type
I collagen can cause relatively mild osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type I.
In contrast, heterozygous, missense glycine substitutions in type I collagen can act in a dominant negative fashion to cause severe OI type II,
III, and IV. In other cases, loss-­of-­function variants must be present in
both copies of a gene before an abnormal phenotype results. This situation typically results in diseases inherited in a recessive fashion (see

Chapter 97). Some conditions are semidominant where one affected
copy (heterozygous pathogenic variant) causes a milder phenotype
than when both copies are affected (compound heterozygous or homozygous pathogenic variants). This is seen in classical achondroplasia vs
homozygous achondroplasia
Gain-­of-­function variants typically cause dominantly inherited
diseases. These variants can result in production of a protein molecule with an increased ability to perform a normal function or can
confer a novel property on the protein. The gain-­of-­function variant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 96 u Principles of Human Genetics
in achondroplasia, the most common of the disproportionate, short-­
limbed short stature disorders, exemplifies the enhanced function of a
normal protein. Achondroplasia results from a pathogenic variant in
the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor three gene (FGFR3), which
leads to activation of the receptor, even in the absence of FGF. In sickle
cell disease, an amino acid is substituted into the hemoglobin molecule and has little effect on the ability of the protein to transport oxygen. However, sickle hemoglobin chains have a novel property. Unlike
normal hemoglobin, sickle hemoglobin chains aggregate under conditions of deoxygenation, forming fibers that deform the red cells.
Other gain-­of-­function variants result in overexpression or inappropriate expression of a gene product. Many cancer-­causing genes
(oncogenes) are normal regulators of cellular proliferation during
development. However, expression of these genes in adult life and/or
in cells in which they usually are not expressed can result in neoplasia.
In some cases, changes in gene expression are caused by changes in
the number of copies of a gene that are present in the genome (Fig.
96.4). Although some copy number variations are common and do
not appear to cause or predispose to disease, others are clearly disease causing. Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease type 1A, the most common inherited form of chronic peripheral neuropathy of childhood,
is caused by duplications of the gene for peripheral myelin protein 22,
resulting in overexpression due to the existence of three active copies
of this gene (see Chapter 653.1). Deletions of this same gene, leaving
Reference DNA

Test DNA

Reference DNA

Test DNA

Labeling

Samples mixed
Hybridization to arrays

Ratio (test:reference)

Spurious signal
Combine dye-swap
experiments and calculate from one dyeswap experiment
fluorescence ratio
Duplication

Deletion

1.5
1.0
0.5
1 Mb

2 Mb

3 Mb
Genomic region

4 Mb

Fig. 96.4 Array comparative genomic hybridization. Test and refer-

ence DNA samples are differentially labeled, mixed, and passed over
a target array of probes (e.g., bacterial artificial chromosome clones
or oligonucleotides) containing DNA fragments from across the whole
human genome. The experiment is often repeated with reversal of the
test and reference dyes to detect dye effects or identify spurious signals. DNA samples hybridize with their corresponding probe, and the
ratio of fluorescence from each probe (test:reference) is used to detect
regions that vary in copy number between the test and the reference
sample (red line, original hybridization; blue line, dye-­swapped hybridization). Equal copy number for both the test and the reference DNA is
identified by equal binding, resulting in a ratio of 1:1. Duplication in a
genomic region of the test sample is identified by an increased ratio,
and a deletion is identified by a decreased ratio, but a deletion in the
test sample is indistinguishable from a duplication in the reference sample. These ratios are usually converted to log2 scale for further analysis.
Mb, megabase. (Adapted from Feuk L, Carson AR, Scherer SW. Structural variation in the human genome. Nat Rev Genet 2006;7:85–97.)

733

only one active copy, are responsible for a different disorder, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
Deletions and duplications can vary in their extent and can involve
several genes, even when they are not detectable using a traditional
chromosome analysis. Such changes are commonly called microdeletions and microduplications. When deletion or duplication of two or
more genes in the same chromosomal region each play a role in the
resulting clinical features, the condition can also be referred to as a
contiguous gene disorder.
In some cases, the recognition of a specific constellation of features
leads clinicians to suspect a specific microdeletion or microduplication syndrome. Examples of such disorders include Smith-­Magenis,
DiGeorge, and Williams syndromes. In other cases, the clinician may
be alerted to this possibility by an unusually diverse array of clinical
features in one patient or the presence of unusual features in a person with a known condition. Because of the close physical proximity
of a series of genes, different deletions involving the short arm of the
X chromosome can produce individuals with various combinations of
ichthyosis, Kallmann syndrome, ocular albinism, intellectual disability,
chondrodysplasia punctata, and short stature.
DNA rearrangements can also take place in somatic cells (cells that
do not go on to produce ova or sperm). Rearrangements that occur
in lymphoid cells are required for the normal formation of functional
immunoglobulin in B cells and antigen-­recognizing receptors on T
cells. Large segments of DNA, which code for the variable and the constant regions of either immunoglobulin or the T-­cell receptor (TCR),
are physically joined at a specific stage in the development of an immunocompetent lymphocyte. These rearrangements take place during
development of the lymphoid cell lineage in humans and result in the
extensive diversity of immunoglobulin and TCR molecules. Because of
this postgermline DNA rearrangement, no two individuals, not even
identical twins, are fully identical, because mature lymphocytes from
each will have undergone random DNA rearrangements at these loci.
The human genome demonstrates that any two individuals will differ in about one base in 1,000. Some of these differences are silent;
some result in changes that explain phenotypic differences (hair or
eye color, physical appearance); and some have medical significance,
causing single-­gene disorders such as sickle cell anemia or explaining
susceptibility to common pediatric disorders such as asthma. Genetic
variants in a single gene that occur at a frequency of >1% in a population are often referred to as polymorphisms. These variations may be
silent or subtle or may have significant phenotypic effects.

GENOTYPE-­PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS IN
GENETIC DISEASE

The term genotype is used to signify the internally coded, heritable
information of an individual and can also be used to refer to which
particular alternative version (allele) of a gene is present at a specific
location (locus) on a chromosome. A phenotype is the observed
structural, biochemical, and physiologic characteristics of an individual, determined by the genotype, and can also refer to the observed
structural and functional effects of a variant allele at a specific locus.
Many sequence variants result in predictable phenotypes; physicians
can predict clinical outcomes and plan appropriate treatment strategies based on a patient’s genotype. There is also phenotypic expansion
where multiple alleles (variants) within a gene can be associated with
often diverse and distinct clinical presentations.
Long QT syndrome exemplifies a disorder with predictable associations between a patient’s genotype and his or her phenotype (see
Chapter 484.5). Long QT syndrome is genetically heterogeneous,
meaning that pathogenic variants in several different genes can cause
the same disorder. The risk for cardiac events (syncope, aborted cardiac
arrest, or sudden death) is higher in patients with long QT syndrome
involving KCNQ1 (63%) or KCNH2 (46%) than in those with pathogenic variants in SCN5A (18%). In addition, individuals with KCNQ1
variants experience most of their episodes during exercise and rarely
during rest or sleep. In contrast, individuals with pathogenic variants
in KCNH2 and SCN5A are more likely to have episodes during sleep
or rest and rarely during exercise. Therefore variants in specific genes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

734 Part VIII u Human Genetics
(genotype) are correlated with specific manifestations (phenotype) of
long QT syndrome. These types of relationships are commonly referred
to as genotype-­phenotype correlations.
Pathogenic variants in the fibrillin-­1 gene associated with Marfan syndrome represent another example of predictable genotype-­
phenotype correlations (see Chapter 743). Marfan syndrome is
characterized by the combination of skeletal, ocular, and aortic manifestations, with the most devastating outcome being aortic root dissection and sudden death. The fibrillin-­1 gene consists of 65 exons, and
pathogenic variants have been found in almost all these. The location
of the variant within the gene (genotype) might play a significant role
in determining the severity of the condition (phenotype). Neonatal
Marfan syndrome is often caused by variants in exons 24-­27 and in
exons 31 and 32, whereas milder forms are caused by variants in exons
59-­65 and in exons 37 and 41.
Genotype-­phenotype correlations have also been observed in some
complications of cystic fibrosis (CF; see Chapter 454). Although pulmonary disease is the major cause of morbidity and mortality, CF is a multisystem disorder that affects not only the epithelia of the respiratory tract
but also the exocrine pancreas, intestine, male genital tract, hepatobiliary
system, and exocrine sweat glands. CF is caused by pathogenic variants
in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. More
than 1,600 different pathogenic CFTR variants have been identified. The
most common is a deletion of three nucleotides that removes the amino
acid phenylalanine (F) at the 508th position on the protein (ΔF508 variant), which accounts for approximately 70% of all pathogenic CF variants and is associated with severe disease. The best genotype-­phenotype
correlations in CF are seen in the context of pancreatic function, with
common pathogenic variants being classified as either pancreatic sufficient or pancreatic insufficient. Persons with pancreatic sufficiency usually have either one or two pancreatic-­sufficient alleles, indicating that
pancreatic-­sufficient alleles are dominant. In contrast, the genotype-­
phenotype correlation in pulmonary disease is much weaker, and persons with identical genotypes have wide variations in the severity of their
pulmonary disease. This finding may be accounted for, in part, by genetic
modifiers or environmental factors.
In many disorders, the effects of variants on phenotype can be modified by changes in the other allele of the same gene, by changes in specific modifier genes, and/or by variations in a number of unspecified
genes (genetic background). When sickle cell anemia is co-­inherited
with the gene for hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin, the sickle
cell phenotypic expression is less severe. Modifier genes in CF can
influence the development of congenital meconium ileus, or colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Modifier genes can also affect
the manifestations of Hirschsprung disease, neurofibromatosis type 2,
craniosynostosis, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The combination of genetic variants producing glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency and longer versions of the TATAA element in the uridine
diphosphate–glucuronosyltransferase gene promoter exacerbates neonatal physiologic hyperbilirubinemia.

HUMAN GENOME PROJECT

A rudimentary genetic map can be made using genetic linkage, which
is based on the principle that alleles at two genetic loci that are located
near each other segregate together in a family unless they are separated by genetic recombination. In contrast to linkage maps, physical
maps rely on overlapping DNA fragments to determine the location of
loci with respect to one another. Overlapping segments of the genomic
regions can be identified and used to piece together a map composed of
overlapping DNA fragments to obtain the DNA sequence of the entire
region. An alternative strategy involves breaking the entire genome into
random fragments, sequencing the fragments, and then computationally assembling them into overlapping segments. This whole genome
approach in combination with next-­generation sequencing technologies has resulted in a dramatic reduction in the cost of sequencing an
individual’s entire genome.
Analysis of the human genome has produced some surprising
results. The number of genes appears to be ∼20,000. However, the number of protein products encoded by the genome is far greater than the

Fig. 96.5 Microarray containing 36,000 oligonucleotides. The micro-

array was exposed to RNA from normal fibroblasts (labeled in red; see
arrows) and fibroblasts from a patient with Niemann-­Pick disease, type
C (labeled green). Arrows point to regions in which there was a strong
hybridization signal with either normal or disease RNA. This microarray
was used to search for genes that are highly expressed in the fibroblasts
of patients. (From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, White RL. Medical
Genetics, 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2006: p. 116.)

number of genes. This is a result of the presence of alternative promoter
regions, alternative splicing, and posttranslational modifications,
which can allow a single gene to encode a number of protein products.
It is also apparent that most of the human genome does not encode
protein, with <5% being transcribed and translated, although a much
larger percentage may be transcribed without translation. Many transcribed sequences are not translated but represent genes that encode
RNAs that serve regulatory roles. A large fraction of the genome consists of repeated sequences that are interspersed among the genes. Some
of these are transposable genetic elements that can move from place to
place in the genome. Others are static elements that were expanded and
dispersed in the past during human evolution. Other repeated sequences
might play a structural role. There are also regions of genomic duplications. Such duplications are substrate for evolution, allowing genetic
motifs to be copied and modified to serve new roles in the cell. Duplications can also play a role in chromosomal rearrangement, permitting
nonhomologous chromosome segments to pair during meiosis and
exchange material. This is another source of evolutionary change and a
potential source of chromosomal instability leading to congenital anomalies or cancer. Low copy repeats also play an important role in causing genomic disorders. When low copy repeats flank unique genomic
segments, these regions can be duplicated or deleted through a process
known as nonallelic homologous recombination.
Availability of the entire human genomic sequence permits the
study of large groups of genes, looking for patterns of gene expression
or genome alteration. Studies of gene expression are performed using
next-­generation sequencing techniques to obtain information about all
RNA transcripts in a tissue or single cell. The patterns of gene expression may provide signatures for particular disease states, such as cancer, or change in response to therapy (Fig. 96.5).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

735

The family history remains the most important screening tool for pediatricians in identifying a patient’s risk for developing a wide range of
diseases, from multifactorial conditions such as diabetes and attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, to single-­gene disorders such as sickle
cell anemia and cystic fibrosis. Through a detailed family history, the
physician can often ascertain the mode of genetic transmission and the
risks to family members. Because not all familial clustering of disease
is caused by genetic factors, a family history can also identify common
environmental and behavioral factors that influence the occurrence of
disease. The main goal of the family history is to identify genetic susceptibility, and the cornerstone of the family history is a systematic and
standardized pedigree.
A pedigree provides a graphic depiction of a family’s structure and
medical history. It is important when taking a pedigree to be systematic and use standard symbols and configurations so that anyone can
read and understand the information (Figs. 97.1-­97.4). In the pediatric
setting, the proband is typically the child or adolescent who is being
evaluated. The proband is designated in the pedigree by an arrow.
A three-­to four-­generation pedigree should be obtained for every
new patient as an initial screen for genetic disorders segregating within
the family. The pedigree can provide clues to the inheritance pattern
of these disorders and can aid the clinician in determining the risk to
the proband and other family members. The closer the relationship of
the proband to the person in the family with the genetic disorder, the
greater is the shared genetic complement. First-­degree relatives, such
as a parent, full sibling, or child, share one half their genetic information on average; first cousins share one eighth. Sometimes the person
providing the family history may mention a distant relative who is
affected with a genetic disorder. In such cases a more extensive pedigree may be needed to identify the risk to other family members. For
example, a history of a distant maternally related cousin with intellectual disability caused by fragile X syndrome can still place a male proband at an elevated risk for this disorder.

trait and do not harbor a copy of the deleterious gene) do not pass the
disorder to their children. Males and females are equally affected.
Although not a characteristic per se, the finding of male-­to-­male
transmission essentially confirms autosomal dominant inheritance.
Vertical transmission can also be seen with X-­linked traits. However,
because a father passes on his Y chromosome to a son, male-­to-­male
transmission cannot be seen with an X-­linked trait. Therefore male-­to-­
male transmission eliminates X-­linked inheritance as a possible explanation. Although male-­to-­male transmission can occur with Y-­linked
genes as well, there are very few Y-­linked disorders, compared with
thousands having the autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.
Although parent-­to-­child transmission is a characteristic of autosomal dominant inheritance, many patients with an autosomal dominant disorder have no history of an affected family member, for several
possible reasons. First, the patient may have the disorder due to a de
novo (new) pathogenic variant that occurred in the DNA of the egg or
sperm that formed that individual. Second, many autosomal dominant
conditions demonstrate incomplete penetrance, meaning that not all
individuals who carry the pathogenic variant have phenotypic manifestations. In a pedigree, this can appear as a skipped generation, in
which an unaffected individual links two affected persons (Fig. 97.6).
There are many potential reasons that a disorder might exhibit incomplete penetrance including the effect of modifier genes, environmental
factors, gender, and age. Third, individuals with the same autosomal
dominant variant can manifest the disorder to different degrees. This is
termed variable expression and is a characteristic of many autosomal
dominant disorders.
Fourth, some spontaneous genetic pathogenic variants occur not in
the egg or sperm that forms a child, but rather in a cell in the developing embryo or in a tissue after birth. Such events are referred to as
somatic pathogenic variants. Because only a subset of cells in the body
are affected, the change is said to be mosaic. The phenotypes caused by
a somatic pathogenic variant can vary but are usually milder than if all
cells were affected by the pathogenic variant. Some cancers typically
arise from cells that have been affected by multiple somatic pathogenic
variants. In germline mosaicism, the pathogenic variant occurs in a
subset of cells that ultimately produce ova or sperm. An individual
who is germline mosaic for a pathogenic variant might not have any
manifestations of the associated disorder but may pass that change
on to his or her offspring by producing ova or sperm that carry the
pathogenic variant. Children whose bodies derive from those ova or
sperm will carry the pathogenic variant in all of their cells unless the
change undergoes a rare reversion of the somatic pathogenic variant.
Recurrence of a dominantly inherited condition to apparently unaffected parents can sometimes be explained by germline mosaicism for
the dominantly transmitted variant in one of the parents.

MENDELIAN INHERITANCE

Autosomal Recessive Inheritance

Chapter 97

Patterns of Genetic
Transmission
Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee
FAMILY HISTORY AND PEDIGREE NOTATION

There are three classic forms of genetic inheritance: autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-­linked; these are referred to as mendelian inheritance forms.

Autosomal Dominant Inheritance

Autosomal dominant inheritance is determined by the presence of one
abnormal gene on one of the autosomes (chromosomes 1-­22). Autosomal genes exist in pairs, with each parent contributing one copy. In an
autosomal dominant trait, a change in one of the paired genes affects
the phenotype of an individual, even though the other copy of the gene
is functioning correctly. A phenotype can refer to a physical manifestation, a behavioral characteristic, or a difference detectable only through
laboratory tests.
The pedigree for autosomal dominant disorders demonstrates certain characteristics. These disorders show a vertical transmission
(parent-­to-­child) pattern and can appear in multiple generations (Fig.
97.5). An affected individual has a 50% chance of passing on the deleterious gene in each pregnancy and, therefore, of having a child affected
by the disorder. This is referred to as the recurrence risk for the disorder. Unaffected individuals (family members who do not manifest the

Autosomal recessive inheritance requires deleterious variants in both
copies of a gene to cause disease. Examples include cystic fibrosis
and sickle cell disease. Autosomal recessive disorders are characterized by horizontal transmission, the observation of multiple affected
members of a kindred in the same generation, but no affected family members in other generations (Fig. 97.7). They are associated with
a recurrence risk of 25% for carrier parents who have had a previous affected child. Male and female offspring are equally likely to be
affected, although some traits exhibit differential expression between
sexes. The offspring of consanguineous parents are at increased risk for
rare, autosomal recessive traits due to the increased chance that both
parents may carry a gene affected by a deleterious variant that they
inherited from a common ancestor. Consanguinity between parents
of a child with a suspected genetic disorder implies, but certainly does
not prove, autosomal recessive inheritance. Although consanguineous
unions are uncommon in Europe and the Americas, in other parts of
the world (southern India, Japan, and the Middle East) as high as 50%
of all children may be conceived in consanguineous unions. The risk
of a genetic disorder in the offspring of a first-­cousin union (6–8%) is
about double the risk in the general population (3–4%).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

736 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Instructions:
Key should contain all information relevant to interpretation of pedigree (e.g., define fill/shading)
For clinical (non-published) pedigrees include:
a) name of proband/consultand
b) family names/initials of relatives for identification, as appropriate
c) name and title of person recording pedigree
d) historian (person relaying family history information)
e) date of intake/update
f) reason for taking pedigree (e.g., abnormal ultrasound, familial cancer, developmental delay, etc.)
g) ancestry of both sides of family
Recommended order of information placed below symbol (or to lower right)
a) age; can note year of birth (e.g., b.1978) and/or death (e.g., d. 2007)
b) evaluation (see Fig. 97.4)
c) pedigree number (e.g., I-1, I-2, I-3)
Limit identifying information to maintain confidentiality and privacy
Male

Female

Gender not
specified

1. Individual
b.1925

30 y

4 mo

2. Affected individual

Comments
Assign gender by phenotype (see text for
disorders of sex development, etc.).
Do not write age in symbol.
Key/legend used to define shading or other
fill (e.g., hatches, dots, etc.). Use only when
individual is clinically affected.

With 2 conditions, the individual’s symbol can be
partitioned accordingly, each segment shaded with a
different fill and defined in legend.
3. Multiple individuals,
number known

5

5

5

4. Multiple individuals,
number unknown or
unstated

n

n

n

5. Deceased individual
d. 35

d. 4 mo

d. 60’s

Number of siblings written inside symbol.
(Affected individuals should not be grouped.)
“n” used in place of “?”.

Indicate cause of death if known. Do not use
a cross (†) to indicate death to avoid
confusion with evaluation positive ().

6. Consultand

Individual(s) seeking genetic
counseling/testing.

7. Proband

An affected family member coming to
medical attention independent of other
family members.

P

P

8. Stillbirth (SB)

Include gestational age and karyotype,
if known.
SB
28 wk

SB
30 wk

SB
34 wk

P

P

P

LMP: 7/1/2007
47,XY,+21

20 wk
46, XX

9. Pregnancy (P)

Pregnancies not carried to term

Affected

Gestational age and karyotype below
symbol. Light shading can be used for
affected; define in key/legend.

Unaffected

10. Spontaneous abortion (SAB)
17 wks female
cystic hygroma

11. Termination of pregnancy (TOP)

10 wks

If gestational age/gender known, write below
symbol. Key/legend used to define shading.
Other abbreviations (e.g., TAB, VTOP) not
used for sake of consistency.

18 wks
47, XY,18

12. Ectopic pregnancy (ECT)

Write ECT below symbol.
ECT

Fig. 97.1 Common pedigree symbols, definitions, and abbreviations. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human
pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns.
2008;17:424–433.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission
1. Definitions

Comments

1. relationship line

If possible, male partner should be to left of female partner on
relationship line.

3. sibship line

2. line of descent

737

Siblings should be listed from left to right in birth order (oldest
to youngest).

4. individual’s line

2. Relationship line (horizontal)
a. Relationships

A break in a relationship line
indicates the relationship no
longer exists. Multiple previous
partners do not need to be
shown if they do not affect
genetic assessment.

b. Consanguinity

If degree of relationship not obvious from pedigree, it should be stated
(e.g., third cousins) above relationship line.

3. Line of descent (vertical or diagonal)
a. Genetic

- Multiple
gestation

Biologic parents shown.

Monozygotic

Dizygotic

Unknown

Trizygotic

?

- Family history
not available/
known for
individual

?

?

Indicate reason, if known.

- No children
by choice
or reason
unknown

or
tubal

vasectomy

- Infertility

Indicate reason, if known.

or
azoospermia

b. Adoption

The horizontal line indicating
monozygosity is placed
between the individual’s line
and not between each
symbol. An asterisk (*) can
be used if zygosity proven.

in

endometriosis

out

by relative

Brackets used for all
adoptions. Adoptive and
biological parents denoted
by dashed and solid lines
of descent, respectively.

Fig. 97.2 Pedigree line definitions. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree nomenclature: update and
assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424–433.)

Every individual probably carries several rare, deleterious recessive
pathogenic sequence variants. Because most pathogenic variants carried in the general population occur at a very low frequency, it does
not make economic sense to screen the entire population to identify
the small number of persons who carry these variants. These variants typically remain undetected unless an affected child is born to a
couple who both carry pathogenic variants affecting the same gene.
However, in some genetic isolates (small populations isolated by
geography, religion, culture, or language), certain rare recessive pathogenic variants are much more common than in the general population. Even though there may be no known consanguinity, couples
from these genetic isolates have a greater chance of sharing pathogenic
alleles inherited from a common ancestor. Screening programs have
been developed among some such groups to detect persons who carry
common disease-­causing variants and, therefore, are at increased risk
for having affected children.

A variety of autosomal recessive conditions are more common
among Ashkenazi Jews than in the general population. Couples of
Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry should be offered prenatal or preconception screening for Gaucher disease type one (carrier rate 1:14),
cystic fibrosis (1:25), Tay-­Sachs disease (1:25), familial dysautonomia (1:30), Canavan disease (1:40), glycogen storage disease type
1A (1:71), maple syrup urine disease (1:81), Fanconi anemia type C
(1:89), Niemann-­Pick disease type A (1:90), Bloom syndrome (1:100),
mucolipidosis IV (1:120), and possibly neonatal familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.
The prevalence of carriers of certain autosomal recessive variants
in some larger populations is unusually high. In such cases, heterozygote advantage is postulated. The carrier frequencies of sickle cell
disease in the African population and of cystic fibrosis in the northern European population are much higher than would be expected
from the rate of new pathogenic variants. In these populations,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

738 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Instructions:
D represents egg or sperm donor
S represents surrogate (gestational carrier)
If the woman is both the ovum donor and a surrogate, in the interest of genetic assessment, she will only be
referred to as a donor (e.g., 4 and 5); the pregnancy symbol and its line of descent are positioned below the
woman who is carrying the pregnancy
Available family history should be noted on the gamete donor and/or gestational carrier
Possible Reproductive Scenarios

Comments

1. Sperm donor

Couple in which woman is carrying
pregnancy using donor sperm. No
relationship line is shown between the
woman carrying the pregnancy and the
sperm donor.

D

D
or
P

2. Ovum donor

P

Couple in which woman is carrying
pregnancy using a donor egg and partner’s
sperm. The line of descent from the birth
mother is solid because there is a biologic
relationship that may affect the fetus (e.g.,
teratogens).

D

P

3. Surrogate only

Couple whose gametes are used to
impregnate a woman (surrogate) who
carries the pregnancy. The line of descent
from the surrogate is solid because there is
a biological relationship that may affect the
fetus (e.g., teratogens).

S

P
4. Surrogate ovum
donor

a)

b)
D

D

Couple in which male partner’s sperm is
used to inseminate (a) an unrelated woman
or (b) a sister who is carrying the pregnancy
for the couple.

or
P
5. Planned
adoption

P

D

D

Couple contracts with a woman to carry a
pregnancy using ovum of the woman
carrying the pregnancy and donor sperm.

P

Fig. 97.3 Assisted reproductive technology symbols and definitions. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree
nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424–433.)

heterozygous carriers may have had an advantage in terms of survival
and reproduction over noncarriers. In sickle cell disease, the carrier
state is thought to confer some resistance to malaria. In cystic fibrosis, the carrier state has been postulated to confer resistance to cholera or enteropathogenic Escherichia coli infections. Population-­based
carrier screening for cystic fibrosis is recommended for persons of
northern European and Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry, and population-­
based screening for sickle cell disease is recommended for persons of
African ancestry.
If the frequency of an autosomal recessive disease is known, the frequency of the heterozygote or carrier state can be calculated from the
Hardy-­Weinberg formula:
p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1

where p is the frequency of one of a pair of alleles and q is the frequency of the other. For example, if the frequency of cystic fibrosis
among White Americans is one in 2,500 (p2), then the frequency of the

heterozygote (2pq) can be calculated: If p2 = 1/2,500, then p = 1/50 and
q = 49/50; 2pq = 2 × (1/50) × (49/50) = 98/2,500, or 3.92%.

Pseudodominant Inheritance

Pseudodominant inheritance refers to the observation of apparent
dominant (parent to child) transmission of a known autosomal recessive disorder (Fig. 97.8). This occurs when a homozygous affected
individual has a partner who is a heterozygous carrier. This is most
likely to occur for relatively common recessive traits within a population, such as sickle cell anemia or nonsyndromic autosomal recessive hearing loss caused by deleterious variants in GJB2, the gene that
encodes connexin 26.

X-­Linked Inheritance

X-­linked inheritance describes the inheritance pattern of most disorders caused by deleterious changes in genes located on the X chromosome (Fig. 97.9). In X-­liked disorders, males are more commonly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

739

Instructions:
E is used for evaluation to represent clinical and/or test information on the pedigree
a. E is to be defined in key/legend
b. If more than one evaluation, use subscript (E1, E2, E3) and define in key
c. Test results should be put in parentheses or defined in key/legend
A symbol is shaded only when an individual is clinically symptomatic
For linkage studies, haplotype information is written below the individual. The haplotype of interest
should be on left and appropriately highlighted
Repetitive sequences, trinucleotides, and expansion numbers are written with affected allele first and
placed in parentheses
If variant known, identify in parentheses
Definition

Symbol

Scenario
Woman with negative echocardiogram.

1. Documented evaluation (*)
Use only if examined/evaluated
by you or your research/clinical
team or if the outside evaluation
has been reviewed and verified.

*

*
E (echo)

2. Carrier—not likely to manifest
disease regardless of
inheritance pattern

Male carrier of Tay-Sachs disease by patient
report (* not used because results not
verified).

3. Asymptomatic/presymptomatic
carrier—clinically unaffected at
this time but could later exhibit
symptoms

Woman age 25 with negative mammogram
and positive BRCA1 DNA test.
25 y

*

E1 (mammogram)
E2 (5385insC BRCA1)

4. Uninformative study (u)

Man age 25 with normal physical exam and
uninformative DNA test for Huntington
disease (E2).

Eu

*

25 y
E1 (physical exam)
E2u (36n/18n)

Individual with cystic fibrosis and positive
variant study; only one variant has
currently been identified.
E('F508)

5. Affected individual with
positive evaluation (E+)
E+

Eu

*

E('F508/u)

10 week male fetus with a trisomy
18 karyotype.

P
10 wk *
E(CVS)
47,XY,18

Fig. 97.4 Pedigree symbols of genetic evaluation and testing information. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human
pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns.
2008;17:424–433.)

I

I

1

1

III

1

2

2

3

3

4

2

2

3

4

1

2

2
II

II

1

4

5

5

1

6

6

7

Fig. 97.5 Autosomal dominant pedigree. Pedigree showing typical

inheritance of a form of achondroplasia (FGFR3) inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Black, Affected patients.

III

Fig. 97.6 Incomplete penetrance. This family segregates a familial
cancer syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis. Individual II.3 is an
obligate carrier (arrow), but there are no findings to suggest the disorder. This disorder is nonpenetrant in this individual. Black, Affected
patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

740 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Fig. 97.7 Autosomal recessive pedigree with parental consanguinity.
Central dot, Carriers; Black, affected patients.

trait or the presence of a sex chromosome abnormality (45,X or
46,XY female) but more commonly from skewed or nonrandom
X-­inactivation. X chromosome inactivation occurs early in development and involves the random and irreversible inactivation of
most genes on one X chromosome in female cells (Fig. 97.10). In
some cases, a preponderance of cells inactivates the same X chromosome, resulting in phenotypic expression of an X-­linked pathogenic variant if it resides on the active chromosome. This can occur
because of chance, selection against cells that have inactivated the
X chromosome carrying the normal gene, or an X chromosome
abnormality that results in inactivation of the X chromosome carrying the normal gene.
In some X-­linked disorders, both hemizygous males and heterozygous females who carry an affected X-­linked gene have similar phenotypic manifestations. In these cases, an affected male will
have a 50% chance of having an affected daughter and a 50% chance
of having an unaffected son in each pregnancy, whereas half the
male and female offspring of an affected mother will be affected
(Fig. 97.11). Some X-­linked conditions are lethal in a high percentage of males, such as incontinentia pigmenti. In such cases
the pedigree typically shows only affected females and an overall
female/male ratio of 2:1, with an increased number of miscarriages
(Fig. 97.12).

Y-­LINKED INHERITANCE

There are few Y-­linked traits. These demonstrate only male-­to-­male
transmission, and only males are affected (Fig. 97.13). Most Y-­linked
genes are related to male sex determination and reproduction and are
associated with infertility. Therefore it is rare to see familial transmission of a Y-­linked disorder. However, advances in assisted reproductive
technologies might make it possible to have familial transmission of
male infertility.

= GJB2 carrier

Fig. 97.8 Pseudodominant inheritance. Black, Affected (deaf); central
dot shows carrier who is asymptomatic (unaffected).

I

II

INHERITANCE ASSOCIATED WITH
PSEUDOAUTOSOMAL REGIONS

There are pseudoautosomal regions on the X and Y chromosomes.
Because these regions are made up of homologous sequences of
nucleotides, genes that are located in these regions are present in
equal numbers among both males and females. SHOX is one of the
best-­characterized disease genes located in these regions. Heterozygous SHOX pathogenic variants cause Leri-­Weil dyschondrosteosis,
a rare skeletal dysplasia that involves bilateral bowing of the forearms
with dislocations of the ulna at the wrist and generalized short stature.
Homozygous SHOX pathogenic variants cause the much more severe
Langer mesomelic dwarfism.

DIGENIC INHERITANCE
III

IV

3

2

5

3

Fig. 97.9 Pedigree demonstrating X-­linked recessive inheritance. Central
dot, Carriers; black, affected patients.

affected than females. Female carriers of these disorders are generally
unaffected, or if affected, they are affected more mildly than males.
In each pregnancy, female carriers have a 25% chance of having an
affected son, a 25% chance of having a carrier daughter, and a 50%
chance of having a child that does not inherit the mutated X-­linked
gene. Because affected males pass their X chromosome to all their
daughters and their Y chromosome to all their sons, they have a 50%
chance of having a daughter who is a carrier. Male-­to-­male transmission excludes X-­linked inheritance but is seen with autosomal dominant and Y-­linked inheritance.
A female occasionally exhibits signs of an X-­linked trait similar
to a male. This occurs rarely from homozygosity for an X-­linked

Digenic inheritance explains the occasional occurrence of retinitis
pigmentosa (RP) in children of parents who each carry a pathogenic
variant in a different RP-­associated gene (Fig. 97.14). Both parents
have normal vision, as would be expected, but their offspring who
are double heterozygotes—having inherited both variants—develop
RP. Digenic pedigrees can exhibit characteristics of both autosomal
dominant (vertical transmission) and autosomal recessive inheritance (one in four recurrence risk). A couple in which the two unaffected partners are carriers for variants in two different RP-­associated
genes that show digenic inheritance have a one in four risk of having an affected child, similar to what is seen in autosomal recessive
inheritance. However, their affected children, and affected children
in subsequent generations, have a one in four risk of transmitting
both variants to their offspring, who would be affected (vertical
transmission).

PSEUDOGENETIC INHERITANCE AND FAMILIAL
CLUSTERING

Sometimes nongenetic causes of a particular disease in multiple family members can produce a pattern that mimics genetic transmission.
These nongenetic factors can include identifiable environmental factors, teratogenic exposures, or undetermined or undefined factors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

741

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

Fig. 97.10 X-­inactivation. Black marks the active X chromosome. Color of the cell represents its active X chromosome is paternally (Xp, blue) or
maternally (Xm, pink) derived.

I

II

III

IV

Fig. 97.11 Pedigree pattern demonstrating X-­linked dominant inher-

itance. Black, Affected patients. Note there is no father-­to-­son transmission in this situation, and hemizygosity (i.e., X-­linked gene in a male)
is not lethal. In some X-­linked dominant conditions, X-­linked males
have a more severe phenotype and might not survive. In that case, only
females manifest the disease (see Fig. 97.12).

Fig. 97.12 Pedigree of an X-­linked dominant disorder with male
lethality, such as incontinentia pigmenti. Black, Affected patients.

Examples of identifiable factors might include multiple siblings
in a family having asthma because of exposure to cigarette smoke
from their parents or having failure to thrive, developmental delay,
and unusual facial appearance caused by exposure to alcohol during
pregnancy.
In some cases, the disease is sufficiently common in the general
population that some familial clustering occurs simply by chance.
Breast cancer affects 11% of all women, and it is possible that several
women in a family will develop breast cancer even in the absence of
a specific genetic predisposition. However, hereditary breast cancer
associated with pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 should be
suspected in any individual who has a personal history of breast cancer with onset before age 50, early-­onset breast and ovarian cancer
at any age, bilateral or multifocal breast cancer, a family history of
breast cancer or breast and ovarian cancer consistent with autosomal
dominant inheritance, or a personal or family history of male breast

Fig. 97.13 Y-­linked inheritance. Black, Affected patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

742 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Aa
BB

AA
BB

Aa
BB

AA
Bb

AA
Bb

Aa
Bb

Aa
Bb

Aa
BB

AA
BB

AA
Bb

AA
BB

Fig. 97.14 Digenic pedigree. Here, the disease alleles are a and b

and they reside on distinct genetic loci or genes. For a person to have
the disease, heterozygosity for variant alleles in both genes (A/a; B/b) is
required. Black, Affected patients.

heart, and liver (see Chapters 107.4, 409, 638.2, and 651.4; Fig. 97.16).
Common manifestations include developmental delay, seizures, cardiac dysfunction, decreased muscle strength and tone, and hearing and
vision problems.
Mitochondrial diseases can be highly variable in their clinical
manifestations. This is partly because cells can contain multiple
mitochondria, each bearing several copies of the mitochondrial
genome. Thus a cell can have a mixture of normal and abnormal
mitochondrial genomes, which is referred to as heteroplasmy. In
contrast, homoplasmy refers to a state in which all copies of the
mitochondrial genome carry the same sequence variant. Unequal
segregation of mitochondria carrying normal and abnormal
genomes and replicative advantage can result in varying degrees
of heteroplasmy in the cells of an affected individual, including
the individual ova of an affected female. Because of this, a mother
may be asymptomatic and yet have children who are severely
affected. The level of heteroplasmy at which disease symptoms
typically appear can also vary based on the type of mitochondrial
variant.
Detection of variants in the mitochondrial genome may require
sampling of the affected tissue for DNA analysis. In some tissues, such
as blood, testing for mitochondrial DNA variants may be inadequate
because the variant may be found primarily in affected tissues such as
muscle (Fig. 97.17). Growth and differentiation factor 15 (GDF-­15)
and blood lactate levels are screening tests for mitochondrial disorders.
GDF-­15 is only accurate in children ≥1 year of age and in the absence
of heart, liver, or renal disease.

Triplet Repeat Expansion Disorders

Fig. 97.15 Pedigree of a mitochondrial disorder, exhibiting maternal
inheritance. Black, Affected patients.

cancer. In other cases, clustering within a family may be caused by
undefined genetic factors or unidentified pathogenic sequence variants (nuclear or mitochondrial).

NONTRADITIONAL INHERITANCE

Some genetic disorders are inherited in a manner that does not follow classical mendelian patterns. Nontraditional inheritance is seen
in mitochondrial disorders, triplet repeat expansion diseases, and
imprinting defects.

Mitochondrial Inheritance

An individual’s mitochondrial genome is entirely derived from the
mother because sperm contain relatively few mitochondria, which
are degraded after fertilization. It follows that mitochondrial inheritance is, essentially, maternal inheritance. A female with a mitochondrially inherited genetic disorder can have affected offspring of
either sex, but an affected father cannot pass on the disease to his offspring (Fig. 97.15). Mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants are often
deletions or point pathogenic variants. Overall, one person in 400
has a maternally inherited pathogenic mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variant (see Chapter 108). In individual families, mitochondrial
inheritance may be difficult to distinguish from autosomal dominant
or X-­linked inheritance, but in many cases, the sex of the transmitting and nontransmitting parents can suggest a mitochondrial basis
(Table 97.1).
Mitochondria are the cell’s suppliers of energy; the organs that are
most affected by the presence of abnormal mitochondria are those
that have the greatest energy requirements, such as the brain, muscle,

Triplet repeat expansion disorders are distinguished by the special
dynamic nature of the disease-­causing variant. Triplet repeat expansion disorders include fragile X syndrome, myotonic dystrophy,
Huntington disease, and spinocerebellar ataxias (Table 97.2 and
Fig. 97.18). These disorders are caused by expansion in the number of 3-­bp repeats. The fragile X gene, FMR1, normally has 5-­40
CGG triplets. An error in replication can result in expansion of that
number to a level in the gray zone between 41 and 58 repeats or to
a level referred to as a prepathogenic variant, which comprises 59-­
200 repeats. Some prepathogenic variant carriers, more often males,
develop fragile X–associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) as
adults. Female prepathogenic variant carriers are at risk for fragile X–associated primary ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI). Persons,
especially females, with a prepathogenic variant are also at risk for
having the repeat expand further in subsequent meiosis, thus crossing into the range of a full pathogenic variant (>200 repeats) in
offspring. With this number of repeats, the FMR1 gene becomes
hypermethylated, and protein production is lost.
Some triplet expansions associated with other genes can cause
disease through a mechanism other than decreased protein production. In Huntington disease, the expansion causes the gene product to have a new, toxic effect on the neurons of the basal ganglia.
For most triplet repeat disorders, there is a clinical correlation to
the size of the expansion, with a greater expansion causing more
severe symptoms and having an earlier age of disease onset. The
observation of increasing severity of disease and early age at onset
in subsequent generations is termed genetic anticipation and is a
defining characteristic of many triplet repeat expansion disorders
(Fig. 97.19).

Genetic Imprinting

The two copies of most autosomal genes are functionally equivalent.
However, in some cases, only one copy of a gene is transcribed, and
the second copy is silenced. This gene silencing is typically associated with methylation of DNA, which is an epigenetic modification; it does not change the nucleotide sequence of the DNA (Fig.
97.20). In imprinting, gene expression depends on the parent of
origin of the chromosome (see Chapter 99.7). Imprinting disorders
result from an imbalance of active copies of a given gene, which can
occur for several reasons. Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

743

Table 97.1  Representative Examples of Disorders Caused by Pathogenic Variants in Mitochondrial DNA and Their Inheritance
DISEASE

PHENOTYPE

MOST FREQUENT PATHOGENIC
VARIANT IN mtDNA MOLECULE

HOMOPLASMY vs
HETEROPLASMY

INHERITANCE

Leber hereditary
optic neuropathy

Rapid optic nerve atrophy, leading
to blindness in young adult life;
sex bias approximately 50%
males with visual loss, only 10%
females

Substitution p.Arg340His in ND1
gene of complex I of electron
transport chain; other complex
I missense pathogenic variants

Homoplasmic (usually)

Maternal

NARP, Leigh
disease

Neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis
pigmentosa, developmental
delay, intellectual disability lactic
academia

Point pathogenic variants in ATPase
subunit six gene

Heteroplasmic

Maternal

MELAS

Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy,
lactic acidosis, and strokelike
episodes; may manifest only as
diabetes mellitus or deafness

Point pathogenic variant in tRNALeu

Heteroplasmic

Maternal

MERRF

Myoclonic epilepsy, ragged red
fibers in muscle, ataxia,
sensorineural deafness

Point pathogenic variant in tRNALys

Heteroplasmic

Maternal

Deafness

Progressive sensorineural
deafness, often induced by
aminoglycoside antibiotics

m.1555A>G pathogenic variant in
12S rRNA

Homoplasmic

Maternal

Nonsyndromic sensorineural
deafness

m.7445A>G pathogenic variant in
12S rRNA

Homoplasmic

Maternal

Chronic progressive
external
ophthalmoplegia
(CPEO)

Progressive weakness of extraocular
muscles, cardiomyopathy,
ptosis, heart block, ataxia, retinal
pigmentation, diabetes

The common MELAS point
pathogenic variant in tRNALys;
large deletions similar to KSS

Heteroplasmic

Maternal if
point
pathogenic
variants

Pearson syndrome

Pancreatic insufficiency,
pancytopenia, lactic acidosis

Large deletions

Heteroplasmic

Sporadic,
somatic
pathogenic
variants

Kearns-­Sayre
syndrome (KSS)

PEO of early onset with heart
block, retinal pigmentation

5-­kb large deletion

Heteroplasmic

Sporadic,
somatic
pathogenic
variants

mtDNA, Mitochondrial DNA; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; tRNA, transfer RNA.
From Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: p. 246.

two distinct disorders associated with developmental impairment,
are caused by microdeletions of chromosome 15q11-­12. The microdeletion in Prader-­Willi syndrome is always on the paternally
derived chromosome 15, whereas in Angelman syndrome it is on
the maternal copy. UBE3A is the gene responsible for Angelman
syndrome. The paternal copy of UBE3A is transcriptionally silenced
in the brain, but the maternal copy continues to be transcribed. If an
individual has a maternally derived deletion, an insufficient amount
of UBE3A protein is produced in the brain, resulting in the neurologic deficits seen in Angelman syndrome.
Uniparental disomy (UPD), the rare occurrence of a child
inheriting both copies of a chromosome from the same parent, is
another genetic mechanism that can cause Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes. Inheriting both chromosomes 15 from the mother
is functionally the same as deletion of the paternal 15q12 region
and results in Prader-­Willi syndrome. Approximately 30% of cases
of Prader-­Willi syndrome are caused by maternal UPD15, whereas
paternal UPD15 accounts for only 3% of Angelman syndrome (see
Chapter 99.7). Pathogenic variants in UBE3A account for ∼11% of
patients with Angelman syndrome and result in familial transmission. The least common cause is a pathogenic variant affecting the
imprinting center, which results in an inability to correctly imprint

UBE3A. In a mother, inability to reset the imprinting on her paternally inherited chromosome 15 imprint results in a 50% risk of
passing on an incorrectly methylated copy of UBE3A to a child, who
would then develop Angelman syndrome.
Other imprinted regions of clinical interest include the short arm
of chromosome 11, where the genes for Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome and nesidioblastosis map, and the long arm of chromosome
seven with maternal UPD of 7q being associated with some cases of
idiopathic short stature and Russell-­Silver syndrome.
Imprinting of a gene can occur during gametogenesis or early
embryonic development (reprogramming). Genes can become
inactive or active by various mechanisms including DNA methylation or demethylation or histone acetylation or deacetylation, with
different patterns of (de)methylation noted on paternal or maternal imprintable chromosome regions. Some genes demonstrate
tissue-­specific imprinting (see Fig. 97.20). There is a small but
increased incidence of imprinting disorders, specifically Beckwith-­
Wiedemann and Angelman syndrome, following assisted reproductive technologies such as in vitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic
sperm injection. The overall incidence of these disorders in children conceived using assisted reproductive technologies is likely
to be <1%.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

744 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Central nervous system
Encephalopathy
Strokelike episodes
Seizures and dementia
Psychosis and depression
Ataxia
Migraine
Cardiac
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Heart block
Pre-excitation syndrome
Renal
Renal tubular defects
Fanconi syndrome

Endocrine and diabetes
Diabetes mellitus
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Gonadal failure

Eye
External ophthalmoplegia
Ptosis
Cataract
Pigmentary retinopathy
Optic atrophy
Hearing
Bilateral sensorineural deafness

Gastrointestinal
Dysphagia
Pseudo-obstruction
Constipation
Hepatic failure

Peripheral nervous system
Myopathy
Axonal sensorimotor neuropathy

Fig. 97.16 The range of affected tissues and clinical phenotypes associated with pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). (Modified
from Chinnery PF, Turnbull DM. Mitochondrial DNA and disease. Lancet. 1999;345:SI17–SI21.)

MULTIFACTORIAL AND POLYGENIC INHERITANCE

Multifactorial inheritance refers to traits that are caused by a combination of inherited, environmental, and stochastic factors (Fig.
97.21). Multifactorial traits differ from polygenic inheritance, which
refers to traits that result from the additive effects of multiple genes.
Multifactorial traits segregate within families but do not exhibit
a consistent or recognizable inheritance pattern. Characteristics
include the following:
• There is a similar rate of recurrence among all first-­degree relatives
(parents, siblings, offspring of affected child). It is unusual to find a
substantial increase in risk for relatives related more distantly than
second degree to the index case.
• The risk of recurrence is related to the incidence of the disease.
• Some disorders have a sex predilection, as indicated by an unequal
male:female incidence. Pyloric stenosis, for example, is more common in males, whereas congenital dislocation of the hips is more
common in females. With an altered sex ratio, the risk is higher for
the relatives of an index case whose gender is less often affected than
relatives of an index case of the more frequently affected gender. The
risk to the son of an affected female with infantile pyloric stenosis
is 18%, compared with the 5% risk for the son of an affected male.
An affected female presumably has a greater genetic susceptibility,
which can be passed on to offspring.

• The likelihood that both identical twins will be affected with the
same malformation is <100% but much greater than the chance that
both members of a nonidentical twin pair will be affected. This contrasts with the pattern seen in mendelian inheritance, in which identical twins almost always share fully penetrant genetic disorders.
• The risk of recurrence is increased when multiple family members
are affected. A simple example is that the risk of recurrence for unilateral cleft lip and palate is 4% for a couple with one affected child
and increases to 9% with two affected children. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between a multifactorial and mendelian etiology
in families with multiple affected individuals.
• The risk of recurrence may be greater when the disorder is more
severe. For example, an infant who has long-­segment Hirschsprung
disease has a greater chance of having an affected sibling than the
infant who has short-­segment Hirschsprung disease.
There are two types of multifactorial traits. One exhibits continuous
variation, with “normal” individuals falling within a statistical range—
often defined as having a value two standard deviations (SDs) above
and/or below the mean—and “abnormals” falling outside that range.
Examples include such traits as intelligence, blood pressure, height,
and head circumference. For many of these traits, offspring values can
be estimated based on a modified average of their parental values, with
nutritional and environmental factors playing an important role.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

745

Patients with clinical suspicion of mitochondrial RC disorders
Common mtDNA variants

positive

negative
Blood

•Determine heteroplasmy
•Family member studies

Myopathy

Leigh

•PDH
•COX assembly genes
•CI subunits
•CI assembly genes

•TK2
•ANT1

EncephaloMNGIE
Cardiomyopathy
•SCO2
•ANT1

Encephaloand/or
Hepatopathy

•DGUOK
•POLG
•MPV17
•SCO1
•BCS1L
•SUCLA2

•TP

Encephalo- PEO
Nephropathy

Intractable
Seizures

•POLG

•COX10
Muscle,
Liver, or
Skin

•POLG
•ANT1
•TWINKLE

negative

positive

muscle, liver, skin
•Family member studies

ETC

negative
•mtDNA tRNA genes
•Mito genome sequencing
•mtDNA deletions by PCR

Isolated
Complex
Deficiency

Generalized
Complex
Deficiency

Proliferated
or
Not Deficient

positive

mtDNA
content

negative

•Depletion
genes
•PDH

negative

negative
Cannot confirm
diagnosis

high or
normal
•mtDNA tRNA
genes
•Mito genome
sequencing

•Sequence
complex
subunits
•Sequence
assembly
genes

negative

•POLG
•DGUOK
•TK2
•TP
•TWINKLE
•ANT1
•MPV17
•SUCLA2

positive

positive

positive

depletion

•Family member studies

Fig. 97.17 Clinical algorithm for genetic diagnostic testing of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA (nDNA) genes in patients suspected
of mitochondrial disorders (Baylor College of Medicine, Mitochondrial Diagnostics Laboratory). RC, Respiratory chain; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy; PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; CI, respiratory complex I; ETC, electron transport chain; PCR, polymerase chain reaction. (From Haas RH, Parikh S, Falk MJ, et al. The in-­depth evaluation of suspected mitochondrial
disease. Mol Genet Metab. 2008;94:16–37.)

Table 97.2  Diseases Associated with Polynucleotide Repeat Expansions

DISEASE

DESCRIPTION

REPEAT
SEQUENCE

NORMAL
RANGE

ABNORMAL
RANGE

PARENT IN WHOM
EXPANSION
USUALLY OCCURS

LOCATION OF
EXPANSION

CATEGORY 1
Huntington
disease

Loss of motor control,
dementia, affective disorder

CAG

6-­34

36-­100 or more

More often through
father

Exon

Spinal and bulbar
muscular atrophy

Adult-­onset motor-­neuron
disease associated with
androgen insensitivity

CAG

11-­34

40-­62

More often through
father

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 1

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria,
dysmetria

CAG

6-­39

41-­81

More often through
father

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 2

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria

CAG

15-­29

35-­59

—

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type three
(Machado-­Joseph
disease)

Dystonia, distal muscular
atrophy, ataxia, external
ophthalmoplegia

CAG

13-­36

68-­79

More often through
father

Exon

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

746 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 97.2  Diseases Associated with Polynucleotide Repeat Expansions—cont’d

DISEASE

DESCRIPTION

REPEAT
SEQUENCE

NORMAL
RANGE

ABNORMAL
RANGE

PARENT IN WHOM
EXPANSION
USUALLY OCCURS

LOCATION OF
EXPANSION

CATEGORY 1
Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 6

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria,
nystagmus

CAG

4-­16

21-­27

—

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 7

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria,
retinal degeneration

CAG

7-­35

38-­200

More often through
father

—

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 17

Progressive ataxia, dementia,
bradykinesia, dysmetria

CAG

29-­42

47-­55

—

Exon

Dentatorubral-­
pallidoluysian
atrophy/Haw
River syndrome

Cerebellar atrophy, ataxia,
myoclonic epilepsy,
choreoathetosis, dementia

CAG

7-­25

49-­88

More often through
father

Exon

Short stature, joint laxity,
degenerative joint disease

GAC

5

6-­7

—

Exon

Oculopharyngeal
muscular
dystrophy

Proximal limb weakness,
dysphagia, ptosis

GCG

6

7-­13

—

Exon

Cleidocranial
dysplasia

Short stature, open skull
sutures with bulging
calvaria, clavicular hypoplasia,
shortened fingers, dental
anomalies

GCG, GCT,
GCA

17

27 (expansion
observed in
one family)

—

Exon

Synpolydactyly

Polydactyly and syndactyly

GCG, GCT,
GCA

15

22-­25

—

Exon

CATEGORY 3
Myotonic
dystrophy (DM1;
chromosome 19)

Muscle loss, cardiac
arrhythmia, cataracts,
frontal balding

CTG

5-­37

100 to several
thousand

Either parent, but
expansion to
congenital form
through mother

3′ untranslated
region

Myotonic
dystrophy (DM2;
chromosome 3)

Muscle loss, cardiac
arrhythmia, cataracts,
frontal balding

CCTG

<75

75-­11,000

—

3′ untranslated
region

Friedreich ataxia

Progressive limb ataxia,
dysarthria, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, pyramidal
weakness in legs

GAA

7-­2

200-­900 or
more

Autosomal recessive
inheritance, so
disease alleles
are inherited from
both parents

Intron

Fragile X syndrome
(FRAXA)

Intellectual impairment,
large ears and jaws,
macroorchidism in males

CGG

6-­52

200-­2,000 or
more

Exclusively through
mother

5′ untranslated
region

Fragile site (FRAXE)

Mild intellectual impairment

GCC

6-­35

>200

More often through
mother

5′ untranslated
region

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 8

Adult-­onset ataxia, dysarthria,
nystagmus

CTG

16-­37

107-­127

More often through
mother

3′ untranslated
region

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 10

Ataxia and seizures

ATTCT

12-­16

800-­4,500

More often through
father

Intron

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 12

Ataxia, eye movement
disorders; variable age at
onset

CAG

7-­28

66-­78

—

5′ untranslated
region

Progressive
myoclonic
epilepsy type 1

Juvenile-­onset seizures,
myoclonus, dementia

12-­bp repeat
motif

2-­3

30-­75

Autosomal recessive
inheritance, so
transmitted by
both parents

5′ untranslated
region

CATEGORY 2
Pseudoachondroplasia, multiple
epiphyseal
dysplasia

From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, White, RL. Medical Genetics, 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2006: p. 82.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

59

stop

AUG

pre-mRNA

747

intron

59 UTR
(CGG)n

exon

intron

39 UTR

(GAA)n

(CCUG)n

(CAG)n

(CUG)n

(CCTG)n≥75
Myotonic
dystrophy 2

(CAG)n≥40
Huntington
disease

(CTG)n≥50
Myotonic
dystrophy 1

39

(CGG)n>200
Fragile X
syndrome

(CGG)n60 to 200
Fragile X
tremor/ataxia
syndrome

(GAA)n≥200
Friedreich
ataxia

Transcriptional
silencing
= loss-offunction
variant

2 to 5-fold increase
in FMR1 mRNA
= ? gain-ofRNA function

Impaired
transcriptional
elongation
= loss of
frataxin function

Expanded polyglutamine
tracts in the huntingtin
protein confer novel
properties on the protein

Expanded CUG
repeats in the
RNA confer novel
properties
on the RNA

Loss of
RNA binding
= impaired
translational
repression of
target RNAs

Neuronal
intranuclear
inclusions

Increased Fe
in mitochondria,
reduced heme
synthesis,
reduced activity
of Fe-S complex
containing proteins

Increased and/or
promiscuous protein:protein
interactions with transcription
factors → loss of their function

Expanded CUG
repeats bind increased
amounts of RNA-binding
proteins → impaired RNA
splicing of key proteins

Fig. 97.18 The locations of the trinucleotide repeat expansions and the sequence of each trinucleotide in five representative trinucleotide repeat
diseases, shown on a schematic of a generic pre–messenger RNA (mRNA). The minimal number of repeats in the DNA sequence of the affected
gene associated with the disease is also indicated, as well as the effect of the expansion on the mutant RNA or protein. (From Nussbaum RL, McInnes
RR, Willard HF, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; based partly on an unpublished figure from
John A. Phillips III, Vanderbilt University.)

55 yr

48 yr

39 yr

37 yr

50 yr

40 yr

Fig. 97.19 Myotonic dystrophy pedigree illustrating genetic anticipation. In this case the age at onset for family members affected with an autosomal dominant disease is lower in more recent generations. Black, Affected patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

748 Part VIII u Human Genetics

T

G
C

A

T

T

G
A

T
C

T

T

T

G
C

A

T

T

G
A

Individual I

T
C

T

Individual II
T

Fig. 97.20 Tissue-­specific DNA methylation and epigenetic heterogeneity among individuals. A subset of the DNA methylation patterns within a

cell is characteristic of that cell type. Cell type–specific and tissue-­specific DNA methylation patterns are illustrated by organ-­to-­organ variations in
the clusters of methylated cytosine-­phosphate-­guanine bases (CpGs) within the same individual. Despite overall consistency in tissue-­specific DNA
methylation patterns, variations in these patterns exist among different individuals. Methylated CpGs are indicated by a filled circle and unmethylated CpGs by an open circle. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are indicated by the corresponding base. (Redrawn from Brena RM, Huang
THM, Plass C. Toward a human epigenome. Nat Genet. 2006;38:1359–1360.)

Nature vs nurture

Genetic load

Genetic dominant
fully penetrant
Incompletely
penetrant
Polygenic
Multifactorial
Environmental

Environmental effect

Fig. 97.21 The progressive decrease in the genetic load contribut-

ing to the development of a disease creates a smooth transition in
the distribution of illnesses on an etiologic diagram. In theory, no diseases are completely free from the influence of both genetic and environmental factors. (From Bomprezzi R, Kovanen PE, Martin R. New
approaches to investigating heterogeneity in complex traits. J Med
Genet. 2003;40:553–559.)

With other multifactorial traits, the distinction between normal and
abnormal is based on the qualitative presence or absence of a particular trait. Examples include pyloric stenosis, neural tube defects, congenital heart defects, and cleft lip and cleft palate. Such traits follow a
threshold model (see Fig. 97.15). A distribution of liability because of
genetic and nongenetic factors is postulated in the population. Individuals who exceed a threshold liability develop the trait, and those
below the threshold do not.
The balance between genetic and environmental factors is demonstrated by neural tube defects. Genetic factors are implicated by the
increased recurrence risk for parents of an affected child compared
with the general population, yet the recurrence risk is about 3%, less
than what would be expected if the trait was caused by a single, fully
penetrant pathogenic variant. The role of nongenetic environmental
factors is shown by the recurrence risk decreasing up to 87% if the
mother-­to-­be takes 4 mg of folic acid daily starting 3 months before
conception.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice

Chapter 98

Integration of Genetics
into Pediatric Practice
Brendan Lee and Nicola Brunetti-­Pierri
Genetic testing involves analyzing genetic material to obtain information related to a person’s health status using chromosomal (cytogenetic) analysis (see Chapter 99) and nucleic acid (primarily DNA but
also RNA)-­based testing.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING

Diagnostic genetic testing helps to aggregate a set of signs and symptoms (phenotype) for disease diagnosis. The list of disorders for which
specific genetic tests are available is extensive and growing. The website
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/ provides one database of reported
available tests.
Single-­
gene disorders can be tested by at least three different
approaches: linkage analysis (a classical approach now rarely used),
chromosome microarray (CMA), and direct pathogenic variant analysis,
usually by DNA sequencing (Table 98.1). Linkage analysis is used if the
responsible gene is mapped but not yet identified, or if it is impractical to find specific pathogenic variants, usually because of the large size
and large number of different pathogenic variants in some genes. CMA
can be used to detect large, multigene deletions or duplications (copy
number variations, or CNVs). In addition, with increasing resolution, single-­gene or smaller intragenic deletions or duplications can be
detected by CMA, although it is important to note that coverage of each
gene varies by array type used. Direct DNA pathogenic variant identification is readily available with the advent of the complete human genome
sequence next-­generation sequencing (NGS) tools. We also recognize the
relatively frequent co-­occurrence of multiple disorders, each caused by
distinct pathogenic variants, in patients with complex or “blended” features. This may include partial to minimal clinical manifestations in a
substantial percentage of individuals harboring pathogenic variants in
known disease genes that remain undiagnosed. The ability to simultaneously sequence hundreds to thousands of genes (via NGS approaches)
has provided insight into this complexity of disease pathogenesis.
Linkage testing involves tracking a genetic trait through a family
using closely linked polymorphic markers as a surrogate for the trait

749

(Fig. 98.1). It requires testing an extended family and is vulnerable to
several pitfalls, such as genetic recombination, genetic heterogeneity,
and incorrect diagnosis in the proband or family member. Genetic
recombination occurs between any pair of loci, with the frequency
being proportional to the distance between them. This problem is minimized using very closely linked markers and, if possible, using markers
that flank the specific gene. Genetic heterogeneity can be problematic
for a linkage-­based test if there are multiple distinct genomic loci that
can cause the same phenotype, resulting in the risk that the locus tested
for is not the one responsible for disease in the family. Incorrect diagnosis in the proband also leads to tracking the wrong gene. Linkage
testing remains useful for several genetic conditions, but it has been
superseded by the availability of DNA sequencing of either single gene,
panel, or exome sequencing.
CMAs can detect CNVs in a patient’s DNA (see Chapter 99). CMA
provides a level of genetic resolution between that available with DNA
sequencing (single nucleotide) and that available with chromosome
analysis (∼5 million base pairs). CMA can resolve deletions or duplications of several kilobases within one gene. In theory, this approach
can detect deletion and duplication pathogenic variants that would
be missed by either chromosome analysis or direct pathogenic variant testing by DNA sequencing. However, because the specific resolution and coverage of different CMA platforms can vary tremendously
for different gene regions, the sensitivity for detecting deletions and
duplications can vary for different diseases and laboratories. The highest resolution used is detection of a deletion or duplication at the single
exon level.
Direct DNA-­based pathogenic variant testing avoids the pitfalls
of linkage testing by detecting the specific gene pathogenic variant
(i.e., sequence change). The specific approach used is customized to
the biology of the gene being tested. In some disorders, one or a few
distinct pathogenic variants occur in all affected individuals and a specific assay for that variant could be used. This is the case in sickle cell
anemia, in which the same single-­base substitution occurs in everyone with the disorder. In other conditions, many possible pathogenic
variants may account for the disorder in different individuals. In cystic
fibrosis, for example, >1,000 distinct pathogenic variants have been
found in the CFTR gene. Pathogenic variant analysis is challenging
because no single technique can detect all possible pathogenic variants
(e.g., single nucleotide variation [SNV]), small (several nucleotide)
insertion-­deletions (“indels”), CNV (larger deletion or duplications),
complex structural variations (e.g., translocations, inversions, etc.),
DNA repeat expansions (e.g., variable repeat expansions), and epigenetic alterations (e.g., changes in DNA methylation without changing the underlying DNA sequence). However, with high-­throughput
DNA sequencing technology, the most frequently used approach is to

Table 98.1  Approaches for Genetic Testing
TYPE OF TESTING

RESOLUTION

ADVANTAGES

DISADVANTAGES

SAMPLE REQUIREMENTS

Linkage analysis

Depends on location of
polymorphic markers
near putative disease
gene

Possible when specific
disease-­causing genetic
pathogenic variant is not
identifiable or found

Can give only diagnostic
probability based on
likelihood of genetic
recombination between
presumed DNA
pathogenic variant and
polymorphic markers

Requires multiple
family members with
documented Mendelian
pattern of inheritance
within family

Chromosome
microarray (CMA)

Several hundred base
pairs to several
hundreds of kilobases

Able to detect small
deletion or duplications
within one or more genes

Can miss small deletions
or insertions depending
on the resolution of the
array used

Single patient sample
sufficient, but having sample
from biological parents can
help with interpretation

Direct DNA-­based
testing (e.g., DNA
sequencing)

Single–base-­pair
changes

High specificity if previously
described deleterious
pathogenic variant is
found

Can miss deletion or
duplication of a segment
of gene

Single patient sample
sufficient, but having
sample from biological
parents and siblings
(affected or unaffected) can
help with interpretation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

750 Part VIII u Human Genetics

A
Disease
gene

A 2 1
B 3 2
C 1 2

3 2
2 1
4 2

B

C
fetus
1 2
2 1
2 2

1 3
2 2
2 4

Fig. 98.1 Use of linkage analysis in prenatal diagnosis of an autoso-

mal recessive disorder. Both parents are carriers, and they have one
affected son. The numbers below the symbols indicate alleles at three
polymorphic loci: A, B, and C. Locus B resides within the disease gene.
The affected son inherited the 1-­2-­2 chromosome from his father and
the 2-­1-­2 chromosome from his mother. The fetus has inherited the
same chromosome from the father but the 3-­2-­4 chromosome from the
mother and therefore is most likely to be a carrier.

directly sequence DNA segments “captured” and amplified from DNA
isolated from peripheral blood white blood cells. The limitation of this
approach is that only amplified DNA segments are sequenced and are
usually restricted to the coding exonic regions of a gene. Because pathogenic variants sometimes occur in the noncoding and intronic regions,
failure to detect a pathogenic variant does not fully exclude the diagnosis. In addition, deleted genes or regions may not be detected.
NGS tests panels of genes that target disease symptoms (e.g., epilepsy,
brain malformations, sensorineural deafness, or skeletal dysplasias) or
the majority of the exome (exome sequencing). Genome sequencing,
where both coding and noncoding sequences are sequenced, can provide even more information. However, clinical interpretation is limited
predominantly to the coding sequences of the approximately 20,000
human genes, the “digital exome,” as it is extracted electronically from
genome data. Genome sequencing, compared with exome sequencing,
also has the advantage of providing improved detection of CNV, structural variation, and repeat expansions, although this is highly dependent on the bioinformatics algorithms used in interpretation.
With NGS, the challenge is the interpretation of enormous genetic
variation within a single individual. Direct sequencing of tens to
hundreds of genes in NGS panels offers a potentially higher sensitivity because the “depth” of read is higher without complicating high
discovery rate of variants of unknown sequences (VUS) (Fig. 98.2).
Exome and genome sequencing also offer the potential for identifying
new disease-­gene associations as well as the ability to detect clinical
presentations caused by more than one altered gene (i.e., oligogenic
phenotypes).
An important ethical consideration is the reporting of incidental
findings, whether medically actionable or not medically actionable in
a patient. For example, exome and genome sequencing may identify
pathogenic variants that cause aminoglycoside-­sensitive hearing loss,
which would be medically actionable but unrelated to the primary
indication for which the test was ordered. At the same time, the discovery of apolipoprotein E variants in a child that increase Alzheimer
disease risk susceptibility would not typically be medically actionable.
Therefore counseling for patients undergoing these tests is important so
that only requested results are reported back to the patient. Guidelines
continue to evolve for reporting of incidental findings from exome and
genome sequencing by the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics (www.acmg.net). Practice and recommendations continue
to vary among international genetic organizations revealing incidental
findings to patients, and many strongly advocate the engagement of the
patient and family in the decision. Some groups require revealing to

the patient and/or family significant diseases (actionable) with a specific and successful treatment or prevention strategy (Table 98.2).
Genetic testing is interpreted by three factors: analytic validity, clinical validity, and clinical utility. Analytical validity is test accuracy:
Does the test correctly detect the presence or absence of pathogenic
variant? Most genetic tests have a very high analytical validity assuming
human error has not occurred. Human errors are possible, and unlike
most medical tests, a genetic test is unlikely to be repeated because it
is assumed that the result will not change over time. Therefore human
errors can go undetected for long periods of time. In addition, variants
may be reinterpreted over time as our knowledge base of disease-­causing
pathogenic variants and genes increases.
Clinical validity is the degree to which the test correctly predicts
presence or absence of disease. False-­positive and false-­negative test
results can occur. False-­positive results are more likely for predictive tests than for diagnostic tests. An important contributing factor is nonpenetrance, where an individual with an at-­risk genotype
might not clinically express the condition. Another factor is the finding of a VUS. Detection of a base sequence variation in an affected
patient does not prove that it is the cause of the patient’s disorder.
Exome sequencing of an individual may identify more than 30,000
VUS and more than 3,000,000 VUS for genome sequencing. Various
lines of evidence are used to establish pathogenicity. These include
the absence of the variant in large populations of control individuals,
finding the variant in affected individuals, demonstration or inference that the variant alters the function of the gene product, noting
that the amino acid altered by the pathogenic variant is conserved
in evolution, and segregation of the variant with disease in a family. For many variants, it is possible to be certain whether the variant is pathogenic or benign, but for others it might be impossible
to definitively assign causality or noncontribution with 100% confidence. For these reasons, they are noted as VUS. Notably, interpretation of pathogenicity for a specific VUS may change over time as our
knowledge base increases, underscoring the importance of counseling
and reinterpretation.
False-­negative results reflect an inability to detect a pathogenic
variant in an affected patient. This occurs principally in disorders
with genetic heterogeneity—allelic (different pathogenic variants
occur in one causative gene) or locus (>1 gene can cause a disease)
heterogeneity. It is often difficult to detect all possible pathogenic
variants within a gene because pathogenic variants vary, both in location within the gene and in the type of variant. Direct sequencing can
miss gene deletions or rearrangements (i.e., structural variants), and
pathogenic variants may be found within noncoding sequences such
as introns or promoter. Therefore a negative DNA test does not necessarily exclude a diagnosis.
Clinical utility is the degree to which the results of a test guide clinical management. For genetic testing, clinical utility includes establishing a diagnosis that obviates the need for additional workup or guiding
surveillance or treatment. Test results may also be used as a basis for
genetic counseling. For some disorders, genetic testing is possible, but
the test results do not add to the clinical assessment. If the diagnosis
and genetic implications are already clear, it might not be necessary to
pursue genetic testing.
Predictive genetic testing involves performing a test in a person at
risk for developing a genetic disorder (presymptomatic), usually on the
basis of family history, yet who does not manifest signs or symptoms.
This is usually done for disorders that display age-­dependent penetrance
(e.g., the likelihood of manifesting signs and symptoms increases with
age, as in cancer genetic syndromes or Huntington disease).
A major caution with predictive testing is that the presence of a
gene pathogenic variant does not necessarily mean that the disease will
develop. Many of the disorders with age-­dependent penetrance display
incomplete penetrance. A person who inherits a pathogenic variant
may never develop signs of the disorder. There is concern that a positive DNA test could result in stigmatization of the person and might
not provide information that will guide medical management. Stigmatization might include psychologic stress, but it could also include

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice

Specimen
1. Blood or other
tissue
2. Germ line or
somatic
(eg, tumor)

Nucleic
acid
extraction
DNA or RNA

Library
preparation

Next-gen
sequencing

Raw data
processing

1. Target
enrichment if
for targeted
panel
2. Fragmentation
if needed
3. End repair,
A-tailing, linker
modification
amplification

1. Fragment analysis
(single read)
2. Paired-end analysis
3. Mate-pair analysis

1. Machine formatted
base calls
2. Nucleotide formatted
base calls
3. Mapping an alignment
to a reference human
genome sequence
4. Marking of duplicate
sequencing reads
5. Base quality calibration
6. Analysis-ready reads

751

Variant calling
1. Variant calling: SNVs,
indels, CNVs, SVs
2. Date visualization
3. Variant validation
4. Annotation
5. Integrated consideration of
segregation analysis, linkage,
association testing, pathway
modeling, interaction analysis,
additional functional studies
6. Variant assigned as benign,
uncertain, or pathogenic

Fig. 98.2 Overview of the next-­generation DNA sequencing workflow. CNV, Copy number variant; Indels, insertions and deletions; SNV, single
nucleotide variant; SV, structural variant. (Adapted from Casey G, Conti D, Haile R, et al. Next generation sequencing and a new era of medicine.
Gut. 2013;62[6]:920–932.)

Table 98.2  Variants That Are Incidental Findings Are
Assigned to One of Four Categories

from which they are generated, and current population genetic data
have limitations including lack of ethnic diversity and population
stratification.

Childhood onset

Medically actionable*

PHARMACOGENETICS

Childhood onset

Not medically actionable†

Adult onset

Medically actionable*

Adult onset

Not medically actionable†

*“Medically actionable” refers to a variant in a gene in which knowledge of the
particular variant will affect medical decision-­making, such as initiation of a treatment
or family planning.
†“Not medically actionable” refers to variants that increase the individual’s risk for a
disease in which no treatment is proven to significantly change the disease natural
history.
From Bick D, Dimmock D. Whole exome and whole genome sequencing. Curr Opin
Pediatr. 2011;23:594–600.

discrimination, including denial of health, life, or disability insurance,
or employment (see Chapter 95).
It is generally agreed that predictive genetic tests should be performed for children only if the results of the test will benefit the medical
management during childhood; otherwise, the test should be deferred
until the individual understands the risks and benefits of testing and
can provide their own informed consent. Individual states offer varying degrees of protection from discrimination on the basis of genetic
testing. A major milestone in the prevention of genetic discrimination
was the passage of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act
(GINA) in 2008, which is a U.S. federal law that prohibits discrimination in health coverage or employment based on genetic information.
Of note, it does not protect against refusal of life insurance.
Predispositional genetic testing is available with the goal of predicting risk of disease. The rationale for predispositional testing is that
the results would lead to strategies aimed at risk reduction as part of a
personalized approach to healthcare maintenance. This might include
avoidance of environmental exposures that would increase risk of disease (cigarette smoking and α1-­antitrypsin deficiency), medical surveillance (familial breast cancer and mammography), or in some cases,
pharmacologic treatment (statins and hypercholesterolemia).
Common disorders are multifactorial in etiology, and many different genes may contribute to risk of any specific condition (see
Chapter 103). Most genetic variants found to correlate with risk of
a common disease add small increments of relative risk and, in most
cases, too little to guide management based on a single variant.
Statistical models for predicting risk based on a collection of DNA
variants has been integrated into approaches such as polygenic risk
scores. By combining the relative risk conferred by a group of DNA
variants, the goal is to quantify a larger proportion of risk for a specific disease. These predictions are confounded by the source of data

Polymorphisms in drug metabolism genes can result in distinctive
patterns of drug absorption, metabolism, excretion, or effectiveness. Knowledge of individual genotypes can guide pharmacologic
therapy, allowing customization drug choice and dosage to avoid
toxicity and provide a therapeutic response. Well-­
known examples include testing for polymorphisms within the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene for susceptibility of
potentially increased toxicity to methotrexate antimetabolite therapy
and thiopurine S-­methyltransferase (TPMT) to avoid adverse effects
with 6-­mercaptopurine therapy (Fig. 98.3).

Pediatric Pharmacogenomics

Pharmacogenomics is the study of how variants contribute to interindividual variability in drug response. The finding that drug responses can
be influenced by the patient’s genetic profile offers great hope for realizing individualized pharmacotherapy, in which the relationship between
genotype and phenotype (either disease and/or drug response) is predictive of drug response. In addition to genetic differences, environmental factors (e.g., diet, concomitant drug or toxic exposure), physiologic
variables (age, sex, pregnancy), and patient adherence all contribute
to variations in drug metabolism and response. Interindividual differences in children are further complicated by the changing patterns of
gene expression occurring during the developmental processes from
birth through adolescence. Combining these genetic and nongenetic
individual-­specific variables, it is expected that children will benefit from
the promise of precision medicine, e.g., identifying the right drug for the
right patient at the right time and dosing (Fig. 98.4).
Examples of pharmacogenomic traits include specific adverse drug
reactions, such as prolonged respiratory muscle paralysis due to succinylcholine, hemolysis associated with antimalarial therapy, carbamazepine-­
induced Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, isoniazid-­induced neurotoxicity,
and others (Table 98.3). The pharmacokinetic properties of a drug are
determined by genes that control drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Drug-­metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters
play a particularly important role in this process. One of the better recognized clinical manifestations of pharmacogenomic variability in drug
biotransformation is an increased risk of concentration-­dependent toxicity caused by reduced clearance and consequent tissue drug accumulation. Equally important is the lack of efficacy caused by variations in
metabolism of prodrugs that require biotransformation to be converted
into a pharmacologically active form. The pharmacogenomics of drug
receptors and other target proteins involved in signal transduction or
disease pathogenesis are also expected to contribute to interindividual
variability in drug disposition and response.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

752 Part VIII u Human Genetics
SH

SH
N

N
HO

N

XO

OH
N
H

N

SCH3
N

TPMT

N
H

N

N

6MP

6TU
(inactive)

N

N

N
H

MeMP
(inactive)

HPRT
SH

SCH3
N

N

Fig.

N

TPMT N

N

N

N

P

ribose

P

N

N

N

H2N

ribose

N
P P P

TIMP

MeTIMP

N
ribose

TGNs
DNA
incorporation

Inhibition of de novo
purine synthesis

Anti-leukemic effect
Myelosuppression

A
10

3000
Intracellular TGN
concentration

Percent of population

98.3 Thiopurine S-­methyltransferase
(TPMT) polymorphism. A, 6-­Mercaptopurine
(6MP) undergoes metabolism to thioguanine
nucleotides (TGNs) to exert its cytotoxic effects. TPMT and xanthine oxidase reduce the
amount of 6MP available for the bioactivation
pathway to TGNs. TPMT can also methylate
6-­thioinosine 5′-­monophosphate (TIMP) to generate a methylated compound capable of inhibiting de novo purine synthesis. B, Distribution
of TPMT activity in humans. Of the population,
89% has high activity, whereas 11% has intermediate activity. Approximately 1 in 300 individuals homozygous for two loss-­of-­function alleles
has very low activity. C, Correlation between
the TPMT genotype and intracellular TGN concentrations. In TPMT-­poor metabolizers, more
6MP is available to go down the bioactivation
pathway to form TGNs; this situation is associated with an increased risk of myelosuppression. D, The most common variant TPMT allele
is the result of two pathogenic variants that
give rise to an unstable protein product that
undergoes proteolytic degradation. Each box
represents an exon. Non-coding sequences
are shown as white boxes and colored boxes
indicate coding sequences. 6TU, 6-­
Thiouric
acid; MeMP, 6-­
methylmercaptopurine; HPRT,
6-­thiomethylinosine 5-­monophosphate; MeTIMP, hypoxanthine-­
guanine phosphoribosyl
transferase; wt, wild type; mut, mutant; Ala, alanine; Thr, threonine; Tyr, tyrosine; Cys, cysteine.
(Modified from Relling MV, Dervieux T. Pharmacogenetics and cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2001;11:99–108.)

SH

wt/wt

8
6
4

2000

1000

wt/mut
0
TPMT genotype: mut/mut

2 mut/
mut

wt/mut

wt/wt

0
0

B

5

10 15 20
TPMT activity

25

30

C

Myelosuppression
↑ Risk secondary cancer

↓ Toxicity
↑ Risk of relapse

TPMT*1
(wild-type)

TPMT*3A

D

Individuals are classified as “fast,” “rapid,” or “extensive” metabolizers at one end and “slow” or “poor” metabolizers at the other end
of the continuum. For biotransformation, fetuses and newborns may
be phenotypically “slow” or “poor” metabolizers for certain drug-­
metabolizing pathways because of their stage of development, and
they may acquire a phenotype consistent with their genotype at some
point later in the developmental process. Moreover, not all infants
acquire drug metabolism activity at the same rate, and there is interindividual variability in the trajectory (i.e., rate and extent) of drug
biotransformation capacity (Fig. 98.5). The primary organ responsible for drug metabolism is the liver, although the kidney, intestine,
lung, adrenals, blood (phosphatases, esterases), and skin can also biotransform certain compounds. Drug biotransformation is characterized by three important features: (1) broad substrate specificity, in
which a single isozyme may metabolize a large variety of chemically
diverse compounds; (2) many different enzymes may be involved in
the biotransformation of a single drug (enzyme multiplicity); and (3)
a given drug may undergo several different types of reactions. Drug
biotransformation reactions are classified into phase I reactions that

460 GA
Ala→Thr

719 AG
Tyr→Cys

introduce or reveal (through oxidation, reduction, or hydrolysis) a
functional group within the substrate drug molecule that serves as a
site for phase II reactions. These reactions involve conjugation with
endogenous substrates (such as acetate, glucuronic acid, glutathione, glycine, and sulfate), making the compound more water soluble
to be excreted in urine. A supergene family with at least 16 primary cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are quantitatively the most
important phase I enzymes and catalyze the metabolism of many
lipophilic endogenous (steroids, fatty acids, fat-­
soluble vitamins,
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes) and exogenous compounds, including a multitude of drugs and environment toxins. The
specific CYP isoforms responsible for the majority of human drug
metabolism are CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1,
and CYP3A4. These enzymes are the products of genes that in some
cases are polymorphically expressed, with allelic variants producing
enzymes generally resulting in either no or reduced catalytic activity. At birth the activities of drug-­oxidizing enzymes in the liver are
reduced, which results in slow clearance (and prolonged elimination)
of several substrate drugs (e.g., phenytoin, caffeine, diazepam). Phase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice

753

98.1 Genetic Counseling
Brendan Lee and Pilar L. Magoulas

Treatment Outcome
Failure

Treat with conventional
drug and dose

Treat with alternative
drug

Drug B

Treat with alternative
drug or dose

Treat with alternative
drug

Drug C

Excessive

Toxicity

Minimal

Success

Fig. 98.4 The promise of genomic medicine to human health and
disease. The goal of personalized medicine is to identify subgroups
of patients who will respond favorably to a given drug with minimum side effects, as well as those who will not respond or who will
show toxicity with standard doses. A further benefit of pharmaco­
genomics is to select the most appropriate alternative drug for patients who cannot be treated successfully with conventional drugs
and doses. (Adapted from Yaffe SJ, Aranda JV. Neonatal and Pediatric Pharmacology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2004.)

II enzymes include arylamine N-­acetyltransferases (NAT1, NAT2),
uridine diphospho-­glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), epoxide hydrolase, glutathione S-­transferases (GSTs), sulfotransferases (SULTs),
and methyltransferases (catechol O-­methyltransferase, thiopurine
S-­methyltransferase, several N-­methyltransferases). Phase II enzyme
activity is decreased in the newborn and increases into childhood.
Conjugation of compounds metabolized by isoforms of UGT (e.g.,
morphine, bilirubin, chloramphenicol) is reduced at birth but can
exceed adult values by 3-­4 years of age.
Membrane transporters are involved in drug disposition and
actively transport substrate drugs between organs and tissues. They
include organic anion transporters (OATs), organic anion–transporting polypeptides (OATPs), organic cation transporters (OCTs),
and the adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette (ABC) transporters, such as P-­glycoprotein and the multidrug-­resistant proteins.
Drug transporters are expressed at numerous barriers, such as
intestinal epithelial cells, hepatocytes, renal tubular cells, and the
blood-­brain barrier (Fig. 98.6). Transporters are often determinants
of drug resistance, and many drugs work by affecting the function
of transporters. Polymorphisms in the genes encoding these transporters might affect drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion.

Genetic counseling is a communication process in which the genetic
contribution to health, specific risks of transmission of a trait, and
options to manage the condition are explained to individuals and
their family members (Table 98.4). Genetic counselors are specialized
healthcare providers trained in the psychosocial aspects of counseling and the science of medical genetics who may serve as members
of medical teams in many different specialties. The genetic counselor
is expected to present information in a neutral, nondirective manner
while providing resources and psychosocial support to the individual
and family to cope with decisions that are made (see Table 98.4).
In the prenatal setting, a common indication for genetic counseling is
to assess risk of occurrence or recurrence of having a child with a genetic
condition and to discuss management or treatment options that might
be available before, during, or after the pregnancy, such as preimplantation genetic testing, noninvasive prenatal screening, prenatal diagnosis
or fetal intervention, and perinatal management. In pediatric and adult
genetics practices, the goals of genetic counseling are to help establish a
diagnosis in an individual, provide longitudinal care and psychosocial
support to the family, and discuss the genetic basis and inheritance of
the condition as it relates to immediate and distant family members.
The genetic counseling role has expanded, particularly with
advances in understanding the genetics of adult-­onset or common and
rare disease therapeutics. In the former context, genetic counseling has
a major role in risk assessment for cancer, especially breast, ovarian, or
colon cancer, for which well-­defined risk models and genetic tests are
available to assess risk to an individual. In the latter, the genetic counselor may discuss developments in rare disease therapeutics and make
appropriate referral for medical therapies.
There are several situations in which genetic counseling plays a
particularly important role. The first situation is the prenatal diagnosis of a congenital anomaly or genetic disease. The need for information is urgent because a family must often make time-­sensitive
decisions about treatment and management options, such as fetal
intervention or continuation of a pregnancy in the context of fetal
anomalies. Risks to the mother must also be considered. The second
type of situation occurs when a child is born with a life-­threatening
congenital anomaly or suspected genetic disease. Decisions must be
made immediately on how much support should be provided to the
child and whether certain types of therapy should be attempted. The
third situation arises when there are concerns about a genetic condition affecting one later in life. This may occur in an adolescent or
young adult with a family history of an adult-­onset genetic disorder
(e.g., Huntington disease, hereditary breast/ovarian cancer), in an
individual with a suspected yet undiagnosed genetic condition, or if
a couple with a personal or family history of a genetic condition (or
a carrier) is planning a family. In these situations, it is often necessary to have several meetings with a family to discuss possible testing,
screening, and management options. Urgency is not as much of an
issue as being sure that they have as much information and as many
options as are available. Last, with the advent of genomic testing in
all areas of clinical care, pretest genetic counseling before testing is
essential to provide individuals with accurate information regarding
the types of results they may receive. During this process, individuals
are also given the option of what type of results they want reported
back to them, such as medically actionable results unrelated to the
primary indication for testing and incidental findings.

GENETIC COUNSELING ELEMENTS

Components of a genetic counseling session and providing accurate
information to families requires the following:
• Taking a targeted family history and constructing a pedigree that
diagrams the patient’s relatives (including miscarriages, abortions,
stillbirths, deceased persons) with their sex, age, ethnicity, and state
of health, up to and including third-­degree relatives.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

754 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 98.3  Examples of Effects of Gene Polymorphisms on Drug Response
GENE

ENZYME/TARGET

DRUG

CLINICAL RESPONSE

BCHE

Butyrylcholinesterase

Succinylcholine

Prolonged paralysis

CYP2C9

Cytochrome P450 2C9

Warfarin

Individuals having ≥1 reduced function alleles require
lower doses of warfarin for optimal anticoagulation,
especially initial anticoagulant control.

CYP2C19

Cytochrome P450 2C19

Clopidogrel

Individuals having ≥1 loss-­of-­function alleles have
reduced capacity to form pharmacologically active
metabolite of clopidogrel and reduced antiplatelet
effect.

CYP2D6

Cytochrome P450 2D6

Codeine

Poor metabolizers (individuals with two loss-­of-­
function alleles) do not metabolize codeine to
morphine and thus experience no analgesic effect.
Ultrarapid metabolizers (individuals with ≥3 functional
alleles) may experience morphine toxicity.

G6PD

Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase

Primaquine (others)

Hemolysis

HLA-­A*3101

Human leukocyte antigen A31

Carbamazepine

Carriers of HLA-­A*3101 allele have increased risk of
SJS and TEN from carbamazepine.

HLA-­B*1502

Human leukocyte antigen B15

Allopurinol

Han Chinese carriers of HLA-­B*1502 allele have
increased risk of SJS and TEN from carbamazepine.

HLA-­B*5701

Human leukocyte antigen B57

Abacavir
Flucloxacillin

Carriers of HLA-­B*5701 allele have increased risk
of hypersensitivity reactions to abacavir-­and
flucloxacillin-­induced liver injury.

HLA-­B*5801

Human leukocyte antigen B58

Allopurinol

Carriers of HLA-­B*5801 allele have increased risk of
severe cutaneous adverse reactions to allopurinol,
including hypersensitivity reactions, SJS, and TEN.

NAT2

N-­Acetyltransferase 2

Isoniazid, hydralazine

Individuals homozygous for “slow acetylation”
polymorphisms are more susceptible to isoniazid
toxicity, or hydralazine-­induced systemic lupus
erythematosus.

SLCO1B1

Organic anion–transporting protein (OATP)
1B1

Simvastatin

Carriers of the SLCO1B1*5 allele are at increased risk
for musculoskeletal side effects from simvastatin.

TPMT

Thiopurine S-­methyltransferase

Azathioprine
6-­Mercaptopurine

Individuals homozygous for an inactivating
pathogenic variant have severe toxicity if
treated with standard doses of azathioprine or
6-­mercaptopurine; rapid metabolism causes
undertreatment.

UGT1A1

Uridine diphospho-­glucuronosyltransferase
1A1

Irinotecan

UGT1A1*28 allele is associated with decreased
glucuronidation of SN-­38, the active metabolite of
irinotecan, and increased risk of neutropenia.

VKORC1

Vitamin K oxidoreductase complex 1

Warfarin

Individuals with a haplotype associated with reduced
expression of VKORC1 protein (therapeutic target
of warfarin) require lower doses of the drug for
stable anticoagulation.

SJS, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis.

• Gathering information from hospital records about the affected individual and, in some cases, about other family members.
• Documenting prenatal, pregnancy, and delivery histories.
• Reviewing the latest available medical, laboratory, and genetic information concerning the disorder.
• Reviewing a careful physical examination of the affected individual
(photographs, measurements) and of apparently unaffected individuals in the family (typically performed by a physician rather than a
genetic counselor).
• Reviewing genetic testing and screening options.
• Establishing or confirming the diagnosis by the diagnostic tests
available.
• Providing psychosocial support to the individual and family
throughout the diagnostic process.
• Giving the family information about support groups and local and
national resources.
• Providing new information to the family as it becomes available (a
mechanism for updating needs to be established).

Genetic counseling sessions often include anticipatory guidance
regarding the occurrence or risk of occurrence of a specific condition,
knowledge of the diagnosis of the particular condition, natural history
of the condition, genetic aspects of the condition, risk of recurrence,
prenatal diagnosis and reproductive options, therapies and referrals,
and provision of support resources.

The Diagnostic Process

If a specific diagnosis is made and confirmed, this should be discussed
with the family and information provided in writing. Often, however,
the disorder fits into a spectrum (e.g., one of many types of arthrogryposis) or the diagnosis is clinical rather than confirmed with molecular
testing. In these situations, the family needs to understand the limits
of the diagnostic process and present knowledge, and that additional
research will probably lead to better information in the future.
Although it is not always possible to make an exact diagnosis, having
a diagnosis as accurate as possible is important. Estimates of recurrence
risk for various family members depend on an accurate diagnosis that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice
100

Biliary excretion
P-gp, MRP3, MRP2, sPGP

60

Intestinal efflux
P-gp, MRP2, MRP1,
OCT1, OATP3,
NTCP

40

Oral intake

20

IV

Activity

80

0
Birth

5

Infant

10

15

20

Child

Adult

Fecal
Excretion

Intestine

Vascular
space

Urinary
Excretion

Interstitial
space
Brain transport
P-gp, OAT3,
MRP1, MRP5,
OATP1

80
60

Renal secretion
OAT1, OAT3, OCT1,
OCT2, OATP,
P-gp, MRP1

Fig. 98.6 Schematic diagram of important transport proteins and

40

their known locations in humans. Spheres correspond to drug molecules. (From American Pharmacists Association. Ritschel WA, Kearns
GL, eds. Handbook of Basic Pharmacokinetics Including Clinical Applications, 7th ed. Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association,
2009. p 45.)

20
0
Birth

Hepatic uptake
OATP2, OATP8, OATP-B,
OCT1, NTCP, OAT2, OAT3

25

100

Activity

755

5

10

15

20

25

Age (yr)

Fig. 98.5 “Developmental” phenotypes. Variability in developmen-

tal changes in gene expression and functional enzyme activity are superimposed on pharmacogenetic determinants. Top, Developmental
profile of a theoretical drug-­metabolizing enzyme over a 25-­year span
in 20 individuals. Bottom, At maturity (adults), allelic variation within
the coding region of the gene gives rise to two distinct phenotypes:
high activity in 92% of the population (“extensive metabolizers”; red
circles) and low activity in 8% of the population (“poor metabolizers”;
yellow circles). However, there is also interindividual variability in the
rate at which functional activity is acquired after birth. For example,
the two phenotypes may not be readily distinguishable in newborn
infants. Furthermore, there may be discrete periods during childhood
in which the genotype-­phenotype relationship may differ from that
observed in adults (e.g., developmental stages at which enzyme activity appears to be greater in children than in adults). (Adapted from
Leeder JS. Translating pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics
into drug development for clinical pediatric and beyond. Drug Discov
Today. 2004;9:567–573.)

considers the likelihood that a particular finding is isolated, associated
with a syndrome, or nonsyndromic (e.g., isolated cleft lip and palate).
When a specific diagnosis cannot be made (as in many cases of multiple congenital anomalies), the various possibilities in the differential
diagnosis should be discussed with the family and empirical information provided. If available, specific diagnostic tests should be discussed.
Often, empirical recurrence risks can be given even without a specific
laboratory-­based diagnosis. At the same time, even negative laboratory
testing can further modify this risk.

Natural History of the Condition

It is important to discuss the natural history of the specific genetic disorder in the family. Affected persons and their families have questions
regarding the prognosis and potential management or therapy that can
be answered only with knowledge of the natural history. If there are
other possible diagnoses, their natural history may also be discussed.
If the disorder is associated with a spectrum of clinical outcomes or
complications, the range of possible outcomes and variability of the
condition, as well as treatment and referral to the appropriate specialist, should be addressed.

Genetic Aspects of the Condition and
Recurrence Risk

The genetic aspects and risk of recurrence are important because all
family members should be informed of their reproductive choices.
The genetic basis of the disorder can be explained with visual aids
(e.g., diagrams of chromosomes and inheritance patterns). It is
important to provide accurate occurrence and recurrence risks for
various members of the family, including unaffected individuals. If
a definite diagnosis cannot be made, it is necessary to use empirical recurrence risks. Genetic counseling gives patients the necessary information to understand the various options and to make
their own informed decisions regarding pregnancy, adoption, assistive reproductive technologies, prenatal diagnosis, screening, carrier detection, or termination of pregnancy. It may be necessary to
have more than one counseling session. Even if a specific molecular
diagnosis has been made and a well-­defined inheritance pattern
has been described for the condition, it is important to recognize
that the principles of incomplete penetrance, variable expressivity,
and germline/somatic mosaicism can contribute uncertainty to the
recurrence risk and severity of a potentially affected pregnancy conception or child.

Prenatal Diagnosis and Prevention

Many different methods of prenatal screening and diagnosis are
available, depending on the specific genetic disorder (see Chapter
117). The use of ultrasonography allows prenatal screening of anatomic abnormalities such as congenital heart defects. Amniocentesis
and chorionic villus sampling are used to obtain fetal tissue for analysis of chromosomal abnormalities, biochemical disorders, and DNA
studies. Maternal blood or serum sampling is used for some types of
screening, including noninvasive prenatal screening by direct analysis of cell-­free fetal DNA found in maternal blood, which is used for
screening of conditions such as trisomy 21 and other aneuploidies. In
addition, this source of cell-­free fetal DNA has also been used clinically for DNA sequencing for selected dominant de novo conditions
in the fetus that may occur with increased frequency with increasing
paternal age. Current tests of fetal DNA from maternal blood should
be considered screening tests, and invasive testing like amniocentesis
or chorionic villus sampling should be considered for confirmatory
diagnostic testing.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

756 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 98.4  Indications for Genetic Counseling
Advanced parental age
• Maternal age ≥35 years
• Paternal age ≥40 years
Previous child with or family history of:
• Congenital abnormality
• Dysmorphology
• Intellectual disability
• Isolated birth defect
• Metabolic disorder
• Chromosome abnormality
• Single-­gene disorder
Adult-­onset genetic disease (presymptomatic testing)
• Cancer
• Huntington disease
Pharmacogenomics
Consanguinity
Teratogen exposure (occupational, abuse)
Repeated pregnancy loss or infertility
Pregnancy screening abnormality
• Maternal serum α-­fetoprotein
Maternal first-­trimester screen
• Maternal triple or quad screen or variant of this test
• Fetal ultrasonography
Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT)
• Fetal karyotype
Heterozygote screening based on ethnic risk
• Sickle cell anemia
• Tay-­Sachs, Canavan, and Gaucher diseases
• Thalassemias
Universal carrier screening panels
Follow-­up to abnormal neonatal genetic testing
Prior to whole genome or exome sequencing
Prior to preimplantation genetic testing

Therapies and Referral

Some genetic disorders require the care of multiple specialists. Many
genetic conditions have diagnosis and management guidelines to aid
in the treatment and management of these complex patients. Prevention of known complications is a priority, so close follow-­up with the
necessary specialists involved in the child’s care is essential to identify
any potentially concerning issues early. The psychologic adjustment of
the family might also require specific intervention. Some challenges
may involve when to discuss the diagnosis of a chronic disease with the
patient, siblings, and other family members or friends. The decision
to do so should always involve the parents and an assessment of the
maturity and capacity of the child or adolescent.
Alternative medicines or nontraditional therapies are often brought
to attention by parents after exhaustive internet searches. Such treatments should not necessarily be dismissed since the physician and
genetic counselor should serve as an important resource for helping
parents navigate the maze of nonstandard treatments. Instead, the
relative merits of treatments should be framed in the context of cost
and benefit, scientific rationale, evidence from controlled and observational studies, the placebo effect, safety of the treatment, and the gaps
in our own scientific knowledge base.

Support Groups

A large number of community and online lay disease–specific support groups have been formed to provide information and to fund
research on specific genetic and nongenetic conditions. An important
part of genetic counseling is to give information about these groups to
patients and to suggest a contact person for the families. Many groups
have established websites and social media platforms with very helpful
information. With the rise of social media and its ability to connect

families with rare syndromes from around the world, it is important to
stress to families that their individual disease course will be unique and
significant biases of reporting occur on such platforms. This should be
balanced by the benefit of sharing potential important natural history
elements of the underlying rare disease.

Follow-­Up

Families should be encouraged to continue to ask questions and keep
up with new information about the specific disorder. New developments often influence the diagnosis and therapy of specific genetic
disorders.

Nondirective Counseling

Genetic counseling is usually nondirective; choices about reproduction
are left to the family to decide what is right for them. The role of the
counselor (physician, genetic counselor, nurse, medical geneticist) is to
provide information in understandable terms and outline the range of
options available.

98.2 Principles of Management and
Treatment of Genetic Disorders
Brendan Lee and Nicola Brunetti-­Pierri

TREATMENT OF GENETIC DISEASES

Genetic conditions are often chronic disorders. Some are amenable
to curative therapies, although there has been a rapid increase in the
number of treatable disorders. Based on ongoing preclinical and clinical investigations, new therapies for a growing number of diseases are
expected to become available in the near future. Surgical management
is available for many conditions that are associated with congenital
anomalies or predisposition to tumors. All patients and families should
be provided information about the disorder, genetic counseling, anticipatory guidance, and appropriate medical surveillance.
Resources for patients include the National Organization of Rare Disorders (www.rarediseases.org), the Genetic Alliance (www.geneticalliance.
org), the National Library of Medicine (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/
geneticdisorders.html), and a large number of disease-­specific websites.
A current listing of federally and privately funded clinical trials, including many for genetic diseases, is available at www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
Specific medical therapies for genetic disorders can be classified into
physiologic and replacement therapies. Another approach to correct
protein misfolding induced by missense pathogenic variants is through
use of small molecules that specifically bind to mutant proteins, stabilizing their conformation, thereby preventing early degradation, and allowing proper cellular trafficking and localization. This strategy has found
successful applications for therapy of cystic fibrosis caused by specific
CFTR pathogenic variants, including the F508del (see Chapter 454).

PHYSIOLOGIC THERAPIES

Physiologic therapies attempt to ameliorate the phenotype of a genetic
disorder by modifying the physiology of the affected individual. The
underlying defect itself is not altered by treatment. Physiologic therapies
are used in the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism (see Chapter
104). These include dietary manipulations, such as reducing phenylalanine intake by persons with phenylketonuria, coenzyme supplementation for some patients with methylmalonic acidemia and mitochondrial
diseases, stimulation of alternative pathways to excrete ammonia for
those with urea cycle disorders, phototherapy to increase excretion of
neurotoxic unconjugated bilirubin in Crigler-­Najjar syndrome, bisphosphonate treatment for those with osteogenesis imperfecta to reduce bone
fractures, and avoiding cigarette smoking by persons with α1-­antitrypsin
deficiency or specific foods and drugs by persons with glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency or acute intermittent porphyria.
Physiologic treatments can be highly effective, but they usually need to
be maintained for a lifetime because they do not affect the underlying
genetic disorder. Many of these treatments are most effective early in life

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice
before irreversible damage has occurred. This is the rationale for comprehensive newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism.
Many physiologic therapies use small-­
molecule pharmaceuticals
(e.g., to remove ammonia in those with urea cycle disorders). Pharmacologic treatments directly target a defective cellular pathway that
is altered by an abnormal or a missing gene product. One approach
is the inhibition of an enzyme reaction that is upstream of the deficient enzyme to prevent accumulation of the toxic metabolites, such
as the nitisinone (NTBC) for therapy of tyrosinemia type I. A similar approach focuses on partially reducing the synthesis of the substrate of the abnormal enzyme or its precursors in lysosomal storage
disorders (see Chapter 106.4). Other examples include targeting the
FGFR3 signaling pathway by the C-­type natriuretic peptide in achondroplasia, FGF23 by the monoclonal antibody burosumab in X-­linked
hypophosphatemia, or the angiopoietin-­like protein 3 (ANGPTL3)
by the monoclonal antibody evinacumab in homozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia.

REPLACEMENT THERAPIES

Replacement therapies include replacement of a missing metabolite, an
enzyme, an organ, or even a specific gene.

Enzyme Replacement

Enzyme replacement therapy is a component of the treatment of cystic fibrosis to manage intestinal malabsorption. Pancreatic enzymes
are easily administered orally, because they must be delivered to the
gastrointestinal tract. Recombinant alkaline phosphatase coupled to a
bone-­targeting motif is available for intravenous therapy of hypophosphatasia, a skeletal disorder caused by alkaline-­phosphatase deficiency.
Enzyme replacement strategies are effective for several lysosomal
storage disorders. Enzymes are targeted for the lysosome by modification with mannose-­6-­phosphate, which binds to a specific receptor. This
receptor is also present on the cell surface, so lysosomal enzymes with
exposed mannose-­6-­phosphate residues can be infused into the blood
and are taken into cells and delivered to lysosomes. Enzyme replacement
therapies are available for Gaucher disease and Fabry disease, most of the
mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS I, II, IVA, VI, VII), acid lipase deficiency,
α-­mannosidosis, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis late infantile (CLN2),
and Pompe disease, and are being tested for MPS IIIA and IIIB, metachromatic leukodystrophy, and Niemann-­Pick disease type B. Other
examples include enzyme replacement therapy with pegylated recombinant phenylalanine ammonia lyase for phenylketonuria that is effective
at reducing blood phenylalanine concentrations in most patients, such
that most of them can come off a phenylalanine-­restricted diet.
One complication of enzyme replacement therapy is antibody
response to the infused recombinant enzyme. The magnitude of this
response is not always predictable and varies depending on the enzyme
preparation and the disease. In most cases, the patient’s antibody
response does not affect the treatment’s efficacy (e.g., Gaucher disease),
but in other situations it may be a significant hurdle (e.g., Pompe disease and phenylketonuria).

Transplantation

Cell transplantation and organ transplantation are potentially effective
approaches to replacement of a defective gene. Aside from transplantation to replace damaged tissues, transplantation of stem cells, liver, or
bone marrow is also used for several diseases, mainly inborn errors of
metabolism, and hematologic or immunologic disorders. A successful
transplant can be essentially curative, although there may be significant
risks and side effects (see Chapters 177-­181). Cell and tissue transplantation is effective in many clinical scenarios, but there is always short-­term
morbidity, often associated with either surgical (liver) or preparative
(bone marrow) regimens, and long-­term morbidity related to chronic
immunosuppression and graft failure. Bone marrow transplantation is
the best example of stem cell therapy, but much effort also is focused on
identifying, characterizing, expanding, and using other tissue stem cells
for regenerative therapies. In contrast to transplantation from a healthy
donor, the infused cells are the patient’s own cells in ex vivo gene therapy
of hematopoietic stem cells. Therefore, although it requires preparative

757

myeloablation akin to regular bone marrow transplantation from healthy
donors, engraftment of genetically modified hematopoietic stem cells is
devoid of risks of rejection or graft-­versus-­host disease. Increasingly,
this approach is combined with gene therapy after genetic correction of
autologous stem cells.

Gene Therapy

Another approach focuses on replacing or correcting a defective gene
(gene therapy). In theory, if one can target the specific tissue that has
a deficiency in the gene or gene product, this can offer a less invasive
means of achieving a cure for a genetic disorder compared to transplantations. Ultimately, gene therapy depends on the unique interaction of the disease pathophysiology, which is specific to the patient, and
the gene delivery vehicle.
Gene-­transfer vehicles include viral and nonviral vectors administered
through ex vivo or in vivo approaches. In ex vivo approaches the patient’s
cells are removed and after gene correction or replacement are infused into
the patient. An example of this is the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-­approved chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy for lymphomas and leukemias. In the in vivo approaches the gene therapy vector
is directly injected into the body by either systemic (e.g., intravenous) or
localized (e.g., intracerebral, intraocular) injections. Most human clinical
trials have used viral vectors because of their efficiency of gene delivery
to tissues. In some diseases, such as X-­linked and adenosine deaminase–
deficient severe combined immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, and Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, clinical gene therapy is a viable and
effective option. Ex vivo gene transfer of hematopoietic stem cells can be
considered at least as effective to allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in presymptomatic patients with X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy and Hurler syndrome.
In vivo gene therapy is also promising for Leber congenital amaurosis
by intraocular delivery, and hemophilias and several inborn errors of liver
metabolism by systemic intravenous injection. In vivo gene therapy is
FDA approved for treatment of a specific RPE65-­deficient form of retinitis
pigmentosa using adeno-­associated virus (AAV)-­mediated expression of
the normal RPE65 gene via subretinal injections. In vivo AAV-­mediated
gene therapy is also an approved treatment that has significantly changed
the early course of the disease and improved motor function in children
with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (see Chapter 652.2). Although
patients with SMA typically present with muscle atrophy, respiratory failure, and die before 2 years of age, treated patients have remained healthy
and attained motor milestones that are typically not achieved in any of the
untreated patients. Similar efficacy has also been achieved by intrathecal
delivery of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) correcting SMN2 splicing.
Brain-directed gene therapy is available for aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency by intracerebral injections of an AAV-based
vector. Systemic intravenous AAV-based gene therapy vectors have been
approved for both hemophilia A and B.
Gene editing with direct correction of a disease-­causing pathogenic variant is another possible approach to genetic therapy.
Various nucleases with specific DNA-­recognition sequences are
available for genome editing; they include zinc finger nucleases
(ZFNs), transcription activator–like effector nucleases (TALENs),
and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-­associated nine (Cas9). They all permit permanent gene modification of genes in cells. This is achieved by DNA
site-­specific double-­strand breaks (DSBs) induced by the endonuclease and a template encompassing the wild-­type sequence to be
used as a substrate for repair by homology-­directed repair (HDR).
Following site-­specific DSB, DNA repair is mediated by either nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) or HDR that repairs DNA in the
presence of a donor sequence (Fig. 98.7A and B). NHEJ repairs
the DSB by joining the two ends of the DSB, often introducing
small insertions or deletions (indels) at the DSB site that generally
inactivate gene function (see Fig. 98.7A). Compared with NHEJ,
HDR is less efficient and requires a donor DNA template (see Fig.
98.7C). The wild-­type copy of the mutated gene can be integrated
into the endogenous locus or into “safe harbors” that allow high
expression levels of the therapeutic gene (see Fig. 98.7A). Based on

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

758 Part VIII u Human Genetics
DNA double strand break
CRISPR/Cas9

5’
3’

DNA donor
sequence

Indel

Indel of nucleotides (e.g.,
inactivation of CCR5 or
BCL11A enhancer)

Targeted insertion (e.g., Factor IX
into the albumin locus)

A
DNA double strand break

5’
3’

DNA double strand break

Pathogenic variant

5’
3’

Mutated
DNA
deletion

Pathogenic variant

Donor sequence

Targeted deletion (e.g., exons of
dystrophin with pathogenic
variant, triplet expansion)

B

C

Fig. 98.7 A, Double-­strand breaks can be repaired by nonhomologous end-­joining (NHEJ) repair mechanisms, giving rise to small insertions and
deletions (Indel) that can disrupt gene expression (blue). B, Two double-­strand breaks can also be corrected by NHEJ and can eliminate the DNA
carrying the pathogenic variant (pink) located between the two breaks. C, Double-­strand breaks can be repaired by homology-­directed repair
mechanisms in the presence of a donor template allowing the incorporation of a donor sequence (yellow) that correct the mutated gene. CRISPR/
Cas9, Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat/CRISPR-­associated nine (Cas9).

these features, genome editing has the potential to overcome several
limitations of gene replacement therapy. First, genotoxicity due to
ectopic activation of nearby protooncogenes or knockout of tumor
suppressor genes does not occur with on-­target editing. Second,
genome editing allows physiologic regulation of the expression of
the corrected gene in contrast to gene replacement therapy. Third,
gene editing is maintained in proliferating cells, and it overcomes
the dilution effect due to cell division that is observed with gene
replacement therapy by nonintegrating vectors such as AAV vectors.
Genome editing tools have corrected the gene defect in several
preclinical murine models and are in clinical trials. ZFNs have been
used ex vivo to disrupt CCR5 expression in human T cells to induce
resistance to HIV infection. ZFNs and CRISPR/Cas9 are being used
to boost fetal hemoglobin in β-­thalassemia and sickle cell disease by
disrupting the enhancer of the BCL11A gene, which suppresses fetal
hemoglobin production. Moreover, ZFN-­mediated targeted introduction of therapeutic genes downstream of the highly active albumin
promoter in hepatocytes is currently under clinical investigation for
several diseases.

RNA-­Targeted Therapy

Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are short synthetic nucleic acids
that hybridize with cellular RNA using classic base pairing to modulate gene expression. To ensure specificity, their sequences are complementary to their target sequences (Fig. 98.8). Through binding to
pre-­mRNA or mRNA, ASOs can posttranscriptionally regulate protein

synthesis by mechanisms including modification of pre-­mRNA processing and splicing, competitive inhibition, steric blockade of translational machinery, and degradation of the target RNA. Clinical ASOs
have been developed for treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy
and SMA, respectively (Table 98.5). In SMA, SMN1 and SMN2 genes
are identical (99% homology), except for an 11-­nucleotide sequence
in exon seven that alters splicing (see Chapter 652.2). Splicing of the
SMN2 pre-­mRNA leads to the exclusion of exon seven, generating a
truncated, unstable protein that is rapidly degraded. Therefore SMN2
cannot compensate for SMN1 loss in SMA. The ASO designed to correct SMN2 splicing by promoting the inclusion of exon seven allows
SMN2 to compensate for the loss of expression caused by the SMN1
pathogenic variant. ASOs are also effective for treatment of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia and have been also designed to
inhibit HTT mRNA to reduce concentrations of mutant huntingtin in
Huntington disease.
Conjugation of siRNA with GalNAc to target the asialoglycoprotein
receptor is an efficient strategy to facilitate cell uptake and to increase
siRNA liver accumulation (see Fig. 98.8). A GalNAc-­siRNA targeting
the mRNA for aminolevulinate synthase 1 (ALAS1), the first enzyme in
the heme synthesis pathway, has been developed for treatment of acute
hepatic porphyria, and a similar strategy targeting glycolate oxidase is
effective at reducing oxalate levels for treatment of primary hyperoxaluria type 1.
Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) are spherical structures with a composition very similar to cell membranes and are suitable carriers for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice

759

Base
O

ter
omo

O

NA
ssD
olyA
AAV
e P
gen
s
n
Tra

ITR

O OH
O P O

–

Pr

Base

O

ITR

O
2'

O

AAV

LNP

OH

ASO

(GalNAc)3 carbohydrate moiety
HO

OH
O

HO

H
N

O

NHAc
HO

H
N

O

OH

OH

HO

Scaffold

O
O

O

H
N

O

NHAc
HO

H
N

O

N

N
H

O

O

O

O

H
N

NH

OH

HO

O

O

O

O

NHAc

O

–

O P O
O

C12 tether

O

GalNAc-siRNA

Fig. 98.8 Approved delivery technologies for in vivo gene therapy. Four platform technologies have been clinically approved for gene-­based

therapies of genetic diseases: adeno-­associated virus (AAV) vector containing a 4.7-­kb single-­stranded DNA with inverted terminal repeats (ITRs),
antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) therapeutics, lipid nanoparticle (LNP) containing siRNA or mRNA including key lipid components, and N-acetylgalactosamine-short-interfering RNA (GALNAc-siRNA) therapeutics made of a trivalent ligand with terminal GalNAc moieties covalently linked to
siRNA at the 3′-­end of the sense strand.

Table 98.5  Approved In Vivo Gene-­Based (DNA and RNA) Therapies for Genetic Disorders
PRODUCT

GENE TARGET

DISEASE

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

ASO
Eteplirsen

Dystrophin (exon 51)

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Intrathecal

Golodirsen

Dystrophin (exon 53)

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Subcutaneous

Casimersen

Dystrophin (exon 45)

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Subcutaneous

Inotersen

Transthyretin (TTR)

TTR-­mediated amyloidosis

Subcutaneous

Nusinersen

Survival of motor neuron two (SMN2)

Spinal muscular atrophy

Intrathecal

Mipomersen

Apolipoprotein B-­100

Hypercholesterolemia

Subcutaneous

Volanesorsen

Apolipoprotein CIII

Familial chylomicronemia

Subcutaneous

GALNAc-­sIRNA CONJUGATES
Givosiran

ALAS1

Acute hepatic porphyrias

Subcutaneous

Inclisiran

PCSK9

Hypercholesterolemia

Subcutaneous

Lumasiran

Glycolate oxidase

Primary hyperoxaluria type 1

Subcutaneous

LNP-­RNA
Patisiran

TTR siRNA

TTR-­mediated amyloidosis

Intravenous

AAV VECTORS
Voretigene neparvovec-­rzyl

RPE65 (AAV2)

Leber congenital amaurosis

Subretinal

Onasemnogene abeparvovec

SMN1 (AAV9)

Spinal muscular atrophy

Intravenous

Eladocagene exuparvovec

DDC (AAV2)

AADC deficiency

Bilateral intraputaminal infusions

Valoctocogene roxaparvovec

Factor VIII (AAV5)

Hemophilia A

Intravenous

Etranacogene dezaparvovec

Factor IX (AAV5)

Hemophilia B

Intravenous

AAV, Adeno-­associated virus; AADC, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase; ASO, antisense oligonucleotides; LNP, lipid nanoparticle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

760 Part VIII u Human Genetics
nucleic acid delivery, such as siRNA and mRNAs (see Fig. 98.8). A
liver targeting LNP carrying an siRNA targeting transthyretin has been
effective for treatment of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis that has
been recently approved. In various preclinical models, LNPs have been
shown to deliver mRNA molecules to hepatocytes with high efficiency.
LNPs are being used for the delivery of gene editing molecules such
as ZFNs and Cas9 mRNA together with a single guide (sg)RNA. In
addition, LNPs have been used for delivery of genome editing tools
such as ZFNs and CRISPR/Cas9 together with a viral vector carrying
a promoterless DNA sequence capable of homologous recombination
that can result in high levels of the integrated sequence and short-­term
expression of the endonucleases.

Correction of Genetic Diseases in the
Human Germline

Prevention of genetic diseases has been accomplished by preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). This procedure requires in vitro fertilization and single–embryo cell genetic testing of the known families’
pathogenic variant and is performed with polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) amplification of the affected gene. To avoid disease recurrence,
only the unaffected embryos are implanted. With the advent of efficient
genome editing by CRISPR/Cas9, editing human embryos is technically possible. The announcement of the birth of “CRISPR babies” has
led to calls for a moratorium on human germline genome editing, and
currently, germline and/or embryonic gene editing studies in humans
have not been approved. Given the limited understanding of the consequences of CRISPR/Cas9-­mediated DSBs on the germline human
genome, it is unlikely that these approaches will become available any
time soon.
In contrast, mitochondrial replacement therapies to avoid
mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants are available. In one technique, the pathogenic variant carrier mother’s nuclear DNA is
removed from the unfertilized oocyte and transferred to an unaffected mitochondrial donor oocyte (minus that cell’s nuclear DNA).
In another approach, the pronucleus from the pathogenic variant-­
carrier mother’s fertilized oocyte is transferred to the unaffected
mitochondrial donor’s fertilized oocyte (minus the pronucleus).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 99

Chromosome Disorders

Table 99.1  Incidence of Chromosomal Abnormalities in
Newborn Surveys
TYPE OF ABNORMALITY

NUMBER

APPROXIMATE
INCIDENCE

SEX CHROMOSOME ANEUPLOIDY
Males (43,612 newborns)
47,XXY

45

1/1,000*

47,XYY

45

1/1,000

Other X or Y aneuploidy

32

1/1,350

Total

122

1/360 male births

Females (24,547 newborns)
45,X

6

1/4,000

47,XXX

27

1/900

Other X aneuploidy

9

1/2,700

Total

42

1/580 female
births

AUTOSOMAL ANEUPLOIDY (68,159 NEWBORNS)
Trisomy 21
82
1/830
Trisomy 18

9

1/7,500

Trisomy 13

3

1/22,700

Other aneuploidy

2

1/34,000

Total

96

1/700 live births

STRUCTURAL ABNORMALITIES (68,159 NEWBORNS)
Balanced Rearrangements
Robertsonian
62
1/1,100
Other

77

1/885

Unbalanced Rearrangements
Robertsonian

5

1/13,600

Other

38

1/1,800

Total

182

1/375 live births

All chromosome
abnormalities

442

1/154 live births

*Recent studies show the prevalence is currently 1:580 (Morris JK, Alberman E, Scott
C, Jacobs P. Is the prevalence of Klinefelter syndrome increasing? Eur J Hum Genet.
2008;16(2):163–170.)
Data from Hsu LYF. Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities through
amniocentesis. In: Milunsky A, ed, Genetic Disorders and the Fetus, 4th ed. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press; 1998: pp. 179–248.

Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
99.1 Methods of Chromosome Analysis
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
Clinical cytogenetics is the study of chromosomes, including their
structure, function, inheritance, and abnormalities. Chromosome
abnormalities are very common and occur in approximately 1–2% of
live births, 5% of stillbirths, and 50% of early fetal losses in the first
trimester of pregnancy (Table 99.1). Chromosome abnormalities are
more common among individuals with intellectual disability and play
a significant role in the development of some neoplasias.
Chromosome analyses are indicated in persons presenting with
multiple congenital anomalies, dysmorphic features, and/or intellectual disability. The specific indications for studies include prenatal testing in conceptuses of women with advanced maternal age (>35 years),
multiple abnormalities on fetal ultrasound, multiple congenital anomalies, unexplained growth restriction in the fetus, postnatal problems

in growth and development, ambiguous genitalia, unexplained intellectual disability with or without associated anatomic abnormalities,
primary amenorrhea or infertility, recurrent miscarriages (≥3) or prior
history of stillbirths and neonatal deaths, a first-­degree relative with
a known or suspected structural chromosome abnormality, clinical
findings consistent with a known anomaly, some malignancies, and
chromosome breakage syndromes (e.g., Bloom syndrome, Fanconi
anemia).
Cytogenetic studies are usually performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes, although cultured fibroblasts obtained from a skin biopsy
may also be used. Prenatal (fetal) chromosome studies are performed
with cells obtained from the amniotic fluid (amniocytes), chorionic
villus tissue, and fetal blood or, in the case of preimplantation diagnosis, by analysis of a blastomere (cleavage stage) biopsy, polar body
biopsy, or blastocyst biopsy. Cytogenetic studies of bone marrow have
an important role in tumor surveillance, particularly among patients
with leukemia. These are useful to determine induction of remission
and success of therapy, or in some cases the occurrence of relapses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Chromosome anomalies include abnormalities of number and
structure and are the result of errors during cell division. There are
two types of cell division: mitosis, which occurs in most somatic cells,
and meiosis, which is limited to the germ cells. In mitosis, two genetically identical daughter cells are produced from a single parent cell.
DNA replication (duplication of DNA material) has already occurred
during interphase in the S phase of the cell cycle (DNA synthesis).
Therefore, at the beginning of mitosis, the chromosomes consist of
two double DNA strands joined together at the centromere, known
as sister chromatids. Mitosis can be divided into four stages: prophase,
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Prophase is characterized by
condensation of the DNA. Also during prophase, the nuclear membrane and the nucleolus disappear and the mitotic spindle forms.
In metaphase the chromosomes are maximally compacted and are
clearly visible as distinct structures. The chromosomes align at the
center of the cell, and spindle fibers connect to the centromere of each
chromosome and extend to centrioles at the two poles of the mitotic
figure. In anaphase the chromosomes divide along their longitudinal
axes to form two separate daughter chromatids, which then migrate
to opposite poles of the cell. Telophase is characterized by formation of two new nuclear membranes and nucleoli, duplication of the
centrioles, and cytoplasmic cleavage to form the two daughter cells.
Meiosis begins in the female oocyte during fetal life and is completed years to decades later. In males it begins in a spermatogonial
cell sometime between adolescence and adult life and is completed in a
few days. Meiosis is preceded by DNA replication so that at the outset,
each of the 46 chromosomes consists of two chromatids. In meiosis, a
diploid cell (2n = 46 chromosomes) divides to form four haploid cells
(n = 23 chromosomes). Meiosis consists of two major rounds of cell
division. In meiosis I, each of the homologous chromosomes pair precisely so that genetic recombination, involving exchange between two
DNA strands (crossing over), can occur. This results in reshuffling of
the genetic information for the recombined chromosomes and allows
further genetic diversity. Each daughter cell then receives one of each
of the 23 homologous chromosomes. In oogenesis, one of the daughter
cells receives most of the cytoplasm and becomes the egg, whereas the
other smaller cell becomes the first polar body. Meiosis II is similar to
a mitotic division but without a preceding round of DNA replication.
Each of the 23 chromosomes divides longitudinally, and the homologous chromatids migrate to opposite poles of the cell. This produces
four spermatogonia in males, or an egg cell and a second polar body
in females, each with a haploid (n = 23) set of chromosomes. Consequently, meiosis fulfills two crucial roles: It enables genetic recombination, and it reduces the chromosome number from diploid (46) to
haploid (23) so that on fertilization a diploid number is restored.
Two common errors of cell division may occur during meiosis or
mitosis, and either can result in an abnormal number of chromosomes. The first error is nondisjunction, in which two chromosomes
fail to separate during meiosis and thus migrate together into one of
the new cells, producing one cell with two copies of the chromosome
and another with no copy. The second error is anaphase lag, in which
a chromatid or chromosome is lost during mitosis because it fails to
move quickly enough during anaphase to become incorporated into
one of the new daughter cells (Fig. 99.1).
For chromosome analysis, cells are cultured (for varying periods
depending on cell type), with or without stimulation, and then artificially arrested in mitosis during metaphase (or prometaphase),
later subjected to a hypotonic solution to allow disruption of the
nuclear cell membrane and proper dispersion of the chromosomes
for analysis, fixed, banded, and finally stained. The most commonly
used banding and staining method is the GTG banding (G bands by
trypsin using Giemsa), also known as G banding, which produces
a unique combination of dark (G-­positive) and light (G-­negative)
bands that permits recognition of all individual 23 chromosome
pairs for analysis.
Metaphase chromosome spreads are first evaluated microscopically,
and then their images are photographed or captured by a video camera
and stored on a computer for later analysis. Humans have 46 chromosomes or 23 pairs, which are classified as autosomes for chromosomes

761

46,N

46,N

46,N

Nondisjunction
45,–21

47,+21

A

46,N

46,N

46,N/47,+21

46,XX

46,XX

46,XX
Nondisjunction

46,XX

B

46,XX

45,X

47,XXX

45,X/46,XX/47,XXX

47,+21

Anaphase
lag

46,N

C

47,+21

47,+21

47,+21

47,+21

47,+21

46,N/47,+21

Fig. 99.1 Generation of mosaicism. A, Postzygotic nondisjunction
in an initially normal conceptus. In this example, one cell line (monosomic 21) is subsequently lost, with the final karyotype 46,N/47,+21. B,
Postzygotic nondisjunction in an initially 46,XX conceptus, resulting in
45,X/46,XX/47,XXX mosaicism. C, Postzygotic anaphase lag in an initially 47,+21 conceptus. (From Gardner RJM, Sutherland GR. Chromosome Abnormalities and Genetic Counseling, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2003: Fig. 43.1, p. 33.)

1-­22, and the sex chromosomes, often referred as sex complement: XX
for females and XY for males. The homologous chromosomes from a
metaphase spread can then be paired and arranged systematically to
assemble a karyotype according to well-­defined standard conventions
such as those established by International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature (ISCN), with chromosome 1 being the largest
and 22 the smallest. According to nomenclature, the description of
the karyotype includes the total number of chromosomes followed by
the sex chromosome constitution. A normal karyotype is 46,XX for
females and 46,XY for males (Fig. 99.2). Abnormalities are noted after
the sex chromosome complement.
Although the internationally accepted system for human chromosome classification relies largely on the length and banding pattern
of each chromosome, the position of the centromere relative to the
ends of the chromosome also is a useful distinguishing feature (Fig.
99.3). The centromere divides the chromosome in two, with the short
arm designated the p arm and the long arm designated the q arm. A
plus or minus sign before the number of a chromosome indicates that
there is an extra or missing chromosome, respectively. Table 99.2 lists
some of the abbreviations used for the descriptions of chromosomes
and their abnormalities. A metaphase chromosome spread usually

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

762 Part VIII u Human Genetics

1

2

3

8

9

10

4

5

11

12

6

7

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

X

Y

Fig. 99.2 Karyotype of a normal male at the 550-­600 band level. The
longer the chromosomes are captured at metaphase or sometimes prometaphase, the more bands can be visualized.

11

13

1

Fig. 99.3 Example of different chromosome types according to the

position of the centromere. On the left is a chromosome one pair with
the centromere equidistant from the short and long arm (also known as
metacentric). In the center is a chromosome 11 pair that is submetacentric. On the right is a chromosome 13 pair that is an example of
an acrocentric chromosome. Acrocentric chromosomes contain a very
small short arm, stalks, and satellite DNA. The black arrow indicates
the position of the centromere. The blue arrow shows the long arm of
a chromosome. The red arrow shows the short arm of a chromosome.
The green arrow highlights the satellite region, which is made of DNA
repeats. The light area between the short arm and the satellite is known
as the stalk.

shows 450-­550 bands. Prophase and prometaphase chromosomes
are longer, are less condensed, and often show 550-­850 bands. High-­
resolution analysis may detect small chromosome abnormalities,
although this has been mostly replaced by chromosome microarray
analysis (CMA), also called array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).
Molecular techniques (e.g., fluorescence in situ hybridization
[FISH], CMA) identify subtle abnormalities that are often below
the resolution of standard cytogenetic studies. FISH is used to
identify the presence, absence, or rearrangement of specific DNA
segments and is performed with gene-­ or region-­specific DNA
probes. Several FISH probes are used in the clinical setting: unique
sequence or single-­copy probes, repetitive-­s equence probes (alpha
satellites in the pericentromeric regions), and multiple-­
copy
probes (chromosome specific or painting) (Fig. 99.4A,B). FISH
involves using a unique, known DNA sequence or probe labeled
with a fluorescent dye that is complementary to the studied region
of disease interest. The labeled probe is exposed to the DNA on
a microscope slide, typically metaphase or interphase chromosomal DNA. When the probe pairs with its complementary DNA

sequence, it can then be visualized by fluorescence microscopy
(Fig. 99.5). In metaphase chromosome spreads, the exact chromosomal location of each probe copy can be documented, and
often the number of copies (deletions, duplications) of the DNA
sequence as well. When the interrogated segments (as in genomic
duplications) are close together, interphase cells can accurately
determine the presence of two or more copies or signals, because
in chromosome-­
condensed metaphase cells some duplications
might falsely appear as a single signal.
Chromosome rearrangements <5 million bp (5 Mbp) cannot be
detected by conventional cytogenetic techniques. FISH has facilitated
the clinical characterization of several microdeletion syndromes (50-­
200 kb of DNA). Some FISH probes hybridize to repetitive sequences
located in the pericentromeric regions. Pericentromeric probes are still
used for rapid identification of certain trisomies in interphase cells of
blood smears, or even in the rapid analysis of prenatal samples from
cells obtained through amniocentesis. Such probes are available for
chromosomes 13, 18, and 21 and for the sex pair X and Y (see Fig.
99.4C and D). FISH is no longer the first line of testing, and its role has
also mostly changed to the confirmation of chromosome microarray
findings. FISH is reserved for (1) confirmation studies of abnormalities
detected by CMA, (2) rapid prenatal screening on interphase amniotic
fluid cells, and (3) interphase blood smear for sex assignment of newborns who present with ambiguous genitalia.
Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a type of chromosomal microarray (CMA) that uses a molecular-­based technique
that differentially labels the patient’s DNA with a fluorescent dye (green
fluorophore) and a normal reference DNA with a red fluorophore (Figs.
99.6 and 99.7). Oligonucleotides (short DNA segments) encompassing
the entire genome are spotted onto a slide or microarray grid. Equal
amounts of the two-­labeled DNA samples are mixed, and the green:red
fluorescence ratio is measured along each tested area. Regions of amplification of the patient’s DNA display an excess of green fluorescence,
and regions of loss show excess red fluorescence. If the patient’s and the
control DNA are equally represented, the green:red ratio is 1:1, and the
tested regions are represented as yellow (see Chapter 96 and Fig. 96.5).
Another frequently used chromosome microarray type in the
clinical setting is the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array.
SNPs are polymorphic variations between two nucleotides and, when
analyzed in massive parallel fashion, they can provide valuable clinical information. Several million SNPs normally occur in the human
genome. SNP arrays can help with the detection of uniparental disomies (i.e., genetic information derived from only one parent), as well
as consanguinity in the family. Many arrays used in clinical practice
combine the use of oligonucleotides for the detection of copy number
variations (CNVs) in conjunction with SNPs.
The detection of abnormalities by CMA is possible at the single-­exon
resolution level, depending on the configuration of the array used.
The many advantages of CMA include its ability to test for duplications or deletions in critical disease-­causing regions of the genome at
once, including single-­gene and contiguous gene deletion syndromes.
In addition, CMA does not require cell cultures to generate sufficient
DNA, which may be important in the context of pre­natal testing
because of timing. However, CMA cannot detect balanced translocations or inversions and may not detect low levels of chromosomal
mosaicism. Targeted CMAs can detect clinically known cryptic chromosomal aberrations associated with known disease phenotypes. CNV
detection can also be diagnosed by next-­generation sequencing in the
context of whole genome sequencing.
There are large numbers of deletion and duplication CNVs in the
human genome. Thus many detected genetic abnormalities, unless
associated with well-­known clinical phenotypes, may require parental investigations because a detected CNV that is inherited could
be benign or an incidental polymorphic variant often described as
variants of uncertain significance (VUS). A de novo abnormality
(i.e., one found only in the child and not the parents) is often significant if it is associated with an abnormal phenotype found only
in the child and if it involves genes with important functions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

763

Table 99.2  Some Abbreviations Used for Description of Chromosomes and Their Abnormalities
ABBREVIATION

MEANING

EXAMPLE

CONDITION

XX

Female

46,XX

Normal female karyotype

XY

Male

46,XY

Normal male karyotype

[##]

Number [#] of cells

46,XY[12]/47,XXY[10]

Number of cells in each clone, typically inside brackets
Mosaicism in Klinefelter syndrome with 12 normal cells
and 10 cells with an extra X chromosome

cen

Centromere

del

Deletion

46,XY,del(5p)

Male with deletion of chromosome 5 short arm

der

Derivative

46,XX,der(2),t(2p12;7q13)

Female with a structurally rearranged chromosome
2 that resulted from a translocation between
chromosomes 2 (short arm) and 7 (long arm)

dup

Duplication

46,XY,dup(15)(q11-­q13)

Male with interstitial duplication in the long arm
of chromosome 15 in the Prader-­Willi/Angelman
syndrome region

ins

Insertion

46,XY,ins(3)(p13q21q26)

Male with an insertion within chromosome 3
A piece between q21 and q26 has reinserted on p13

inv

Inversion

46,XY,inv(2)(p21q31)

Male with pericentric inversion of chromosome 2 with
breakpoints at bands p21 and q31

ish

Metaphase FISH

46,XX.ish del(7)(q11.23q11.23)

Female with deletion in the Williams syndrome region
detected by in situ hybridization

nuc ish

Interphase FISH

nuc ish(DXZ1 × 3)

Interphase in situ hybridization showing three signals for
the X chromosome centromeric region

mar

Marker

47,XY,+mar

Male with extra, unidentified chromosome material

mos

Mosaic

mos 45,X[14]/46,XX[16]

Turner syndrome mosaicism (analysis of 30 cells showed
that 14 cells were 45,X and 16 cells were 46,XX)

p

Short arm

46,XY,del(5)(p12)

Male with a deletion on the short arm of chromosome 5,
band p12 (short nomenclature)

q

Long arm

46,XY,del(5)(q14)

Male with a deletion on the long arm of chromosome 5,
band 14

r

Ring chromosome

46,X,r(X)(p21q27)

Female with one normal X chromosome and a ring X
chromosome

t

Translocation

t(2;8)(q33;q24.1)

Interchange of material between chromosomes 2 and 8
with breakpoints at bands 2q33 and 8q24.1

ter

Terminal

46,XY,del(5)(p12-­pter)

Male with a deletion of chromosome 5 between p12 and
the end of the short arm (long nomenclature)

/

Slash

45,X/46,XY

Separate lines or clones
Mosaicism for monosomy X and a male cell line

+

Gain of

47,XX,+21

Female with trisomy 21

−

Loss of

45,XY,−21

Male with monosomy 21

FISH, Fluorescence in situ hybridization.

99.2 Abnormalities of Chromosome Number
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee

ANEUPLOIDY AND POLYPLOIDY

Typical human cells contain 46 chromosomes, which is a multiple of 23
chromosomes. Haploid cells contain 23 chromosomes (n=23, typically
in the ovum or sperm). If a cell’s chromosomes are an exact multiple of
23 (46, 69, 92 in humans), those cells are referred to as euploid. Polyploid cells are euploid cells with more than the normal diploid number of 46 (2n) chromosomes, such as 3n, 4n. Polyploid conceptions
are usually not viable, but the presence of mosaicism with a karyotypically normal cell line can allow survival. Mosaicism is an abnormality
defined as the presence of two or more different cell lines in a single

individual. Polyploidy is a common abnormality seen in first-­trimester
pregnancy losses.
Triploid cells are those with three haploid sets of chromosomes
(3n) and are only viable in a mosaic form. Nonmosaic triploid
infants can be liveborn but typically die shortly after birth. Triploidy is often the result of fertilization of an egg by two sperm
(dispermy). Failure of one of the meiotic divisions, resulting in a
diploid egg or sperm, can also result in triploidy. The phenotype of
a triploid conception depends on the origin of the extra chromosome set. If the extra set is of paternal origin, it results in a partial
hydatidiform mole (excessive placental growth) with poor embryonic development, but triploid conceptions that have an extra set of
maternal chromosomes result in severe embryonic restriction with
a small, fibrotic placenta (insufficient placental development) that
is typically spontaneously aborted.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

764 Part VIII u Human Genetics

21
5

5

A

B

C

D
Fig. 99.4 A, Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of interphase peripheral blood cells from a patient with Down syndrome using a

chromosome 21–specific probe. The three red signals mark the presence of three chromosomes 21. B, FISH analysis of a metaphase chromosome
spread from a clinically normal individual using a whole chromosome paint specific for chromosome 5. Both chromosome 5s are completely labeled
(yellow) along their entire length. C, FISH on metaphase cells using a unique sequence probe that hybridizes to the elastin gene on chromosome
7q11.23, inside the Williams syndrome critical region. The elastin probe is labeled in red, and a control probe on chromosome 7 is labeled in green.
The left image shows normal hybridization to chromosome 7, with two signals for the elastin region and two for the control probe. The right image
shows a normal chromosome on the right with control and elastin signals and a deleted chromosome 7 on the left, evidenced by a single signal for
the control probe. This image corresponds to a patient with a Williams syndrome region deletion. D, FISH in interphase cells using DNA probes
that hybridize to repetitive α-­satellite sequences in the pericentromeric region for the sex chromosomes. Left, interphase cells with two signals, one
labeled in red for the X chromosome and green for the Y chromosome, consistent with a normal male chromosome complement. Right, interphase
cell showing two red signals for the X chromosome, compatible with a normal female chromosome complement.
Chromosomal DNA on slide
Denaturation

Fig. 99.5 FISH involves dena-

turation of double-­
stranded DNA
as present in metaphase chromosomes or interphase nuclei on
cytogenetic slide preparations
(A) into single-­
stranded DNA (B).
The slide-­
bound (in situ) DNA is
then renatured or reannealed in
the presence of excess copies of
a single-­
stranded, fluorochrome-­
labeled DNA base-­
pair sequence
or probe (C). The probe anneals
or “hybridizes” to sites of complementary DNA sequence (D) within
the chromosomal genome. Probe
signal is visualized and imaged on
the chromosome by fluorescent
microscopy. (From Lin RL, Cherry
AM, Bangs CD, et al. FISHing for
answers: the use of molecular cytogenetic techniques in adolescent
medicine practice. In: Hyme HE,
Greydanus D, eds, Genetic Disorders in Adolescents: State of the
art reviews. Adolescent medicine.
Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus;
2002: pp. 305–313.)

A

C
G
T
T –A
A –T
G– C
C–G
A –T
C
G
A

Chromosome with
fluorescent probe signal

D

Renaturation with
fluorochrome-labeled
DNA probe

B

C
G
T
T
A
G
C
A
C
G
A

Probe hybridization

A
T
C
G
T

C

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A
T
C
G
T

A
T
C
G
T

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

765

normal 15

q11.2

22 der (22)

q26.1

15 der (15)

46,XY,t(15;22)(q26.1;q11.2)

A

B

crodeletion at a translocation breakpoint of an apparently balanced
translocation in a patient with developmental delay (dd) and growth
defect. A, Partial karyotype shows
t(15;22)(q26.1;q11.2). B, Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with
clones 2O19 (top arrow) and 354M14
(bottom arrow) at 15q26.1; arrows
indicate signals only present on the
normal chromosome 15, suggesting
a deletion on the der(15). C, Two-­
color array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) with dye swap
with 244 K oligo probes; arrowhead
indicates a 3.3-­
Mbp deletion at
chromosome 15q26.1-­q26.2; arrow
points to the close-­up view of the deletion. (From Li MM, Andersson HC.
Clinical application of microarray-­
based molecular cytogenetics: an
emerging new era of genomic medicine. J Pediatr. 2009;155:311–317,
with permission of the authors and
publisher.)

15:85716661-96053081, 10.3 Mb

q12
q13.2
q14
q15.2

89 Mb

85 Mb

15

Fig. 99.6 Example of a cryptic mi-

der (15)

q21.1

q22.2
q22.32
q23
q24.2

92 Mb

q21.3

q25.1

q26.2

1.5

C

96 Mb

q25.3

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13 14 15

16

17

18 19 20 21 22

0.0
–0.5
–1.0

michybridization (aCGH) in a female
patient with Down syndrome. Each
black dot represents a piece of DNA
segment specific for different chromosome location. Most of the dots displayed between the 0.0 and 0.2 axis
are considered within normal range.
Exceptions are often a result of polymorphic variations. A group of dots
colored in green clusters on chromosome 21 and above 0.5. These represent a gain in copy number of DNA
segments for chromosome 21, as seen
in Down syndrome and consistent with
trisomy 21.

–1.5

Fig. 99.7 Array comparative geno­

0.5

1.0

1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

X

Y

766 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 99.3  Chromosomal Trisomies and Their Clinical Findings*
SYNDROME

INCIDENCE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Trisomy 13, Patau
syndrome

1/10,000 births

Cleft lip often midline; flexed fingers with postaxial polydactyly; ocular hypotelorism,
bulbous nose; low-­set, malformed ears; microcephaly; cerebral malformation, especially
holoprosencephaly; microphthalmia, cardiac malformations; scalp defects; hypoplastic or
absent ribs; visceral and genital anomalies
Early lethality in most cases, with a median survival of 12 days; ∼80% die by 1 year; 10-­year
survival ∼13%; survivors have significant neurodevelopmental delay

Trisomy 18, Edwards
syndrome

1/6,000 births

Low birthweight, closed fists with index finger overlapping the third digit and the fifth digit
overlapping the fourth, narrow hips with limited abduction, short sternum, rocker-­bottom
feet, microcephaly, prominent occiput, micrognathia, cardiac and renal malformations,
intellectual disability
∼88% of children die in the first year; 10-­year survival ∼10%; survivors have significant
neurodevelopmental delay

Trisomy 8, mosaicism

1/20,000 births

Long face; high, prominent forehead; wide, upturned nose; thick, everted lower lip;
microretro­gnathia; low-­set ears; high-­arched, sometimes cleft, palate; osteoarticular anomalies
common (camptodactyly of second through fifth digits, small patella); deep plantar and
palmar creases; moderate intellectual disability

*For trisomy 21, see Chapter 57.

Abnormal cells that do not contain a multiple of haploid number
of chromosomes are termed aneuploid cells. Aneuploidy is the most
common and clinically significant type of human chromosome abnormality, occurring in at least 3–4% of all clinically recognized pregnancies. Monosomies occur when only one, instead of the normal pair
(two), of a given chromosome is present in an otherwise diploid cell.
In humans, most autosomal monosomies appear to be lethal early in
development, and survival is possible in mosaic forms or by means of
chromosome rescue (restoration of the normal number by duplication
of single monosomic chromosome, also known as monosomy rescue).
An exception to this rule is monosomy for the X chromosome (45,X),
seen in Turner syndrome; nonetheless, the majority of 45,X conceptuses are believed to be lost early in pregnancy for as yet unexplained
reasons.
The most common cause of aneuploidy is nondisjunction, the failure of chromosomes to disjoin normally during meiosis (see Fig. 99.1).
Nondisjunction can occur during meiosis I or II or during mitosis,
although maternal meiosis I is the most common nondisjunction in
aneuploidies (e.g., Down syndrome, trisomy 18). After meiotic nondisjunction, the resulting gamete either lacks a chromosome or has two
copies instead of one normal copy, resulting in a monosomic or trisomic zygote, respectively.
Trisomy is characterized by the presence of three chromosomes,
instead of the normal pair (two), of any particular chromosome. Trisomy is the most common form of aneuploidy. Trisomy can occur in
all cells, or it may be mosaic. Most individuals with a trisomy exhibit
a consistent and specific phenotype depending on the chromosome
involved.
FISH is a technique that can be used for rapid diagnosis in the
prenatal detection of common fetal aneuploidies, including chromosomes 13, 18, and 21, as well as sex chromosomes (see Fig. 99.4C and
D). Direct detection of cell-­free fetal DNA (trophoblastic or placental
origin) in maternal plasma for fetal trisomy detection is a safe and
highly effective screening test for fetal aneuploidy. The most common numerical abnormalities in liveborn children include trisomy 21
(Down syndrome) (see Chapter 57); trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome);
trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome); and sex chromosomal aneuploidies,
such as Turner syndrome (usually 45,X), Klinefelter syndrome
(47,XXY), 47,XXX, and 47,XYY. By far the most common type of
trisomy in liveborn infants is trisomy 21 (47,XX,+21 or 47,XY,+21)
(see Table 99.1). Trisomy 18 and trisomy 13 are relatively less common and are associated with a characteristic set of congenital anomalies and severe intellectual disability (Table 99.3). The occurrence

of trisomy 21 and other trisomies increases with advanced maternal
age (≥35 years). Because of this increased risk, women who are ≥35
years old at delivery should be offered genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis (including serum screening, ultrasonography, and cell-­
free DNA detection, amniocentesis, or chorionic villus sampling; see
Chapter 117).

99.3 Abnormalities of Chromosome
Structure
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee

TRANSLOCATIONS

Translocations, which involve the transfer of material from one
chromosome to another, occur with a frequency of 1 in 500 liveborn human infants. They may be inherited from a carrier parent
or appear de novo, with no other affected family member. Translocations are usually reciprocal or Robertsonian, involving two chromosomes (Fig. 99.8).
Reciprocal translocations are the result of breaks in nonhomologous chromosomes, with reciprocal exchange of the broken segments.
Carriers of a reciprocal translocation are usually phenotypically normal but are at an increased risk for miscarriage caused by transmission
of unbalanced reciprocal translocations and for bearing chromosomally abnormal offspring. Unbalanced translocations are the result of
abnormalities in the segregation or crossover of the translocation carrier chromosomes in the germ cells.
Robertsonian translocations involve two acrocentric chromosomes (chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21, and 22) that fuse near the centromeric region with a subsequent loss of the short arms. Because
the short arms of all five pairs of acrocentric chromosomes have
multiple copies of genes encoding for ribosomal RNA, loss of the
short arms of acrocentric chromosomes has no deleterious effect.
The resulting karyotype has only 45 chromosomes, including the
translocated chromosome, which consists of the long arms of the
two fused chromosomes. Carriers of Robertsonian translocations
are usually phenotypically normal. However, they are at increased
risk for miscarriage and unbalanced translocations in phenotypically abnormal offspring.
In some rare instances, translocations can involve three or more
chromosomes, as seen in complex rearrangements. Another less

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

q24.1

8

q33

der(8)

der(2)

A

2

767

A carrier of a deletion is monosomic for the genetic information of
the missing segment. Deletions are usually associated with intellectual
disability and malformations. The most commonly observed deletions
in routine chromosome preparations include 1p−, 4p−, 5p−, 9p−,
11p−, 13q−, 18p−, 18q−, and 21q− (Table 99.4 and Fig. 99.9), all distal
or terminal deletions of the short or the long arms of chromosomes.
Deletions may be observed in routine chromosome preparations, and
deletions and translocations larger than 5-­10 Mbp are usually visible
microscopically.
High-­resolution banding techniques, FISH, and molecular studies such as CMA can reveal deletions that are too small to be seen in
ordinary or routine chromosome spreads (see Fig. 99.7). Microdeletions involve loss of small chromosome regions, the largest of which
are detectable only with prophase chromosome studies and molecular
methods. For submicroscopic deletions, the missing piece can only be
detected using molecular methodologies such as DNA-­based studies
(e.g., CMA, FISH). The presence of extra genetic material from the
same chromosome is referred to as duplication. Duplications can also

Table 99.4  Common Deletions and Their Clinical
­Manifestations
DELETION

B

13

der(13;14)

4p–

Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome. The main features are a
typical “Greek helmet” facies secondary to ocular
hypertelorism, prominent glabella, frontal bossing,
microcephaly, dolichocephaly, hypoplasia of the
orbits, ptosis, strabismus, nystagmus, bilateral
epicanthic folds, cleft lip and palate, beaked nose
with prominent bridge, hypospadias, cardiac
malformations, and intellectual disability.

5p–

Cri du chat syndrome. The main features are
hypo­tonia, short stature, characteristic shrill cry
in the first few weeks of life (also called cat’s cry
syndrome), microcephaly with protruding metopic
suture, hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthic folds,
high arched palate, wide and flat nasal bridge, and
intellectual disability.

9p–

The main features are craniofacial dysmorphic features
with trigonocephaly, slanted palpebral fissures, discrete
exophthalmos secondary to supraorbital hypoplasia,
arched eyebrows, flat and wide nasal bridge, short
neck with low hairline, genital anomalies, long
fingers and toes with extra flexion creases, cardiac
malformations, and intellectual disability.

13q–

The main features are low birthweight, failure to
thrive, microcephaly, and severe intellectual disability.
Facial features include high, wide nasal bridge;
hypertelorism; ptosis; and micrognathia. Ocular
malformations are common (retinoblastoma). The
hands have hypoplastic or absent thumbs and
syndactyly.

18p–

A few patients (15%) are severely affected and
have cephalic and ocular malformations:
holoprosencephaly, cleft lip and palate, ptosis,
epicanthal folds, and varying degrees of intellectual
disability. Most (80%) have only minor malformations
and mild intellectual disability.

18q–

The main features are growth deficiency and
hypotonia with a “froglike” position with the legs
flexed, externally rotated, and in hyperabduction.
The face is characteristic, with depressed midface
and apparent protrusion of the mandible, deep-­set
eyes, short upper lip, and everted lower lip
(“carplike” mouth); antihelix of the ears is very
prominent. Varying degrees of intellectual disability
and belligerent personality are present. Myelination
abnormalities occur in the central nervous system.

14

Fig. 99.8 A, Schematic diagram (left) and partial G-­banded karyotype

(right) of a reciprocal translocation between chromosome two (blue)
and chromosome eight (pink). The breakpoints are on the long (q) arm
of both chromosomes at bands 2q33 and 8q24.1, with the reciprocal
exchange of material between the derivative (der) chromosomes 2 and
8. This translocation is balanced, with no net gain or loss of material.
The nomenclature for this exchange is t(2;8)(q33:q24.1). B, Schematic
diagram (left) and partial G-­banded karyotype (right) of a Robertsonian
translocation between chromosomes 13 (blue) and 14 (pink). The breakpoints are at the centromere (band q10) of both chromosomes, with
fusion of the long arms into a single derivative chromosome and loss
of the short (p) arm material. The nomenclature for this exchange is
der(13;14)(q10;q10).

common type is the insertional translocation. Insertional translocations result from a piece of chromosome material that breaks away and
later is reinserted within the same chromosome at a different site or
inserted into another chromosome.

INVERSIONS

An inversion requires that a single chromosome breaks at two points;
the broken piece is then inverted and joined into the same chromosome. Inversions occur in 1 in 100 live births. There are two types of
inversions, pericentric and paracentric. In pericentric inversions the
breaks are in the two opposite arms of the chromosome and include the
centromere. They are usually discovered because they change the position of the centromere. The breaks in paracentric inversions occur in
only one arm. Carriers of inversions are usually phenotypically normal,
but they are at increased risk for miscarriages, typically in paracentric inversions, and chromosomally abnormal offspring in pericentric
inversions.

DELETIONS AND DUPLICATIONS

Deletions involve loss of chromosome material and, depending on
their location, can be classified as terminal (at the end of chromosomes) or interstitial (within the arm of a chromosome). They may be
isolated or may occur along with a duplication of another chromosome
segment. The latter typically occurs in unbalanced reciprocal chromosomal translocation secondary to abnormal crossover or segregation in
a translocation or inversion carrier.

CLINICAL ABNORMALITIES

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

768 Part VIII u Human Genetics

A

C

B

D

Fig. 99.9 A, Child with velocardiofacial syndrome (deletion 22q11.2). B, Child with Williams syndrome (deletion 7q11.23). C, Child with Prader-­
Willi syndrome (deletion 15q11-­13). D, Child with Angelman syndrome (deletion 15q11-­13). (From Lin RL, Cherry AM, Bangs CD, et al. FISHing
for answers: the use of molecular cytogenetic techniques in adolescent medicine practice. In: Hyme HE, Greydanus D, eds, Genetic Disorders in
Adolescents: state of the art reviews. Adolescent medicine. Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus; 2002: pp. 305–313.)

Table 99.5  Microdeletion and Contiguous Gene Syndromes and Their Clinical Manifestations
DELETION

SYNDROME

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

1p36

1p deletion

Growth restriction, dysmorphic features with midface hypoplasia, straight thin eyebrows,
pointy chin, sensorineural hearing loss, progressive cardiomyopathy, hypothyroidism,
seizures, intellectual disability

5q35

Sotos (50% are deletions of
NSD1 gene in Asians but
only 6% in Whites)

Overgrowth, macrocephaly, prominent forehead, prominence of extraaxial fluid spaces on
brain imaging, large hands and feet, hypotonia, clumsiness, mental disabilities

6p25

Axenfeld-­Rieger

Axenfeld-­Rieger malformation, hearing loss, congenital heart defects, dental anomalies,
developmental delays, facial dysmorphism

7q11.23

Williams

Round face with full cheeks and lips, long philtrum, stellate pattern in iris, strabismus,
supravalvular aortic stenosis and other cardiac malformations, varying degrees of
intellectual disability, friendly personality

8p11

8p11

Kallmann syndrome type 2 (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and anosmia), spherocytosis
(deletions of ankyrin 1), multiple congenital anomalies, intellectual disability

8q24.1-­q24.13

Langer-­Giedion or tricho­
rhinophalangeal type II

Sparse hair, multiple cone-­shaped epiphyses, multiple cartilaginous exostoses, bulbous
nasal tip, thickened alar cartilage, upturned nares, prominent philtrum, large protruding
ears, mild intellectual disability

9q22

Gorlin

Multiple basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts, palmoplantar pits, calcification
falx cerebri

9q34

9q34 deletion

Distinct face with synophrys, anteverted nares, tented upper lip, protruding tongue,
midface hypoplasia, conotruncal heart defects, intellectual disability

10p12-­p13

DiGeorge type 2

Many of the DiGeorge type 1 and velocardiofacial type 1 features (conotruncal defects,
immunodeficiency, hypoparathyroidism, dysmorphic features)

11p11.2

Potocki-­Shaffer

Multiple exostoses, parietal foramina, craniosynostosis, facial dysmorphism, syndactyly,
intellectual disability

11p13

WAGR

Hypernephroma (Wilms tumor), aniridia, male genital hypoplasia of varying degrees,
gonadoblastoma, long face, upward-­slanting palpebral fissures, ptosis, beaked nose,
low-­set poorly formed auricles, intellectual disability (retardation)

11q24.1-­11qter

Jacobsen

Growth restriction, intellectual disability, cardiac and digit anomalies, thrombocytopenia

15q11-­q13
(paternal)

Prader-­Willi

Severe hypotonia and feeding difficulties at birth, voracious appetite and obesity in
infancy, short stature (responsive to growth hormone), small hands and feet,
hypogonadism, intellectual disability
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

769

Table 99.5  Microdeletion and Contiguous Gene Syndromes and Their Clinical Manifestations—cont’d
DELETION

SYNDROME

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

15q11-­q13
(maternal)

Angelman

Hypotonia, feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux, fair hair and skin, midface
hypoplasia, prognathism, seizures, tremors, ataxia, sleep disturbances, inappropriate
laughter, poor or absent speech, severe intellectual disability

16p13.3

Rubinstein-­Taybi

Microcephaly, ptosis, beaked nose with low-­lying philtrum, broad thumbs and large toes,
intellectual disability

17p11.2

Smith-­Magenis

Brachycephaly, midfacial hypoplasia, prognathism, myopia, cleft palate, short stature,
severe behavioral problems, intellectual disability

17p13.3

Miller-­Dieker

Microcephaly, lissencephaly, pachygyria, narrow forehead, hypoplastic male external
genitals, growth restriction, seizures, profound intellectual disability

20p12

Alagille

Bile duct paucity with cholestasis; heart defects, particularly pulmonary artery
stenosis; ocular abnormalities (posterior embryotoxon); skeletal defects such
as butterfly vertebrae; long nose

22q11.2

Velocardiofacial-­DiGeorge

Conotruncal cardiac anomalies, cleft palate, velopharyngeal incompetence, hypoplasia
or agenesis of thymus and parathyroid glands, hypocalcemia, hypoplasia of auricle,
learning disabilities, psychiatric disorders

22q13.3 deletion

Hypotonia, developmental delay, normal or accelerated growth, severe expressive
language deficits, autistic behavior

Xp21.2-­p21.3

Duchenne muscular dystrophy, retinitis pigmentosa, adrenal hypoplasia, intellectual
disability, glycerol kinase deficiency

Xp22.2-­p22.3

Ichthyosis, Kallmann syndrome, intellectual disability, chondrodysplasia punctata

Xp22.3

MLS

Microphthalmia, linear skin defects, poikiloderma, congenital heart defects, seizures,
intellectual disability

Table 99.6  Microduplications and Their Clinical Manifestations
DUPLICATION ­CHROMOSOME
REGION

DISEASE REGION

CLINICAL FEATURES

1q21.1

Macrocephaly, DD, learning disabilities

3q29

Mild to moderate DD, ID, microcephaly

7q11.23

Williams syndrome

DD and severe expressive language disorder, autistic features, subtle
dysmorphisms

15q13.3

Prader-­Willi/Angelman syndrome

DD, ID, autistic features in duplications of maternal origin

15q24

Growth restriction, DD, microcephaly, digital anomalies, hypospadias,
connective tissue abnormalities

16p11.2

FTT, severe DD, short stature, GH deficiency, dysmorphic features

17p11.2

Potocki-­Lupski syndrome

17q21.31

Hypotonia, cardiovascular anomalies, FTT, DD, verbal apraxia, autism,
anxiety
Severe DD, microcephaly, short and broad digits, dysmorphic features

22q11.2

Velocardiofacial-­DiGeorge
syndrome

Cardiovascular defects, velopharyngeal insufficiency

Xq28

MECP2 gene (Rett syndrome)

In males: infantile hypotonia, immune deficiency, dysmorphic features,
DD, speech delay, autistic behavior, regression in childhood

DD, Developmental delay; FTT, failure to thrive; GH, growth hormone; ID, intellectual disability.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

770 Part VIII u Human Genetics
be sporadic or result from abnormal segregation in translocation or
inversion carriers.
Microdeletions and microduplications usually involve regions that
include several genes, so the affected individuals can have a distinctive phenotype depending on the number of genes involved. When
such a deletion involves more than a single gene, the condition is
referred to as a contiguous gene deletion syndrome (Table 99.5).
With the advent of chromosome microarray, a large number of
microduplications, have been uncovered. Many of those microduplication syndromes are the reciprocal duplications of the known
deletions or microdeletion counterparts and have distinctive clinical
features (Table 99.6).
Subtelomeric regions are often involved in chromosome rearrangements that cannot be visualized using routine cytogenetics.
Telomeres, which are the distal ends of the chromosomes, are gene-­
rich regions. The distal repetitive sequence structure of telomeres is
essentially common to all chromosomes, but proximal to these are
unique regions known as subtelomeres, which typically are involved
in deletions and other chromosome rearrangements. Small subtelomeric deletions, duplications, or rearrangements (translocations,
inversions) may be relatively common in children with nonspecific
intellectual disability and minor anomalies. Subtelomeric rearrangements have been found in 3–7% of children with moderate to
severe intellectual disability and 0.5% of those with mild intellectual
disability and can be detected by CMA studies.
Pathogenic variants affecting telomere function and length have
been associated with dyskeratosis congenita and other aplastic anemia
syndromes, as well as pulmonary or hepatic fibrosis. Both the subtelomeric rearrangements and the microdeletion and microduplication
syndromes are typically diagnosed by molecular techniques like CMA
and multiple ligation-­dependent probe amplification (MLPA) studies.
CMA can detect 14–18% of abnormalities in patients who previously
had normal cytogenetic studies.

INSERTIONS

Insertions occur when a piece of a chromosome broken at two
points is incorporated into a break of a chromosome in another
location. A total of three breakpoints are then required, and they
can occur between two or within one chromosome. A form of nonreciprocal translocation, insertions are rare. Insertion carriers are
at risk of having offspring with deletions or duplications of the
inserted segment.

amount of chromosome material and number of genes included in
the fragment.
Ring chromosomes, which are found for all human chromosomes,
are rare. A ring chromosome is formed when both ends of a chromosome are deleted and the ends are then joined to form a ring. Depending on the amount of chromosome material that is lacking or in excess
(if the ring has duplicated chromosomal material), a patient with a ring
chromosome can appear normal or can have different degrees of intellectual disability and/or multiple congenital anomalies.
Marker and ring chromosomes can be found in the cells of solid
tumors of children. Some of these markers can be the result of tumor-­
specific rearrangements, such as translocations, deletions, and duplications, ultimately leading to gene fusions and tumor gene amplifications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

99.4 Sex Chromosome Aneuploidy
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
About 1 in 400 males and 1 in 650 females have some form of sex
chromosome abnormality. Considered together, sex chromosome
abnormalities are the most common chromosome abnormalities
seen in liveborn infants, children, and adults. Sex chromosome
abnormalities can be either structural or numerical and can be present in all cells or in a mosaic form. Those affected with these abnormalities might have few or no physical or developmental problems
(Table 99.7).

TURNER SYNDROME

Turner syndrome is a condition characterized by complete or partial
monosomy of the X chromosome and defined by a combination of
phenotypic features (see Table 99.7 and Table 99.8). Half the patients
with Turner syndrome have a 45,X chromosome complement. The
other half exhibit mosaicism and varied structural abnormalities of
the X or Y chromosome. Maternal age is not a predisposing factor
for children with 45,X. Turner syndrome occurs in approximately 1
Table 99.7  Sex Chromosome Abnormalities
DISORDER

ISOCHROMOSOMES

Isochromosomes consist of two copies of the same chromosome arm
joined through a single centromere and forming mirror images of one
another. The most commonly reported autosomal isochromosomes
tend to involve chromosomes with small arms. Some of the more common chromosome arms involved in this formation include 5p, 8p, 9p,
12p, 18p, and 18q. There is also a common isochromosome abnormality seen in long arm of the X chromosome and associated with Turner
syndrome. Individuals who have one isochromosome X within 46
chromosomes are monosomic for genes in the lost short arm and trisomic for the genes present in the long arm of the X chromosome.

Klinefelter syndrome

XYY syndrome

APPROXIMATE
INCIDENCE

47,XXY

1/580 males

48,XXXY

1/50,000-­1/80,000
male births

Other (48,XXYY;
49,XXXYY; mosaics)
47,XYY

Other X or Y
chromosome
abnormalities

1/800-­1,000 males
1/1,500 males

XX males

46,XX

1/20,000 males

Turner syndrome

45,X

1/2,500-­1/5,000
females

MARKER AND RING CHROMOSOMES

Marker chromosomes are rare and are usually chromosome fragments that are too small to be identified by conventional cytogenetics; they usually occur in addition to the normal complement of 46
chromosomes. Most are sporadic (70%); mosaicism is often (50%)
noted because of the mitotic instability of the marker chromosomes.
The incidence in newborn infants is 1 in 3,300, and the incidence in
persons with intellectual disability is 1 in 300. The associated phenotype ranges from normal to severely abnormal, depending on the

KARYOTYPE

Variants and mosaics
Trisomy X

47,XXX

1/1,000 females

48,XXXX and
49,XXXXX

Rare

Other X chromosome
abnormalities
XY females

1/3,000 females
46,XY

1/20,000 females

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Table 99.8  Signs Associated with Turner Syndrome
Short stature
Congenital lymphedema
Horseshoe kidneys
Patella dislocation
Increased carrying angle of elbow (cubitus valgus)
Madelung deformity (chondrodysplasia of distal radial epiphysis)
Congenital hip dislocation
Scoliosis
Widespread nipples
Shield chest
Redundant nuchal skin (in utero cystic hygroma)
Low posterior hairline
Coarctation of aorta
Bicuspid aortic valve
Cardiac conduction abnormalities
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome and other left-­sided heart
abnormalities
Gonadal dysgenesis (infertility, primary amenorrhea)
Gonadoblastoma (increased risk if Y chromosome material is
present)
Learning disabilities (nonverbal perceptual motor and visuospatial
skills) (in 70%)
Developmental delay (in 10%)
Social awkwardness
Hypothyroidism (acquired in 15–30%)
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (insulin resistance)
Strabismus
Cataracts
Red-­green color blindness (as in males)
Recurrent otitis media
Sensorineural hearing loss
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease (increased incidence)

in 5,000 female live births. In 75% of patients, the lost sex chromosome is of paternal origin (whether an X or a Y). 45,X is one of the
chromosome abnormalities most often associated with spontaneous
pregnancy losses. It has been estimated that 95–99% of 45,X conceptions are miscarried.
Clinical findings in the newborns can include small size for gestational age, webbing of the neck, protruding ears, and lymphedema
of the hands and feet, although many newborns are phenotypically
normal (Fig. 99.10). Older children and adults have short stature
and exhibit variable dysmorphic features. Congenital heart defects
(40%) and structural renal anomalies (60%) are common. The most
common heart defects are bicuspid aortic valves, coarctation of the
aorta, aortic stenosis, and mitral valve prolapse. The gonads are
generally streaks of fibrous tissue (gonadal dysgenesis) (see Chapter 626). There is primary amenorrhea and lack of secondary sex
characteristics. These children should receive regular endocrinologic testing.
Patients with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism can have Turner syndrome,
although this form of mosaicism can also be associated with male
pseudohermaphroditism, male or female genitalia in association with
mixed gonadal dysgenesis, or a normal male phenotype. This variant
is estimated to represent approximately 6% of patients with mosaic
Turner syndrome. Some of the patients with Turner syndrome phenotype and a Y cell line exhibit masculinization. Phenotypic females with
45,X/46,XY mosaicism have a 15–30% risk of developing gonadoblastoma. The risk for the patients with a male phenotype and external

771

testes is not so high, but tumor surveillance is nevertheless recommended. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has recommended the use of FISH analysis to look for Y chromosome mosaicism
in all 45,X patients. If Y chromosome material is identified, laparoscopic gonadectomy is recommended.
Noonan syndrome (see Chapter 101.1) shares many clinical features
with Turner syndrome and was formerly called pseudo-­Turner syndrome, although it is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from
pathogenic variants in several genes involved in the RAS-­MAPK pathway. In contrast to Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome affects both
sexes and has a different pattern of congenital heart disease, typically
involving right-­sided heart lesions.

KLINEFELTER SYNDROME

Persons with Klinefelter syndrome are phenotypically male. This
syndrome is the most common cause of hypogonadism and infertility in males and the most common sex chromosome aneuploidy
in humans (see Chapter 623). Eighty percent of children with
Klinefelter syndrome have a male karyotype with an extra chromosome X-­47,XXY. The remaining 20% have multiple sex chromosome aneuploidies (48,XXXY; 48,XXYY; 49,XXXXY), mosaicism
(46,XY/47,XXY), or structurally abnormal X chromosomes; the
greater the aneuploidy, the more severe the mental impairment and
dysmorphism. The prevalence of 47,XXY is 1 in 580 liveborn males.
Errors in paternal nondisjunction in meiosis I account for ∼50% of
the cases.

47,XYY

The incidence of 47,XYY is approximately 1 in 800-­1,000 males, with
many cases remaining undiagnosed, because most affected individuals have a normal appearance and normal fertility. The extra Y is the
result of nondisjunction at paternal meiosis II. Those with this abnormality have normal intelligence but are at risk for learning disabilities.
Behavioral abnormalities, including hyperactive behavior, pervasive
developmental disorder, and aggressive behavior, have been reported.
Early reports that assigned stigmata of criminality to this disorder have
long been disproved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

99.5 Mosaicism
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
Mosaicism describes an individual or tissue that contains ≥2 genetically different cell lines typically derived from a single zygote.
Genetic differences can result from mitotic nondisjunction (see Fig.
99.1; Table 99.9) or sporadic variant. Study of placental tissue from
chorionic villus samples collected at or before the 10th week of gestation has shown that ≥2% of all conceptions are mosaic for a chromosome abnormality. With the exception of chromosomes 13, 18,
and 21, complete autosomal trisomies are usually nonviable, and the
contribution of a normal cell line might allow these other trisomic
conceptions to survive to term. Depending on the point at which
the new cell line arises during early embryogenesis, mosaicism may
be present in some tissues but not in others. Germline mosaicism,
which refers to the presence of mosaicism in the germ cells of the
gonad, may be associated with an increased risk for recurrence of
an affected child if the germ cells are affected with a chromosomal
abnormality or with a specific gene pathogenic variant.

PALLISTER-­KILLIAN SYNDROME

Pallister-­Killian syndrome is characterized by coarse facies (prominent full cheeks), abnormal ear lobes, localized alopecia (sparse hair

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

772 Part VIII u Human Genetics

A

C

B

D

E

Fig. 99.10 Physical manifestations associated with Turner syndrome. A, This newborn shows a webbed neck with low hairline, shield chest with

widespread nipples, abnormal ears, and micrognathia. B, The low-­set posterior hairline can be better appreciated in this older child, who also has
protruding ears. C, In this frontal view, mild webbing of the neck and small, widely spaced nipples are evident, along with a midline scar from prior
cardiac surgery. The ears are low-­set and prominent, protruding forward. D and E, The newborn shown in A also has prominent lymphedema of the
hands and feet. (From Madan-­Khetarpal S, Arnold G. Genetic disorders and dysmorphic conditions. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds, Zitelli
and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012: Fig. 1.25.)

in the temporal regions), pigmentary skin anomalies, diaphragmatic hernia, cardiovascular anomalies, supernumerary nipples,
seizures, and profound intellectual disability. The syndrome is
caused by mosaicism for an isochromosome of the short chromosome of 12 (12p). The presence of the isochromosome 12p in cells
gives four functional copies for the short arm of chromosome 12 in
the affected cells. The isochromosome 12p is preferentially cultured
from fibroblasts that can be readily obtained from a skin punch
biopsy and is seldom present in lymphocytes. A CMA obtained
from a buccal swab can be another tool to detect this disorder. The
abnormalities seen in affected persons probably reflect the presence
of abnormal cells during early embryogenesis.

HYPOMELANOSIS OF ITO

Hypomelanosis of Ito is characterized by unilateral or bilateral
macular hypo-­or hyperpigmented whorls, streaks, and patches (see
Chapter 694). Sometimes these pigmentary defects follow the lines
of Blaschko that represent areas of early epidermal cell migration.
Hair and tooth anomalies are common. Abnormalities of the eyes,
musculoskeletal system (growth asymmetry, syndactyly, polydactyly,
clinodactyly), and central nervous system (microcephaly, seizures,
intellectual disability) may also be present. Patients with hypomelanosis of Ito might have two genetically distinct cell lines. The mosaic
chromosome anomalies that have been observed involve both autosomes and sex chromosomes and have been demonstrated in about

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Table 99.9  Other Rare Mosaic Aneuploidy Syndromes
DISORDER
Trisomy 8

KARYOTYPE
47,XX/XY,+8

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Variable growth and intellectual
deficiency
The majority of patients are
mosaic
Deep palmar and plantar furrows
Joint contractures

Trisomy 9

47,XX/XY,+9

The majority of patients are
mosaic
Craniofacial (high forehead,
microphthalmia, low-­set
malformed ears, bulbous nose)
Skeletal (joint contractures)
Heart defects (60%)

Trisomy 16

47,XX/XY,+16

The most commonly observed
autosomal aneuploidy in
spontaneous abortion
Recurrence risk negligible

Tetrasomy
12p

46,XX[12]/46,XX,
+i(12p)[8]
(mosaicism
for an
isochromosome
12p)

Pallister-­Killian syndrome
Sparse anterior scalp hair (more
so temporal region), eyebrows,
and eyelashes; prominent
forehead; full cheeks; long
philtrum with thin upper lip
and cupid-­bow configuration;
polydactyly; streaks of hyper-­
and hypopigmentation

50% of clinically affected patients. The mosaicism might not be visible in lymphocyte-­derived chromosome studies; it is more likely to
be found when chromosomes are analyzed from skin fibroblasts. The
distinct cell lines might not always be caused by observable chromosomal anomalies but might result from single-­gene pathogenic variants or other mechanisms.

99.6 Chromosome Instability Syndromes
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
Chromosome instability syndromes, formerly known as chromosome
breakage syndromes, are characterized by an increased risk of malignancy and specific phenotypes. They display autosomal recessive
inheritance and have an increased frequency of chromosome breakage and/or rearrangement, either spontaneous or induced. Chromosome instability syndromes result from specific defects in DNA repair,
cell cycle control, and apoptosis. The resulting chromosomal instability leads to the increased risk of developing neoplasms. The classic
chromosome instability syndromes are Fanconi anemia, ataxia telangiectasia, Nijmegen syndrome, ICF (immunodeficiency, centromere
instability, facial anomalies) syndrome, Roberts syndrome, and Bloom
syndrome (Table 99.10).

773

99.7 Uniparental Disomy and Imprinting
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee

UNIPARENTAL DISOMY

Uniparental disomy (UPD) occurs when both chromosomes of a
pair or areas from one chromosome in any individual have been
inherited from a single parent. UPD can be of two types, uniparental isodisomy or uniparental heterodisomy. Uniparental isodisomy means that both chromosomes or chromosomal regions are
identical (typically the result of monosomy rescue by duplication).
Uniparental heterodisomy means that the two chromosomes are
different members of a pair, both of which were still inherited from
one parent. This results from a trisomy that is later reduced to
disomy, leaving two copies from one parent. The phenotypic result
of UPD varies according to the chromosome involved, the parent
who contributed the chromosomes, and whether it is isodisomy or
heterodisomy. Three types of phenotypic effects are seen in UPD:
those related to imprinted genes (i.e., the absence of a gene that is
normally expressed only when inherited from a parent of a specific
sex), those related to the uncovering of autosomal recessive disorders, and those related to a vestigial aneuploidy producing mosaicism (see Chapter 97).
In uniparental isodisomy, both chromosomes or regions (and
thus the genes) in the pair are identical. This is particularly important when the parent is a carrier of an autosomal recessive disorder. If the offspring of a carrier parent has UPD with isodisomy for
a chromosome that carries an abnormal gene, the abnormal gene
will be present in two copies, and the phenotype will be that of the
autosomal recessive disorder; the child has an autosomal recessive
disorder even though only one parent is a carrier of that recessive disorder. It is estimated that all humans carry approximately
20 abnormal autosomal recessive genes. Some autosomal recessive
disorders, such as spinal muscular atrophy, cystic fibrosis, cartilage-­
hair hypoplasia, α-­ and β-­thalassemias, and Bloom syndrome, have
been reported in cases of UPD. The possibility of uniparental isodisomy should also be considered when a person is affected with >1
recessive disorder because the abnormal genes for both disorders
could be carried on the same isodisomic chromosome. Uniparental
isodisomy is a rare cause of recessively inherited disorders. Uniparental isodisomies can also be detected by SNP microarrays.
Maternal UPD involving chromosomes 2, 7, 14, and 15 and paternal UPD involving chromosomes 6, 11, 15, and 20 are associated with
phenotypic abnormalities of growth and behavior. UPD of maternal
chromosome 7 is associated with Russell-­Silver syndrome with intrauterine growth restriction. These phenotypic effects may be related to
imprinting (see later) (Fig. 99.11).
Although microdeletions cause the majority of cases, UPD for
chromosome 15 is seen in some instances of Prader-­Willi syndrome
and Angelman syndrome. In Prader-­Willi syndrome, approximately 25–29% of cases have maternal UPD (missing the paternal
chromosome 15) (Fig. 99.12). In Angelman syndrome, paternal
UPD of chromosome 15 is only observed in approximately 5% of
the cases (missing the maternal chromosome 15). The phenotype
for Prader-­Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome in cases of
UPD is thought to result from the lack of specific parental contributions from chromosome 15. In Prader-­Willi syndrome the paternal
contribution is missing, and the maternal contribution is missing
in Angelman syndrome. Prader-­Willi syndrome may be caused by
paternal deficiency of a cluster of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

774 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 99.10  Chromosome Instability Syndromes
SYNDROME

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND GENES INVOLVED

CLINICAL FINDINGS

Fanconi anemia (FA)

Chromosome breakage induced by diepoxybutane and
mitomycin C
There are least 21 FA genes, most are autosomal
recessive, only one is X linked

Short stature, microcephaly in 1/3 of cases, radial ray
defects including thumb anomalies, pancytopenia,
skeletal anomalies, renal anomalies, café-­au-­lait
macules, ear abnormalities and hearing loss

Ataxia telangiectasia

Chromosome instability with rearrangements between
chromosomes 7 and 14 in lymphocytes often involving
the T-­cell receptors in those chromosomes
Decreased IgA levels
Pathogenic variants in the ATM gene. Autosomal
recessive

Progressive cerebellar ataxia with later development
of conjunctival telangiectasias, choreoathetosis,
and dystonia
Sinopulmonary infections
Predisposition to malignancies like B-­cell
lymphomas, T-­cell leukemias and solid tumors

Nijmegen syndrome

Translocations involving chromosomes 7 and 14 in up to
50% of cells
Pathogenic variants in the NBN gene (autosomal
recessive)

IUGR, short stature, progressive microcephaly, and
intellectual disability, recurrent sinopulmonary
infections
Susceptibility to malignancies before age 20 years
like T-­and B-­cell lymphomas, medulloblastomas,
gliomas, rhabdomyosarcoma

ICF (immunodeficiency,
centromere instability, facial
anomalies) syndrome, types
I and II

Pericentromeric chromosomal instability on PHA-­
stimulated metaphases in chromosomes 1, 9, and 16
Decrease of IgG and IgE in type I, IgM and IgE in type II
Low T cells, like NK cells.
Pathogenic variants in DNMT3B and ZBTB24 genes in
types I and II, respectively
Autosomal recessive

Immunodeficiency, recurrent infections, intellectual
disability, facial dysmorphic features

Roberts-­SC phocomelia
syndrome

Premature chromosome separation with chromatid/
centromere repulsion in prophase or early metaphase
easily detected using C-­banding
Pathogenic variants in ESCO2 gene
Autosomal recessive

Prenatal growth deficiency, absent or hypoplastic arms
typically symmetric with reduction of digits’ length
including thumbs that are usually more affected
than lower extremities, bilateral cleft lip and palate,
dysmorphic features, cardiac anomalies, renal
anomalies, and intellectual disability

Bloom syndrome

Marked chromosomal increase of sister chromatid
exchange in the presence of BrdU and increased
spontaneous chromosome breakage
Decreased IgG, IgA, IgM
Pathogenic variants in the RECQL3 gene. Autosomal
recessive

Severe prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency,
microcephaly (average intelligence), sensitivity to
sunlight (butterfly distribution over the face), cafe-­
au-­lait macules, insulin resistance, predisposition
to malignancies: lymphomas, leukemias,
squamous cell carcinoma and solid tumors
Hypersensitivity to chemotherapy

Werner syndrome

“Variegated translocation mosaicism”: chromosomal
aberrations, including translocations, inversions, and
deletions
Telomere loss
Pathogenic variants in RECQL2
Autosomal recessive

Short stature, premature aging appearance, and
predisposition to malignancies
Loss and graying of hair, hoarseness, scleroderma-­
like changes in the 20s
Cataracts, type II diabetes, osteoporosis, hypo­
gonadism in the 30s
Neoplasms in >40% of cases including sarcomas,
melanomas, and thyroid cancer
Myocardial infarction and malignancies are cause of
early death

IUGR, Intrauterine growth restriction; PHA, phytohemagglutinin; NK, natural killer.

These findings suggest that there are differences in function of certain regions of chromosome 15, depending on whether it is inherited from the mother or from the father. Angelman syndrome is
caused by absent function of the maternal gene UBE3A and can be
the result of maternal deletion, maternal UBE3A pathogenic variant, paternal UPD, and abnormalities in the maternal imprinting
center on chromosome 15q11-­13 region.
UPD most frequently arises when a pregnancy starts off as a
trisomic conception followed by trisomy rescue. Because most
trisomies are lethal, the fetus can only survive if a cell line loses
one of the extra chromosomes to revert to the disomic state. One
third of the time, the disomic cell line is uniparental. This is the

typical mechanism for Prader-­Willi syndrome, and it is often associated with advanced maternal age. The embryo starts off as trisomy 15 secondary to maternal meiosis I nondisjunction, followed
by random loss of the paternal chromosome. In this case the disomic cell line becomes the more viable one and outgrows the trisomic cell line. When mosaic trisomy is found at prenatal diagnosis,
care should be taken to determine whether UPD has resulted and
whether the chromosome involved is one of the disomies known
to be associated with phenotypic abnormalities (i.e., chromosome
involved in UPD containing imprinted genes). There must always
be concern that some residual cells that are trisomic are present
in some tissues, leading to malformations or dysfunction. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib
Frequency: ?
#20q13.2
parathormone resistance,
hypoglycemia,...
Transient Neonatal
Diabetes Mellitus
1:400,000
#6q24
IUGR, transient neonatal
diabetes, omphalocele,
macroglossia
Beckwith-Wiedemann/
EMG syndrome
1:13,700
#11p15
Exomphalos, macroglossia,
gigantism,
Increased tumor risk
Silver-Russell
syndrome
1:10,000–30,000
#7q32, 11p15
Growth retardation, rel.
macrocephaly, triangular
face, asymmetry,...

775

Wang syndrome
Frequency: ?
#14q32
IUGR, ID, polyhydramnios,
bell-shaped
thorax,...

Overlapping Features
– Aberrant growth
– Asymmetry
– Hypo/hyperglycemia
– Intellectual disability
– Neonatal hypotonia
– Feeding difficulties

Common Molecular Findings
– (Epi)variants
– MLMDs
General Findings in IDs
– Non-mendelian inheritance
– Discordant monozygotic twins
– Environmental contribution

Angelman syndrome
1:16,000
#15q11q13
Severe ID, ataxia,
epilepsy, absent
speech,...

Fig. 99.11 Overview of the
Prader-Willi syndrome
1:17,500
#15q11q13
Growth retardation, ID,
hypotonia,
obesity/hyperphagia,...

Temple syndrome
Frequency: ?
#14q32
Growth retardation,
ID, scoliosis,
obesity, precocious
puberty,...

common clinical and molecular findings in the eight known
imprinting disorders, including
specific features, frequencies,
and major chromosomal localization. #6q24, Chromosome 6q24;
EMG, exomphalos-­macroglossia-­
gigantism; IUGR, intrauterine
growth restriction; ID, intellectual disability; MLMDs, multilocus
methylation defects. (From Eggermann T, Elbracht M, Schröder
C, et al. Congenital imprinting
disorders: a novel mechanism
linking seemingly unrelated disorders. J Pediatr. 2013;163:1204.)

C

A

B

D

Fig. 99.12 Prader-­Willi phenotype. A and B, Individual showing morbid obesity with facial features as shown. C, Upper extremities are notable for

small hands relative to body size. D, External genitalia after laparoscopic orchiopexy at 13 months. Parental informed consent, as approved by the
Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Review Board, was obtained to publish the photographs. (From Sahoo T, del Gaudio D, German JR, et al.
Prader-­Willi phenotype caused by paternal deficiency for the HBII-­85 C/D box small nucleolar RNA cluster. Nat Genet. 2008;40:719–721.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

776 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Fig. 99.13 In this hypothetical pedigree suggestive of imprinting, phenotypic effects occur only when the mutated gene is transmitted from the mother,
but not when it is transmitted from the father, that is, maternal deficiency. Equal numbers of males and females can be affected and not affected phenotypically in each generation. A nonmanifesting transmitter gives a clue to the sex of the parent who passes the expressed genetic information; that is, in maternal
deficiency disorders (also termed paternal imprinting), there are “skipped” nonmanifesting females. This is theoretical, because in most clinical scenarios of
maternal deficiency, such as Angelman syndrome, affected persons do not reproduce.

Fig. 99.14 In theoretical pedigrees suggestive of paternal deficiency (maternal imprinting), phenotypic effects occur only when the mutated gene

is transmitted from the father but not when transmitted from the mother. Equal numbers of males and females can be affected and not affected
phenotypically in each generation. In a theoretical situation, a nonmanifesting transmitter gives a clue to the sex of the parent who passes on the
expressed genetic information; that is, in paternal deficiency (also known as maternal imprinting), there are “skipped” nonmanifesting males. In
real-­life clinical cases of Prader-­Willi syndrome, affected persons do not reproduce.

Table 99.11  Consensus Diagnostic Criteria for Prader-­Willi Syndrome
MAJOR CRITERIA (1 POINT EACH)

MINOR CRITERIA (1/2 POINT EACH)

1

Neonatal/infantile hypotonia

Decreased fetal movement and infantile lethargy

2

Feeding problems and failure to thrive as an infant

Typical behavior problems

3

Weight gain at 1-­6 years; obesity; hyperphagia

Sleep apnea

4

Characteristic dysmorphic facial features

Short stature for family by 15 years

5

Small genitalia; pubertal delay and insufficiency

Hypopigmentation for the family

6

Developmental delay/intellectual disability

Small hands and feet for height

7

Narrow hands, straight ulnar border

8

Esotropia, myopia

9

Thick, viscous saliva

10

Speech articulation defects

11

Skin picking

From Cassidy SB, Schwartz S, Miller JL, Driscoll DJ. Prader-­Willi syndrome. Genet Med. 2012;14(1):15. Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

777

Table 99.12  Nutritional Phases in Prader-­Willi Syndrome
PHASE

MEDIAN AGES

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS

0

Prenatal to birth

Decreased fetal movements and lower birthweight than siblings

1a

0-­9 mo

Hypotonia with difficulty feeding and decreased appetite

1b

9-­25 mo

Improved feeding and appetite and growing appropriately

2a

2.1-­4.5 yr

Weight increasing without appetite increase or excess calories

2b

4.5-­8 yr

Increased appetite and calories, but can feel full

3

8 yr to adulthood

Hyperphagic, rarely feels full

4

Adulthood

Appetite is no longer insatiable

Modified from Miller JL, Lynn CH, Driscoll DC, et al. Nutritional phases in Prader-­Willi syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2011;155A:1040–1049.

Table 99.13  Molecular Mechanisms Causing Prader-­Willi and Angelman Syndromes
PRADER-­WILLI SYNDROME

ANGELMAN SYNDROME

15q11-­q13 deletion

∼70% (paternal)

∼70% (maternal)

Uniparental disomy

∼30% (maternal)

∼5% (paternal)

Single-­gene pathogenic variants

None detected

UBE3A gene encoding the E6-­AP ubiquitin-­protein
ligase (11% of total but mostly in familial cases)

Imprinting center pathogenic variants

5%

1%

Unidentified

<1%

10–15%

Data from Nicholls RD, Knepper JL. Genome organization, function and imprinting in Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2001;2:153–175; and
Horsthemke B, Buiting K. Imprinting defects on human chromosome 15. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113:292–299.

presence of aggregates of trisomic cells might account for the spectrum of abnormalities seen in persons with some UPDs.

IMPRINTING

Genomic imprinting occurs when the phenotypic expression of a
gene depends on the parent of origin for certain genes or chromosome
regions. Whether the genetic material is expressed or not depends on
the sex of the parent from whom it was derived. Genomic imprinting
can be suspected in some cases on the basis of a pedigree. In these pedigrees the disease is always transmitted from the same sex and could
be passed on silently for several generations by the opposite sex (Figs.
99.13 and 99.14). Imprinting probably occurs in many different parts of
the human genome and is thought to be particularly important in gene
expression related to development, growth, cancer, and behavior; >60
genes have been classified as imprintable. Imprinting disorders may
arise from UPD, deletions or duplications, epigenetic aberrant methylation patterns, or single nucleotide pathogenic variants in a specific
gene.
A classic example of imprinting disorder is seen in Prader-­Willi
syndrome and Angelman syndrome, two very different clinical conditions. These syndromes are both commonly caused by a deletion of the

same region in the proximal long arm of chromosome 15. A deletion
of the paternally derived chromosome causes Prader-­Willi syndrome,
in which the maternally derived copy is still intact, for which some of
the imprinted genes within this region normally remain silent. Prader-­
Willi syndrome can be diagnosed clinically (Table 99.11) and confirmed with genetic testing. Additional clinical features and issues of
weight gain are noted in Table 99.12. The weight gain is difficult to control, but treatment with growth hormone has resulted in improvements
in height, lean body mass, decreased adipose tissue, and improvement
in cognitive function.
A maternal deletion of the same region as in Prader-­Willi syndrome
causes Angelman syndrome, leaving intact the paternal copy that in
this case has genes that are also normally silent. In other situations,
UPD can lead to the same diagnosis (Table 99.13). Many other disorders are associated with this type of parent-­of-­origin effect, as in some
cases of Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (see Chapter 598.1), Russell-­
Silver syndrome, and neonatal diabetes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

778 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Chapter 100

Dysmorphology,
­ henotyping, ­and
P
Sequences
Anne M. Slavotinek
Dysmorphology is the study of differences in human form and the
mechanisms that cause them. It has been estimated that 1 in 40 newborns, or 2.5%, have a recognizable birth defect or pattern of malformations at birth; ∼50% of these newborns have a single, isolated
malformation, whereas in the other half, multiple malformations are
present. About 20–30% of infant deaths and 30–50% of deaths after
the neonatal period are caused by congenital abnormalities (http://ww
w.marchofdimes.com/peristats/). In 2021, birth defects accounted for
∼1 in 5 infant deaths in the United States, with a rate of 108.2 deaths
per 100,000 live births, which was higher than other causes of mortality, such as preterm/low birthweight (80.4/100,000), sudden infant
death syndrome (39.8/100,000), maternal complications of pregnancy
(33.4/100,000), and unintentional injury (33.5/100,000).

CLASSIFICATION OF BIRTH DEFECTS

Birth defects can be subdivided into isolated (single) defects or multiple
defects, typically described as multiple congenital anomalies (MCAs).
An isolated primary defect can be classified, according to the presumed
cause of the defect, as a malformation, dysplasia, deformation, or disruption (Table 100.1 and Fig. 100.1). Most birth defects are malformations, a term used interchangeably with anomalies. A malformation is
a structural defect arising from a localized error in morphogenesis that
results in the abnormal formation of a tissue or organ. Dysplasia refers
to the abnormal organization of cells into tissues. Malformations and
dysplasias can both affect the intrinsic structure of tissues and organs.
In contrast, a deformation is an alteration in the shape or form of a
structure or organ that has previously developed or differentiated normally. A disruption is a defect resulting from the destruction of a structure that had formed normally before the insult.
Most human disorders with altered morphogenesis display multiple
anomalies or malformations rather than an isolated birth defect. When

several malformations coexist in a single individual, they can be classified as a syndrome, sequence, or an association. A syndrome is defined
as a pattern comprising multiple anomalies that are related by pathophysiology, resulting from a single, defined etiology. Sequences consist
of multiple anomalies that are caused by a single event, although the
sequence itself can have different etiologies. An association refers to
a nonrandom grouping of anomalies in which there is an unclear, or
unknown, relationship among the anomalies, such that they do not fit
the criteria for a syndrome or sequence.

Malformations and Dysplasias

Human anomalies and dysplasias can be caused by pathogenic gene
variants, chromosome aberrations and copy number variants, environmental factors, or interactions between genetic and environmental factors (Table 100.2). Some malformations are caused by
deleterious sequence variants in single genes, whereas other anomalies
arise because of deleterious sequence variants in multiple genes acting
in combination, termed digenic or oligogenic inheritance. In the past,
it was thought that malformations were caused by monogenic pathogenic variants in 7.5% of patients; chromosomal anomalies in 6%; multigenic pathogenic variants in 20%; and known environmental factors,
such as maternal diseases, infections, and teratogens, in 6–7% (Table
100.3). In the remaining 60–70% of patients, malformations were classified as having an unknown etiology. Currently, the percentages have
increased for all of the possible genetic etiologies of malformations
due to improved cytogenetic and molecular genetic methods, including microarrays and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays
for detecting copy number variants, and next-­generation sequencing
(NGS) technologies, such as exome or genome sequencing, for identifying novel genes and pathogenic sequence variants.
Many developmental abnormalities caused by pathogenic
sequence variants in a single gene display characteristic of mendelian patterns of inheritance such as autosomal dominant, autosomal
recessive, and X-­linked inheritance. Genes that cause birth defects
or MCA syndromes are often transcription factors, part of evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathways, or regulatory
proteins required for key developmental events (see Chapters 101
and 102 and Table 100.2).
In addition, syndromes with MCA can be caused by chromosomal
aberrations or copy number variants and teratogens (see Tables 100.2
and 100.3). Down syndrome typically results from an extra copy
of an entire chromosome 21 or, less frequently, an extra copy of the
Down syndrome critical region on chromosome 21. Chromosome 21
is a small chromosome that contains an estimated 250 genes, and thus
individuals with Down syndrome typically have an increased dosage

Table 100.1  Mechanisms, Terminology, and Definitions of Dysmorphology
TERMINOLOGY

DEFINITION

EXAMPLE

Sequence

Single error in morphogenesis that results
in a series of subsequent defects

Pierre-­Robin sequence, in which a small jaw results in glossoptosis and
cleft palate
22q11 deletion sequence of primary fourth brachial arch and third and
fourth pharyngeal pouch defects, leading to aplasia or hypoplasia of the
thymus and parathyroid glands, aortic arch anomalies, and micrognathia

22q11 deletion

Mechanical (uterine) force that alters
structure of intrinsically normal tissue

Oligohydramnios produces deformations by in utero compression of
limbs (e.g., dislocated hips, equinovarus foot deformity), crumpled ears,
or small thorax

Disruption sequence

In utero tissue destruction after a period
of normal morphogenesis

Amnionic membrane rupture sequence, leading to amputation of fingers/
toes, tissue fibrosis, and tissue bands

Dysplasia sequence

Atypical organization of cells into tissues
or organs

Neurocutaneous melanosis sequence, with atypical migration of
melanocyte precursor cells from the neural crest to the periphery,
manifesting as melanocytic hamartomas of skin and meninges

Malformation syndrome

Appearance of multiple malformations
in unrelated tissues that have a known,
unifying cause

Trisomy 21
Teratogens
Numerous multiple congenital anomaly syndromes as described above

From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences

A

B

C

779

D

Fig. 100.1 Four major types of problems in morphogenesis: malformation, deformation, disruption, and dysplasia. A, Infant with campomelic dys-

plasia syndrome, which results in multiple anomalies caused by a pathogenic variant in SOX9. B, Infant with oligohydramnios deformation sequence
caused by premature rupture of membranes from 17 weeks’ gestation until birth at 36 weeks; the infant was delivered from a persistent transverse
lie. C, Fetus with early amnion rupture sequence with attachment of the placenta to the head and resultant disruption of craniofacial structures with
distal limb contractures. D, Infant with diastrophic dysplasia caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in a sulfate transporter protein. (From Graham Jr
JM. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Deformation, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007, Fig. 1-­1, p. 4.)

for the genes encoded by this chromosome that causes their physical
differences (see Chapter 57).
Neural tube defects (NTDs) are an example of a birth defect
that typically displays multifactorial inheritance. NTDs and other
birth defects, such as cleft lip and palate, can recur in families, but
inheritance for the majority of affected individuals does not follow a straightforward, mendelian inheritance pattern, and multiple
genes and environmental factors acting together likely contribute to
the pathogenesis (see Table 100.2). Many of the genes involved in
NTDs are unknown, so one cannot predict with certainty the mode
of inheritance or a precise recurrence risk for an individual case.
Empirical recurrence risks can be provided on the basis of population studies and the presence of single or multiple family members with the same malformation. However, one important gene/
environment interaction has been identified for NTDs (see Chapter
631.1). Folic acid deficiency is associated with NTDs and can result
from a combination of dietary factors and increased utilization during pregnancy. A common variant in the gene for an enzyme in the
folate recycling pathway, 5,10-­methylene-­tetrahydrofolate reductase
(MTHFR), that makes this enzyme less stable, may also be important in folic acid status. Several teratogenic causes of birth defects
have been described (see Tables 100.2 and 100.3). Ethanol causes a
recognizable pattern of anomalies that is variably called fetal alcohol
syndrome (FAS), fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), or fetal
alcohol effects (FAE) (see Chapter 146). Children who were exposed
to ethanol during the pregnancy can display microcephaly, developmental delays, hyperactivity, and facial anomalies. Ethanol, which
is toxic to the developing central nervous system (CNS), causes cell
death in developing neurons.

Deformations

Many deformations involve the musculoskeletal system (Fig. 100.2).
Fetal movement is required for the proper development of the musculoskeletal system, and restriction of fetal movement can result in
musculoskeletal deformations, such as clubfoot, or talipes. Two major
intrinsic etiologies of deformations are primary neuromuscular disorders and oligohydramnios, or decreased amniotic fluid, which can
be caused by fetal renal defects. Both primary neuromuscular disorders
and oligohydramnios can compromise fetal movements. The major
extrinsic causes of deformations are those that result in fetal crowding
and restriction of fetal movement. Examples of extrinsic causes include
oligohydramnios resulting from chronic leakage of amniotic fluid, and
abnormal shape of the amniotic cavity. When a fetus is in the breech
position (Fig. 100.3), the incidence of deformations is increased 10-­
fold. The shape of the amniotic cavity also has a profound effect on the

shape of the fetus and is influenced by many factors, including uterine
shape and the volume of amniotic fluid (Fig. 100.4).
It is important to determine whether deformations result from intrinsic or extrinsic causes. Most children with deformations from extrinsic
causes are otherwise completely normal, and their prognosis is usually
excellent. Correction typically occurs spontaneously. Deformations
caused by intrinsic factors, such as multiple joint contractures resulting from CNS or peripheral nervous system defects, have a different
prognosis and may be much more significant for the child (Fig. 100.5).

Disruptions

Disruptions are caused by destruction of a previously normally formed
organ or body part. At least two mechanisms are known to produce
disruptions. One involves entanglement followed by tearing apart, or
amputation, of a normally developed structure, usually a digit or limb, by
strands of amnion floating within amniotic fluid that are termed amniotic bands (Fig. 100.6). The other mechanism involves interruption to
the blood supply to a developing body part, which can lead to infarction,
necrosis, and resorption of structures distal to the insult. If interruption to the blood supply occurs early in gestation, the disruptive defect
typically involves atresia, or absence of a body part. Genetic factors have
been considered to play a minor role in the pathogenesis of disruptions,
as most occur as sporadic events in otherwise healthy individuals, but
little is known regarding etiology. The prognosis for a disruptive defect is
determined entirely by the extent and location of the tissue loss.

Multiple Anomalies: Sequences, Associations, and
Syndromes

The pattern of multiple anomalies that occurs when a single primary
defect in early development produces multiple anomalies because of
a cascade of secondary and tertiary developmental effects is called a
sequence (Fig. 100.7). When evaluating a child with MCAs, the physician must differentiate between multiple anomalies that are caused by a
single localized error in morphogenesis (a sequence) from syndromes
with multiple anomalies. In the former, recurrence risk counseling for
the multiple anomalies depends entirely on the risk of recurrence for
the single, localized malformation. Pierre-­Robin sequence is a pattern
of multiple anomalies produced by mandibular hypoplasia. Because
the tongue is relatively large for the oral cavity, it drops back (glossoptosis), blocking closure of the posterior palatal shelves and causing a
U-­shaped cleft palate. There are numerous causes of mandibular hypoplasia, all of which can result in the characteristic features of Pierre-­
Robin sequence.
VATER association was first defined as the nonrandom occurrence
of a combination of congenital anomalies comprising vertebral defects,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

780 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 100.2  Examples of Malformations with Distinct Causes, Clinical Features, and Pathogenesis
DISORDER

CAUSE/INHERITANCE

SELECTED CLINICAL FEATURES

PATHOGENESIS

Spondylocostal dysostosis
syndrome

Mendelian; autosomal recessive

Abnormal vertebral and rib
segmentation

Deleterious sequence variants in
DLL3 and other genes

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

Autosomal dominant

Intellectual disability
Broad thumbs and halluces;
valgus deviation of these digits
Hypoplastic maxillae
Prominent nose and columella
Congenital heart disease

Deleterious sequence variants in
CBP and EP300

X-­linked lissencephaly

X-­linked

Male: severe intellectual disability,
seizures
Female: variable

Deleterious sequence variants in
DCX

Aniridia

Autosomal dominant

Absent iris or iris/foveal
hypoplasia

Deleterious sequence variants in
PAX6

Waardenburg syndrome, type I

Autosomal dominant

Deafness
White forelock
Wide-­spaced eyes
Iris heterochromia and/or pale
skin pigmentation

Deleterious sequence variants in
PAX3

Holoprosencephaly

Loss of function or
haploinsufficiency for multiple
genes

Microcephaly
Cyclopia
Single central incisor

SHH, multiple other genes

Velocardiofacial syndrome

Microdeletion
22q11.2

Congenital heart disease,
including conotruncal defects
Cleft palate
T-­cell defects
Facial anomalies

TBX1 haploinsufficiency/
pathogenic variants;
haploinsufficiency for other
genes in the deleted interval also
contributes to the phenotype

Down syndrome

Additional copy of chromosome
21 (trisomy 21)

Intellectual disability
Characteristic facial anomalies
Congenital heart disease
Increased risk of leukemia
Alzheimer disease

Increase in dosage of an estimated
250 genes on chromosome 21

Neural tube defects

Multifactorial

Meningomyelocele

Defects in folate sensitive
enzymes or folic acid uptake

Fetal alcohol syndrome

Teratogenic

Microcephaly
Developmental delay
Facial anomalies
Behavioral abnormalities

Ethanol toxicity to developing brain

Retinoic acid embryopathy

Teratogenic

Microtia
Congenital heart disease

Isotretinoin effects on neural crest
and branchial arch development

anal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) with esophageal atresia,
radial anomalies, and renal dysplasia. The association was expanded to
include cardiac anomalies (C) and limb anomalies (L), leading to the
longer acronym, VACTERL. Although there are still no definitively
established diagnostic criteria, most clinicians consider that a minimum of three of the seven component features must be present for the
diagnosis. In addition, the designation of VATER/VACTERL association is typically one of exclusion; growth and developmental delays as
well as facial anomalies are atypical and should prompt the consideration of alternative diagnoses. Anorectal defects and TEF are considered more characteristic of VATER/VACTERL association than some
of the other components, such as cardiac anomalies. A single umbilical artery is a common finding. The estimated incidence of VATER/
VACTERL has ranged from 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 40,000 infants. VACTERL with hydrocephalus, also known as VACTERL-­H, is a separate
condition.
VATER/VACTERL association has so far defied the identification of
a simple mendelian etiology. Many cases are sporadic, although there
are rare reports of familial inheritance and first-­degree relatives with
clinical findings in the component systems of VATER/VACTERL association. Hedgehog signaling has been postulated to be important, as

mouse models with defective Hedgehog and/or ciliary signaling manifest the clinical findings observed in VATER/VACTERL. However,
cytogenetic studies have not demonstrated chromosome aberrations or
copy number variants. Exome sequencing (ES) has not identified a single causative gene or gene family, although nonrecurrent variants have
been described in mendelian disease genes, most typically in patients
with renal involvement. Clinical overlap has led to the identification of
pathogenic variants in the SALL1, SALL4, and MID1 genes in patients
with anorectal malformations.
Pathogenic variants in several autosomal recessive genes in the
kynurenine pathway, including KYNU, HAAO, and NADSYN1,
have been associated with a spectrum of anomalies that overlap
with VATER/VACTERL association, including vertebral defects,
cardiac anomalies, renal malformations, and limb defects of variable severity. Biallelic variants in these genes perturb the synthesis
of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) synthesis; these conditions have been grouped together as congenital NAD deficiency
disorders. The overall contribution of these genes to the pathogenesis of VATER/VACTERL association appears to be small in terms
of the entire group of patients but remains an important diagnostic consideration. Interestingly, studies in mice with biallelic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences
Table 100.3  Causes of Congenital Malformations
MONOGENIC
X-­linked hydrocephalus
Achondroplasia
Ectodermal dysplasia
Apert syndrome
Treacher Collins syndrome

Uterine compression
Intrinsic
Oligohydramnios
Uterine hypertonia
Multiple fetuses
Large fetus
Uterine deformities
(bicornate)

CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS AND COPY NUMBER VARIANTS
Trisomy 21, 18, 13
XO, XXY
Deletions 4p−, 5p−, 7q−, 13q−, 18p−, 18q−, 22q−
Prader-­Willi syndrome (70% of affected patients have deletion of
chromosome 15q11.2-­q13)

Fetal constraint

MATERNAL ILLNESS
Diabetes mellitus
Phenylketonuria
Hyperthermia

ENVIRONMENTAL AGENTS
Polychlorinated biphenyls
Herbicides
Mercury
Alcohol
MEDICATIONS
Thalidomide
Diethylstilbestrol
Phenytoin
Warfarin
Cytotoxic drugs
Paroxetine
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
Isotretinoin (vitamin A)
d-­Penicillamine
Valproic acid
Mycophenolate mofetil

Extrinsic
Small pelvis
Bony lumbar spines
Increased abdominal tone
Abnormal fetal posture
(including breech)
Abnormal fetal
muscular tone

Increased mechanical forces

MATERNAL INFECTION
Intrauterine infections (e.g., herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus,
varicella-­zoster virus, rubella virus, Zika virus, toxoplasmosis)

UTERINE ENVIRONMENT
Deformation
Uterine pressure, oligohydramnios: clubfoot, torticollis, congenital
hip dislocation, pulmonary hypoplasia, seventh nerve palsy
Disruption
Amniotic bands, congenital amputations, gastroschisis,
porencephaly, intestinal atresia
Twinning

781

Deformations

Craniofacial

Extremity

Other

Scaphocephaly
Plagiocephaly
Mandibular asymmetry
Flattened facies
Deviated nasal septum
Crumpled ear
Craniosynostosis

Dislocated hips
Metatarsus adductus
Equinovarus foot
Calcaneovalgus foot
Tibial bowing
Hyperflexed hips
Hyperextended knees
Contractures
Internal tibial torsion

Torticollis
Lung hypoplasia
Scoliosis

Fig. 100.2 Deformation abnormalities resulting from uterine com-

pression. (From Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, Marcdante KJ, et al., eds.
Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2005.)

UNKNOWN ETIOLOGIES
Neural tube defects, such as anencephaly and spina bifida
Cleft lip/palate
Pyloric stenosis
SPORADIC SEQUENCE COMPLEXES
VATER/VACTERL sequence (vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia, radial
and renal anomalies)
Pierre-­Robin sequence
NUTRITIONAL
Neural tube defects due to low folic acid
From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson’s Essentials of Pediatrics, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002.

loss-­of-­function variants in Haao and Kynu that were provided
with niacin in their diet showed that the vitamin can overcome the
metabolic block associated with loss-­of-­function for these genes.
Niacin enters the NAD biosynthesis pathway downstream to Haao
and Kynu, and this finding implies that the availability of niacin
and other components of the kynurenine pathway can influence
NAD levels during pregnancy and consequently the clinical severity resulting from the variants affecting some of the genes involved

Fig. 100.3 Breech deformation sequence.

in NAD synthesis. These conditions outline the importance of considering the influence of environmental factors on the phenotype
caused by genetic variation.

MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF MALFORMATIONS
Inborn Errors of Development

Genes that cause malformation syndromes, as well as genes whose expression is disrupted by environmental agents or teratogens, can participate in
numerous cellular processes, including signal transduction, transcription,
or the regulation of genes and proteins required for key developmental
events. When anomalies are viewed as alterations resulting from disturbances to important developmental pathways, this provides a molecular
framework for understanding the birth defects (see Chapter 101).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

782 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Hindgut
Mesonephric
duct
Mesonephric
ridge
Ureteral
bud

Normal
development
Happens at
about 31 days

Cloaca

Ureteral bud
induces metanephric
tissue to form renal
parenchyma

Defective
development

Renal agenesis
Lack of urine
into amniotic cavity
Relative lack of
amniotic fluid during
fetal life
Pulmonary
hypoplasia

Amnion
nodosum

B
Death from
respiratory
insufficiency

Fig. 100.4 A, Consequences of
renal agenesis. B, Multiple deformational defects. C, Defects in
amnion nodosum; brown-­
yellow
granules from vernix have been
ribbed into defects of the amniotic surface. (From Jones KL, Jones
MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s
Recognizable Patterns of Human
Malformation, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013: p. 821.)

Fetal
compression

Altered
facies

Breech
presentation

Abnormal
positioning of
hands and feet

Myo-neural
dysfunction

C

Lack of
amniotic fluid
Intra-uterine constraint

Fetal Akinesia

A

Growth
deficiency

Pulmonary
hypoplasia

Short
umbilical
cord

Limb
positional
defects

Facial
anomalies

A

B

Fig. 100.6 A, Amniotic band disruption sequence. B, Bands constrict-

ing the ankle leading to deformational defects and amputations. (From
Jones KJ. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 6th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.)

B

C

D

Fig. 100.5 A, Diagram demonstrating the etiologically heterogene-

ous phenotype that results from fetal akinesia. B, Infant born with myotonic dystrophy to a mother with the same condition. He had multiple
joint contractures with thin bones and respiratory insufficiency. C, Infant
immobilized in a transverse lie after amnion rupture at 26 weeks. D,
Fetus with bilateral renal agenesis resulting in oligohydramnios. (From
Graham JL. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 3rd
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2007: Fig. 47-­2.)

It is important to consider MCA syndromes as members of a group
based on shared or overlapping clinical findings and related causative
genes that act in the same developmental or metabolic pathway. See
Chapter 101 for the Sonic Hedgehog disorders, RASopathies, craniosynostoses, and chromatin regulatory disorders as examples; disruption of specific steps in this pathway result in a variety of related
developmental disorders and anomalies (see Fig. 100.2).

Cytogenetic Aberrations and Chromosomal
Imbalance

Cytogenetic imbalances resulting from an additional copy of a whole
human chromosome can result in characteristic and recognizable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences
Primary Defect in Prechordal Mesoderm
Prior to 21-25 days

783

Mesencephalon

Neural plate
Prechordal
mesoderm
Area of
future face

A

Amniotic cavity
Notochord
Heart

Rhombencephalon
Body
stalk

Allantois
Yolk sac

Prosencephalon
28 days

35 days

Incomplete cleavage
and morphogenesis
of forebrain

Missing or incomplete
midfacial development

Single ventricle
Absence of corpus
callosum
Fused thalami
Incomplete anterior and
posterior pituitary
Microcephaly
Severe intellectual
defect
Apneic episodes
Seizures
Abnormal EEG
Infant death

C

B

Cleft lip
Cleft palate

Hypotelorism
Lack of ethmoid
bone

Cyclopia
Anophthalmia
Microphthalmia
Coloboma, iris
Retinal defect

Absent philtrum
Absent nasal septum
Single naris
Proboscis

Lack of olfactory lobes
Lack of optic nerve

Fig. 100.7 Holoprosencephaly sequence. A, Schematic longitudinal section of 21-­day embryo. B, Developmental pathogenesis of the sequence.

C, Affected individual. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2013: pp. 802–803.)

syndromes. An additional copy of chromosome 21 results in Down syndrome (see Chapter 57); loss of one of the X chromosomes results in
Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.2 for discussion of syndromes with
whole chromosomal imbalances). With the advent of high-­resolution
cytogenetic techniques, such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH), and SNP arrays,
it has become straightforward to identify submicroscopic chromosome
deletions and duplications. Several recurrent chromosome deletions and
duplications have been identified as the cause of characteristic and recognizable syndromes (see Table 100.6 and Chapter 99), including Williams
syndrome (deletion of chromosome 7q11.23), Miller-­Dieker syndrome
(deletion of chromosome 17p13.3), Smith-­Magenis syndrome (deletion of chromosome 17p11.2), and 22q11 deletion syndrome (deletion
of chromosome 22q11.2, also known as velocardiofacial syndrome).
Collectively, chromosome microarrays (CMAs) and genetic sequencing
have made it possible to uncover rare microdeletions, microduplications,
and single nucleotide pathogenic variants associated with birth defects,
intellectual disability, and neuropsychiatric disorders. The sensitivity and
specificity of microarrays made them a standard starting point for the
evaluation of a child with MCAs and intellectual disabilities, but exome,
genome, and gene panel testing have been preferred due to higher diagnostic yield. It is important to note that unaffected individuals may carry
small microdeletions and microduplications as part of familial variation.
Therefore it is important to compare copy number variants that are identified in children with birth defects or developmental delays with their parents’ chromosome analyses and with databases of normal variants detected
in individuals without such birth defects.

APPROACH TO THE CHILD WITH FACIAL
ANOMALIES

One approach to the child with facial anomalies is the pattern recognition approach, which compares the physical differences in the patient

against a broad and memorized (or computerized) knowledge of
human disorders. This approach can be appropriate for experienced
dysmorphologists and clinical geneticists. In conjunction, a systematic
genetic mechanism approach can also be effective for clinicians who are
not dysmorphology experts. By gathering and analyzing the clinical
data, the general pediatrician can diagnose the patient in a straightforward case or initiate a referral to an appropriate specialist.

Medical History

The history for a patient with birth defects includes elements related to
etiologic factors. The family history, or pedigree, is necessary to assess
the inheritance pattern, or lack thereof, for a disorder. For disorders
that have a simple mendelian inheritance pattern, recognition of the
mode of inheritance can be critical for narrowing the differential diagnosis, then prioritizing common genes with the appropriate inheritance
pattern that could cause the patient’s clinical features. Many common
birth defects have a complex, or multifactorial, genetic etiology, such
as isolated cleft palate and spina bifida or NTDs. The recognition of a
close relative affected with a birth defect similar to the proband’s findings can be useful. Typically, a three-­generation pedigree is sufficient
for this purpose (see Chapter 97).
The perinatal history is also an essential component of the history.
It includes the pregnancy history of the mother, which can be useful
for recognition of recurrent miscarriages that may be indicative of a
chromosomal disorder, factors that may relate to deformations or disruptions such as oligohydramnios, and maternal exposures to teratogenic drugs or chemicals, including isotretinoin and ethanol, that are
potential causes of microcephaly.
Another component of the history that is often useful is the natural
history of the phenotype. MCA syndromes caused by chromosomal
aberrations and single-­gene disorders are frequently static, meaning
that, although the patients can experience new complications over

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

784 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 100.4  Definitions of Common Clinical Signs of Syndromes with Facial Anomalies
SIGN

DEFINITION

Brachycephaly

A condition in which head shape is shortened from front to back along the sagittal plane; typically the back
of the skull (occiput) and face are flatter than normal.

Brachydactyly

Short digits.

Brushfield spots

Speckled white spots or rings about two-­thirds of the distance to the periphery of the iris of the eye.

Camptodactyly

Permanent flexion of one or more fingers that can be associated with missing interphalangeal creases.

Clinodactyly

A medial or lateral curving of the fingers or toes; usually refers to incurving of the fifth finger.

Hypoplastic or small nail

A small nail on a digit.

Low-­set ears

This designation is made when the helix meets the cranium at a level below a horizontal plane that is an
extension of a line through both inner canthi.

Melia

A suffix meaning “limb” (e.g., amelia, missing limb; brachymelia, short limb).

Wide-­set eyes

Increased distance between the center of the pupils of the two eyes; can be measured as an increased
interpupillary distance (IPD).

Plagiocephaly

A condition in which head shape is asymmetric in the sagittal or coronal plane; can result from asymmetry in
cranial suture closure, asymmetry of brain growth, or deformation of the skull.

Posterior hair whorl

A single hair whorl occurs to the right or left of midline and is within 2 cm anterior to the posterior fontanel
in 95% of cases.

Postaxial polydactyly

Extra finger or toe present on the lateral side of the hand or foot.

Preaxial polydactyly

Extra finger or toe present on the medial side of the hand or foot.

Prominent lateral palatine ridges

Relative overgrowth of the lateral palatine ridges that can be caused by a deficit of tongue thrust into the
hard palate.

Scaphocephaly

A condition in which the head is elongated from front to back in the sagittal plane; most normal skulls are
scaphocephalic; also termed dolichocephaly.

Shawl scrotum

The scrotal skin joins around the superior aspect of the penis and represents a mild deficit in full migration of
the labial-­scrotal folds.

Short palpebral fissures

Decreased horizontal distance of the eyelid folds based on measurements from the inner canthus to the
outer canthus.

Syndactyly

Incomplete separation of the fingers or toes. It most commonly occurs between the third and fourth fingers
and between the second and third toes.

Synophrys

Eyebrows that meet in the midline.

Telecanthus

Lateral displacement of the inner canthi. The inner canthal distance (ICD) is increased, but the IPD is normal.

Widow’s peak

V-­shaped midline, downward projection of the scalp hair in the frontal region. It represents an upper
forehead intersection of the bilateral fields of periocular hair growth suppression. A widow’s peak can
occur together with wide-­spaced eyes.

time, the phenotype is typically not progressive. In contrast, disorders that cause facial anomalies because of metabolic perturbations,
for example, Hunter syndrome or Sanfilippo syndrome, can be mild or
may not be apparent at birth, but can progress, causing deterioration of
patient status over time.

Physical Examination

The physical examination is very important for identifying anomalies
that can aid a genetic diagnosis. The essential element of the physical
evaluation is an assessment of the patient’s clinical findings, with the
clinician performing an organized evaluation of the size and formation of various body structures. Familiarity with the terminology typically used to describe anomalies is helpful (Table 100.4). The size and
shape of the head is relevant; for example, many children with Down
syndrome have mild microcephaly and a shortened anteroposterior
dimension of skull, termed brachycephaly. Eye position, shape, and
the slant of the palpebral fissures are useful signs for many disorders.
Reference standards are available with which physical measurements
(e.g., interpupillary distance) can be compared. It can be useful to categorize anomalies as “major” or “minor” birth defects. Major defects

either cause significant dysfunction or require surgical correction (see
Table 100.5), and minor defects neither cause significant dysfunction
nor require surgical correction (e.g., clinodactyly) (Table 100.6 and Fig.
100.8). By cataloging physical parameters, the clinician may be able to
identify a characteristic pattern of anomalies and recognize the diagnosis. Facial recognition software has been helpful in identifying the
etiology of patients with facial dysmorphology (Fig. 100.9).

Imaging Studies

Imaging studies can be critical in diagnosing an underlying genetic etiology. If short stature or disproportionate stature (e.g., long trunk and
short limbs) is noted, a full skeletal survey with radiographs should be
performed. The skeletal survey can detect anomalies in bone number,
structure, and formation that can be used to narrow the differential
diagnosis. When there are abnormal neurologic signs or symptoms,
such as hypotonia, and an abnormal head size, such as microcephaly,
brain imaging can be indicated. Other studies and examinations, such
as echocardiography, renal ultrasonography, and hearing and ophthalmology evaluation, can also be useful to identify additional major or
minor anomalies that may serve as diagnostic clues.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences
90

NEUROLOGIC
Severe hydrocephalus
Lissencephaly
Schizencephaly
Megalencephaly
Neural tube defect
Meningomyelocele
Encephalocele
CARDIOVASCULAR
Various congenital heart
malformations
Cardiomyopathy
Genetic arrhythmia syndromes
GENITOURINARY
Ambiguous genitalia
Kidney malformations
Urachal defects

ABDOMINAL WALL
Gastroschisis
Omphalocele
CRANIOFACIAL
Craniosynostosis
Facial cleft
Cleft lip and palate
Structural eye defect
Coloboma
Aniridia
Structural ear defects
Microtia
Aplasia of the auditory canal
LIMB
Amelia
Split/hand foot malformation

RESPIRATORY
Congenital pulmonary airway
malformation
Tracheoesophageal fistula
*Not an inclusive list.
From Basel D. Dysmorphology in a genomic era. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:15–23. Table 1.

Table 100.6  Minor Malformations*
CRANIOFACIAL
Large fontanel
Flat or low nasal bridge
Saddle nose, upturned nose
Micrognathia
Cutis aplasia of the scalp
EYE
Palpebral fissures
Telecanthus or epicanthus
Up or down slanting
Hypertelorism
Brushfield spots
EAR
Posteriorly rotated pinna
Lack of helical fold
Preauricular with or without
auricular skin tags
Small pinna
Auricular (preauricular) pit or
sinus
Folding of helix
Darwinian tubercle
Crushed (crinkled) ear
Asymmetric ear sizes
Low-­set ears
SKIN
Dimpling over the bones
Capillary hemangioma (face/
posterior neck)
Dermal melanosis (African, Asian)
Sacral dimple
Pigmented nevi
Redundant skin folds
Cutis marmorata
Café-­au-­lait macules

HAND
Simian crease
Bridged upper palmar creases
Fifth finger clinodactyly
Joint hypermobility
(hyperextension of thumb)
Cutaneous syndactyly
Polydactyly
Short, broad thumb
Narrow or hyperconvex nails
Hypoplastic nails
Camptodactyly
Short fourth metacarpal
FOOT
Syndactyly of second/third toe
Asymmetric toe length
Clinodactyly of second toe
Overlapping toes
Nail hypoplasia
Wide gap between hallux and
second toe
Deep plantar crease between
hallux and second toe
OTHER
Mild calcaneovalgus
Hydrocele
Shawl scrotum
Hypospadias
Hypoplasia of labia majora
Supernumerary nipples
Undescended testes
Tongue tie

*Not an inclusive list.
From Basel D. Dysmorphology in a genomic era. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:15–23. Table 2.

Diagnosis

The examining physician should gather data on the patient’s pedigree
and perinatal and pediatric history and should have an appreciation for
the natural history of the clinical findings. At this point, the physician

With one or more major
malformations (%)

Table 100.5  Major Malformations*

785

90%
Mostly
multiple
major
anomalies

70
50
30
10

% of
babies

11%
1.4%

3%

0
(85%)

1
(13.4%)

2
(0.8%)

3 or more
(0.5%)

Number of minor malformations per newborn

Fig. 100.8 Frequency of major malformations in relation to the num-

ber of minor anomalies detected in a given newborn baby. (From Jones
KJ. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.)

has examined the child, identified atypical physical features, and
obtained appropriate imaging studies.
The clinician should now attempt to organize the findings to elucidate
potential developmental processes. An assessment based on specificity can
be helpful for this process. If a child has multiple findings, such as a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), mild growth restriction, mild microcephaly,
and holoprosencephaly, micropenis, and ptosis, a selection of the rarer or
pathognomonic findings may be prioritized. The PDA, ptosis, mild growth
restriction, and mild microcephaly are considered nonspecific findings, as
they are present in many disorders or often present as isolated features that
are not part of a syndrome. However, holoprosencephaly and micropenis
are present in fewer syndromes and are not considered part of normal
variation. The clinician can therefore search for disorders that include both
holoprosencephaly and micropenis. The search can be performed manually using the features index of a textbook such as Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation or a computerized database such as Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM). Searching for both holoprosencephaly and micropenis returns a list of diagnostic possibilities, and the
physician can then return to the patient to examine for additional features
of the leading possible candidate disorders. Appropriate genetic testing
can then be undertaken to confirm the clinician’s hypothesis and verify
the diagnosis. Alternatively, broad genetic testing can be undertaken if the
patient’s clinical findings are nonspecific.

Laboratory Studies and Genetic Testing

The laboratory evaluation of a child with anomalies can be critical to
reach or confirm the correct diagnosis, particularly for metabolic conditions. Array CGH and SNP arrays enable the detection of chromosome
abnormalities and copy number variants and, in the case of SNP arrays,
evaluation for loss of heterozygosity. Chromosome deletion syndromes
may also be identified with specific and sensitive FISH analysis, although
this technology has been largely replaced by chromosome arrays and
NGS sequencing. Cytogenetic studies with Giemsa-­banded (G-­banded)
chromosome analysis are still useful for the diagnosis of Down syndrome and balanced translocations (Table 100.7). These tests are sensitive methods for the detection of cytogenetic alterations associated with
birth defects and MCAs. Cytogenetic alterations can also be detected by
whole genome sequencing that is becoming increasingly utilized.
Molecular testing for deleterious sequence variants that cause pleiotropic malformation syndromes is also available for many disorders
as clinical testing. In most cases, however, such testing should not be
performed indiscriminately; instead, it should be ordered thoughtfully
after a differential diagnosis has been considered. NGS with ES and
whole genome sequencing has led to the identification of innumerable
novel genes and revolutionized the testing that is available for patients
and families with intellectual disability, birth defects, and other genetic
diseases. A strong suspicion of a genetic diagnosis warrants consideration of testing to confirm the diagnosis, facilitate patient treatment
and anticipatory guidance, clarify recurrence risks, and enable carrier
testing for additional family members. Single genes can still be tested
by Sanger sequencing that targets single or multiple exons. However,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

786 Part VIII u Human Genetics
CLM model
building

Healthy groups

CLM

Down syndrome
HCLM training

1st level model

ICA-based
shape model

2nd level
normal model

Local texture
model

2nd level DS
model

HCLM search
Face Detector

CLM search for
full landmark set

CLM refinement for
landmark subset

Model
selection

Fig. 100.9 The Framework of Fa-

φ

ROC
Geometric

Input space Feature space
Texture

Landmark
detection

Feature
extraction

Feature
selection

Classification

cial Recognition for Genetic Syndrome Detection. ICA, Independent component analysis; CLM,
constrained local model; HCLM,
hierarchical CLM; DS, Down syndrome; ROC, receiver operating
characterstics. (From Zhao Q, Okada
K, Rosenbaum K, et al. Digital facial
dysmorphology for genetic screening: hierarchical constrained local
model using ICA. Med Image Anal.
2014;18:699–710. Fig. 2.)

Table 100.7  Chromosomal Deletion Syndromes
CONDITION

BRIEF DESCRIPTION

PROBE

Williams syndrome

Proportionate short stature, mild-­moderate to severe intellectual disability, friendly
personality, stellate pattern of iris pigmentation, supravalvular aortic stenosis, wide mouth
with full lips

7q11

WAGR syndrome

Wilms tumor, aniridia, growth delay, intellectual disability, and genitourinary anomalies

11p13

Prader-­Willi syndrome
Angelman syndrome

Distinct syndromes with common or overlapping areas of deletion; phenotype depends on
gender of the parent of origin of the deletion
Prader-­Willi syndrome: hypotonia in infancy, short stature, obesity, mild-­moderate and
occasionally severe intellectual disability, small hands and feet (caused by paternal deletion
of 15q11-­13 or maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 15)
Angelman syndrome: severe intellectual disability, absence of speech, ataxia, tremulous
movements, large mouth, frequent drooling (caused by maternal deletion of chromosome
15q11-­13 or paternal uniparental disomy)

15q11

Smith-­Magenis syndrome

Brachycephaly, prognathism, self-­destructive behavior, wrist biting, pulling out nails, head
banging, indifference to pain, intellectual disability, hyperactivity

17p11.2

Miller-­Dieker syndrome

Microcephaly, narrow temples, hypotonia/hypertonia, abnormal posturing, seizures, severe to
profound intellectual disability, poor growth, lissencephaly and other brain abnormalities on
CT or MRI

17p13

22q11 deletion syndrome

Cleft palate, congenital heart disease, learning/behavior problems, long face, prominent
nose, limb hypotonia, slender hands with tapering fingers, T-­cell deficiency, immunoglobulin
deficiency

22q11

WAGR, Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation.
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 25-­10.

for diagnoses that have substantial genetic heterogeneity (e.g., hearing
loss), panel testing often using NGS, in which multiple relevant genes
can be interrogated for single nucleotide variants and gene deletions
and duplications, is more expeditious than single-­gene testing. Panel
tests also frequently have the advantage of providing high coverage
for the genes on the panel compared with the coverage for the same
genes that can be obtained by ES. However, in situations with diagnostic uncertainty, such as the investigation of a child with intellectual
disability and facial anomalies for which there is no clearly recognizable pattern, exome or genome sequencing (GS) may be most useful as a broad testing approach. ES examines approximately 200,000
exons, or the 1–2% of the DNA that comprises the coding regions of
the genome. ES is typically performed with a trio approach, in which
the patient and both biological parents are tested simultaneously, so
that the inheritance pattern, or segregation, of deleterious sequence

variants can be determined, thus simplifying analysis. Trio sequencing
has resulted in higher diagnostic yields than proband-­only sequencing and can approach 30–40% for indications such as intellectual disability. In contrast, GS examines the entire DNA content, including
noncoding regions, and increasingly enables analysis for cytogenetic
rearrangements in addition to copy number loss or gain. ES and GS are
applicable to a wide range of birth defects and genetic diseases and can
discover causative variants in known or novel genes associated with a
particular condition.

Management and Counseling

Management and genetic counseling are essential aspects of the
approach to a patient with a genetic disorder. For example, children with
Down syndrome have a high incidence of hypothyroidism, and children with achondroplasia have a high incidence of cervicomedullary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders
junction abnormalities and monitoring for both is appropriate. One
of the many benefits of an early and accurate diagnosis is that anticipatory guidance and medical monitoring of patients for syndrome-­
specific medical risks can improve their quality of life and prolong it.
When a diagnosis is made, the treating physicians can access published
information on the natural history and management of the disorder
through the medical literature, genetics reference texts, and databases.
Providing access to disorder-­specific patient support groups can also
provide immense benefit to patients and families.
The second major benefit of an accurate diagnosis is that it provides
data for recurrence risk estimates. Genetic disorders may have direct
effects on only one member of the family, but the diagnosis of the condition can have implications for the entire family. One or both parents
may be carriers, and siblings may be carriers or may want to know their
genetic status when they reach their reproductive years. Recurrence
risk provision is an important component of genetic counseling and
should be included in all evaluations for families affected with birth
defects or other inherited disorders (see Chapter 98).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

787

Growth factor
RTK

Cell membrane
SHC

SOS1
GRB2

SHP2
UB

KRAS
-GTP

RAS
-GTP

HRAS
-GTP

NRAS

-GTP

Neurofibromin
NF-1

CBL

CS

p120GAP

SHOC2
CM-AVM

SPRED1

PP1C
CRAF BRAF

NS
NSML

Legius
syndrome
CFC

MEK1 MEK2

ERK1 ERK2

Numerous
cytosolic
effectors

Numerous
nuclear
effectors

Fig. 101.1 The RAS/MAPK signal transduction pathway. The MAPK

Chapter 101

Signaling Pathway
Disorders
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert and
Anne M. Slavotinek
An increasing number of defined molecular genetic etiologies explain
many multiple congenital anomaly (MCA) syndromes. Several themes
have emerged: (1) many clinical disorders that were believed to represent a single entity have multiple genetic etiologies, often within genes
that are functionally related; (2) many disorders believed to be distinct
have common underlying genetic bases; and (3) teratogens and genetic
disorders with similar clinical features can often be understood in the
context of shared underlying pathology.
It is useful to consider MCA syndromes as members of a group of disorders based on shared or overlapping clinical findings and related causative
genes that act in the same developmental or metabolic pathway.

101.1 RAS/MAPK Pathway
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert and Anne M. Slavotinek
The RASopathies comprise a clinically defined group of conditions caused
by germline pathogenic variants in genes encoding the components or
regulators of the renin-­angiotensin system (RAS)/mitogen-­activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. This pathway is one of the most important
signaling pathways in human development (Fig. 101.1). Signaling is initiated when one of several growth factors or cytokines binds extracellularly to a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), which transmits
the signal to activate of one of several intracellular RAS proteins, such
as HRAS, KRAS, or NRAS. Phosphorylation then occurs in a stepwise
manner to one or more RAF proteins (ARAF, BRAF, and/or CRAF), and
subsequently to MEK1 and/or MEK2, and then ERK1 and/or ERK2. Activation of ERK1/2 has downstream targets including transcription factors,

signaling pathway of protein kinases is critically involved in cellular
proliferation, differentiation, motility, apoptosis, and senescence. The
RAS­opathies are patterns of anomalies caused by pathogenic variants
in genes that encode components or regulators of the RAS/MAPK
pathway (indicated by dashed lines). These disorders include neurofibromatosis type one (NF1), Noonan syndrome (NS), Noonan syndrome
with multiple lentigines (NSML), capillary malformation–arteriovenous
malformation syndrome (CM-­AVM), Costello syndrome (CS), cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC), and Legius syndrome. RAS/MAPK, RAS
protein family/mitogen-­activated protein kinase. (From Rauen KA. The
RASopathies. Annu Rev Genom Hum Genet. 2013;14:355–369.)

membrane proteins, and other protein kinases that direct cellular growth
and differentiation.
More than 20 genes implicated in RAS/MAPK signaling have been
implicated in human disorders, most with some degree of clinical overlap. Common RASopathies include Noonan syndrome (NS), NS with
multiple lentigines, Costello syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC)
syndrome, neurofibromatosis type one (NF1), Legius syndrome, and
capillary malformation–arteriovenous malformation syndrome (Table
101.1).
NS represents the canonical RASopathy and is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from pathogenic variants in several genes
in the RAS/MAPK pathway. NS occurs in an estimated 1 in 1,000-­
2,500 live births. Approximately 30–75% of the cases are familial,
and the condition typically exhibits autosomal dominant inheritance, although the LZTR1 gene can be associated with autosomal
dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance. Pathogenic variants
in RAS/MAPK genes are found in ∼70% of individuals with NS,
with missense variants activating the PTPN11 gene that encodes the
nonreceptor protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-­2; this is observed
in 50% of affected individuals. Pathogenic variants involving SOS1
occur in 10–13% of affected individuals; variants in RAF1 and
RIT1 each occur in 5% of patients, and variants in KRAS, BRAF,
MAP2K1, LZTR1, and NRAS and duplications of the 12q24 region
containing the PTPN11 gene are rare. The strong clinical overlap
between NS and other RASopathies, such as CFC syndrome, is due
to the involvement of the same pathway and often identical genes
in pathogenesis.
Common features in NS comprise short stature, a characteristic pattern of facial anomalies including ptosis, wide-­spaced eyes
with down-­slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, anomalous
and low-­set ears and micrognathia, congenital heart disease, chest
deformities with pectus excavatum and/or pectus carinatum, a short
or wide neck with a low posterior hairline, and cryptorchidism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

788 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 101.1  Genes and Features of the RAS/MAPK Pathway
RAS/MAPK
PATHWAY GENE

PROTEIN

PROTEIN FUNCTION

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

Noonan syndrome

PTPN11
SOS1
RAF1
KRAS
NRAS
SHOC2
CBL
RIT1

SHP2
SOS1
CRAF
KRAS
NRAS
SHOC2
CBL
RIT1

Phosphatase
RasGEF
Kinase
GTPase
GTPase
Scaffolding
E3 ubiquitin ligase
GTPase

Craniofacial dysmorphic features, including a
broad forehead, hypertelorism, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, ptosis, a high-­arched palate,
and low-­set, posteriorly rotated ears; congenital
heart defects; short stature; undescended
testicles; ophthalmologic abnormalities; bleeding
disorders; normal neurocognitive function or
mild impairment; predisposition to cancer

Noonan syndrome with
multiple
lentigines

PTPN11
RAF1

SHP2
RAF1/CRAF

Phosphatase
Kinase

Same as Noonan syndrome, but with possible
development of multiple skin lentigines as
individuals age; unclear predisposition to
cancer

Capillary malformation–
arteriovenous
malformation

RASA1

p120-­RasGAP

RasGAP

Multifocal capillary malformations, which may be
associated with arteriovenous malformations
and fistulae; unclear predisposition to cancer

Costello syndrome

HRAS

HRAS

GTPase

Craniofacial features similar to those of Noonan
syndrome but potentially more coarse;
congenital heart defects; failure to thrive; short
stature; ophthalmologic abnormalities; multiple
skin manifestations, including papilloma; normal
neurocognitive function or mild impairment;
hypotonia; predisposition to cancer

Cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome

BRAF
MAP2K1
MAP2K2
KRAS

BRAF
MEK1
MEK2
KRAS

Kinase
Kinase
Kinase
GTPase

Craniofacial features similar to those of Noonan
syndrome; congenital heart defects; failure
to thrive; short stature; ophthalmologic
abnormalities; multiple skin manifestations,
including progressive formation of nevi; normal
neurocognitive function or mild impairment;
hypotonia; unclear predisposition to cancer

Neurofibromatosis type 1

NF1

Neurofibromin

RasGAP

Café-­au-­lait maculae; intertriginous freckling;
neurofibromas and plexiform neurofibromas;
iris Lisch nodules; osseous dysplasia; optic
pathway glioma; normal neurocognitive
function or mild impairment; predisposition
to other cancers

Legius syndrome

SPRED1

SPRED1

SPROUTY-­related,
EVH1 domain–containing
protein 1

Café-­au-­lait maculae; intertriginous freckling;
macrocephaly; normal neurocognitive function
or mild impairment; no apparent predisposition
to cancer

SYNDROME

Modified from Rauen KA. The RASopathies. Annu Rev Genom Hum Genet. 2013;14:355–369. Table 3.

(Table 101.2 and Fig. 101.2). The pattern of congenital heart disease
typically involves right-­sided lesions, most frequently presenting
with pulmonary valvular stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but atrial and ventricular septal defects, branch pulmonary
artery stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, and coarctation of the aorta have
all been described. Children with NS can manifest developmental
delays in association with hypotonia and may have challenges with
articulation and coordination. High-­f requency sensorineural hearing loss is common and should be considered in patients with language delays. Hepatosplenomegaly, low levels of clotting factors XI
and XII, and primary lymphatic anomalies have also been noted;
patients may rarely develop acute lymphoblastic leukemia or juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Puberty may be delayed,
and an adult height that reaches the lower limit of the typical range
can be achieved by the end of the second decade. Other distinctive
phenotypes include NS-­like disorder with loose anagen hair caused
by SHOC2 variants and NS-­like disorder with or without JMML
caused by CBL variants.

DIAGNOSIS

Initial suspicion of a RASopathy generally depends on recognition of
one or more characteristic features associated with the various conditions. Genetic testing includes a panel of genes including those in the
RAS/MAPK pathway. Multigene panel testing is preferred over single-­
gene analysis due to the many overlapping symptoms seen in RASopathy disorders. Genetic testing can often be performed on blood, saliva,
or a buccal swab. If a gene in the RAS/MAPK pathway is found to have
a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant, this would provide molecular confirmation of the clinical diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Management of NS is noted in Table 101.3. Human growth hormone
will improve growth velocity in many individuals with NS and short
stature; it is recommended for those who fall below the third percentile for height. MEK inhibitors, such as trametinib, have been used to
treat refractory lymphedema or chylous effusions and possibly severe
cardiac hypertrophy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

789

Table 101.2  Clinical Findings Associated with Noonan
Syndrome
Short stature
Failure to thrive (use of specific Noonan syndrome growth curves is
recommended)
Tall forehead
Epicanthal folds
Ptosis
Blue-­green irides
Wide-­spaced eyes
Low nasal bridge, upturned nose
Down-­slanting palpebral fissures
Low-­set and posteriorly rotated ears
Dental malocclusion
Low posterior hairline
Pectus excavatum
Pectus carinatum superiorly
Scoliosis
Pigmented villonodular synovitis (polyarticular)
Cubitus valgus
Pulmonary valve stenosis (dysplastic valve)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect
Lymphedema
Nevi, lentigines, café-­au-­lait spots
Cryptorchidism
Small penis
Delayed puberty
Bleeding disorders, including thrombocytopenia and coagulation
factor deficiencies
Leukemia, myeloproliferative disorders, other malignancies
Cognitive delay

NEUROFIBROMATOSIS

NF1 is a multisystem disorder that primarily abstractly involves the
skin and peripheral nervous system (see Chapter 636.1). NF1 is associated with marked clinical variability. NF1 is inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner. The disorder is caused by pathogenic variants in the
NF1 gene, which encodes neurofibromin and functions as a regulator
of RAS signaling (see Table 101.1 and Fig. 101.1).

LEGIUS SYNDROME

Legius syndrome is a RASopathy caused by pathogenic variants in
SPRED1, which encodes an HRAS regulator. Individuals with Legius
syndrome present with typical multiple café-­au-­lait macules inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait but do not develop the serious medical
complications of NF1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

101.2 Sonic Hedgehog Pathway
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert
The Hedgehog signaling pathway plays numerous tissue-­specific critical roles during embryogenesis and postnatal life. Disruption of specific steps in this pathway result in a variety of related developmental
disorders and anomalies (Fig. 101.3). Activation of this pathway in the
child or adult may lead to abnormal cellular proliferation and cancer.
Three genes, Sonic (SHH), Indian (IHH), and Desert (DHH), comprise
the hedgehog family, with SHH being the most widely expressed. These

A

B

C

Fig. 101.2 Noonan syndrome. A, Newborn. B, Toddler. C, Affected

male. Note the down-­slanting palpebral fissures, low-­set ears, elevated
left shoulder secondary to scoliosis, and wide-­spaced nipples. (From
Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns
of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 1AC,
p. 150 and Fig. 2A, p. 151; A and B courtesy Dr. Jacqueline Noonan,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky.)

genes encode secreted signaling molecules important in cellular differentiation, proliferation, and survival. Secreted SHH acts as a ligand for
specific cellular receptors to have a signal transduced by other components of the pathway to regulate downstream gene transcription. The
SHH ligand is expressed in the embryo in regions important for development of the brain, face, limbs, and the gut.
Deleterious sequence variants in SHH can cause holoprosencephaly (see Fig. 100.7), a variably severe, midline defect associated with
clinical effects ranging from cyclopia to a single maxillary incisor with
close spacing of the ocular orbits. The SHH protein is processed by proteolytic cleavage to an active N-­terminal form, which is then further
modified by the addition of cholesterol. The steroidal alkaloid cyclopamine exerts a teratogenic effect by inhibiting cholesterol modification of SHH and can result in holoprosencephaly in sheep. In humans,
a defect in cholesterol biosynthesis involving the recessive delta-­7-­
dehydrocholesterol reductase gene (DHCR7) results in Smith-­Lemli-­
Opitz syndrome (SLOS) (see Chapter 106).
In addition to microcephaly and holoprosencephaly, patients with
SLOS (see Fig. 101.3) display syndactyly, classically of the second and
third toes, postaxial polydactyly of the hands and feet, an upturned or
anteverted nose, ptosis, and cryptorchidism.
The cholesterol-­modified active form of SHH binds to its transmembrane receptor Patched (PTCH1). This SHH-­PTCH1 complex then
inhibits the activity of the transmembrane protein Smoothened (SMO).
Because SMO normally acts to suppress downstream targets, the GLI
family of transcription factors, inhibition of SMO by PTCH1 results
in activation of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3. Pathogenic variants resulting
in activation of SMO can be oncogenic, particularly in basal cell carcinomas and medulloblastomas. In addition, PTCH1 and its orthologue,
PTCH2, act as tumor suppressors, and somatic, inactivating sequence
variants can be associated with loss of tumor suppressor function.
Relatedly, germline inactivating variants in PTCH1 result in Gorlin
syndrome (see Fig. 101.3), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a broad face, dental anomalies, rib defects and shortened

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

790 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 101.3  Management of Noonan Syndrome
AT DIAGNOSIS

AFTER DIAGNOSIS

IF SYMPTOMATIC

General

Complete physical and neurologic
examination; medical genetics
consultation to confirm diagnosis,
consider molecular genetic testing
and genetic counseling

Yearly complete physical and
neuro­logic examination; return to
geneticist if genotype negative or
for multisystem assessment; genetic
counseling at adolescence or when a
young adult

Orchiopexy by age 1 year for
crypt­orchidism; if lymphoedema,
refer to specialty clinic; brain
and cervical spine MRI if
intracranial pressure increases;
electroencephalogram and referral to
neurologist if seizures suspected

Developmental

Multidisciplinary developmental
assessment

Developmental screening yearly for
children age 5-­18 years

Neuropsychologist testing if screening
abnormal; referral to early intervention
if delays detected before age 3 years;
individual education plan for children
age 5-­18 years with delays

Dental

First dental assessment between age 1
year and 2 years

Yearly dental assessment

—

Growth and feeding

Plot growth on curves for Noonan
syndrome

Plot growth on curves for Noonan
syndrome 3 times per year until age
3 years, then yearly

Refer to gastroenterologist for feeding
problems or recurrent vomiting, or
if evidence of growth failure without
comorbid cause exists; thyroid
function tests if signs or symptoms of
hypothyroidism

Cardiovascular

Cardiac examination,
electrocardiogram, echocardiogram

Follow up on the basis of initial
findings. If initial assessment normal,
repeat every 5 years

—

Ophthalmologic

Baseline eye examination Baseline
audiology examination

Repeat every 2 years, sooner if
indicated

—

Audiologic

Baseline audiology examination

Repeat if recurrent otitis media or
speech delay

Refer to ear, nose, and throat specialist
for recurrent otitis media or serous
otitis; hearing aids or classroom
interventions for hearing loss

Hematologic

Complete blood cell count with
differential, and prothrombin time or
activated partial thromboplastin time

Repeat complete blood cell count with
differential and prothrombin time or
activated partial thromboplastin time
if age 6-­12 months at initial screen
Preoperatively: complete blood
cell count with differential and
prothrombin time or activated partial
thromboplastin time, second tier
(in consultation with hematologist)
factor IX, XI, and XII concentrations,
von Willebrand factor, platelet
aggregation

Prothrombin time or activated partial
thromboplastin time if bleeding
abnormal or persistent, refer to
hematologist; complete blood
cell count with differential for
splenomegaly; complete blood
cell count with differential
and liver function studies for
hepatosplenomegaly

Renal

Kidney ultrasound

—

—

Skeletal

Clinical assessment of spine with
radiology if indicated by examination

Repeat spinal examination yearly
through adolescence; radiology and
referral to orthopaedic specialist if
abnormal

—

From Roberts AE, Allanson JE, Tartaglia M, Gelb BD. Noonan syndrome. Lancet. 2013;381:333–342.

metacarpals; basal cell nevi that can undergo malignant transformation; and an increased risk of cancers, including medulloblastomas
and rhabdomyosarcomas. GLI1 amplification has been found in several human tumors, including glioblastoma, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and B-­cell lymphomas. Likewise, pathogenic variants
in GLI3 can cause Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS),
Pallister-­Hall syndrome (PHS), postaxial polydactyly type A (and
A/B), and preaxial polydactyly type IV (see Fig. 101.3). GCPS consists
of wide-­spaced eyes, syndactyly, additional digits on the radial border
of the hand or inner aspect of the foot, termed preaxial polydactyly,
and broad thumbs and halluces. PHS is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by postaxial polydactyly, syndactyly, hypothalamic

hamartomas, imperforate anus, and occasionally holoprosencephaly.
GLI3 binds to CBP, the protein that is haploinsufficient in Rubinstein-­
Taybi syndrome.
Disorders that are caused by pathogenic variants in genes that
function together in a developmental pathway typically have overlapping clinical manifestations. The overlapping features result from the
embryonic tissues in which SHH is important for development, including the brain, face, limbs, and gut as previously noted. Brain defects are
present in holoprosencephaly (see Fig. 100.7), SLOS, and PHS. Facial
anomalies are found in holoprosencephaly, SLOS, Gorlin syndrome,
GCPS, and PHS. Limb defects occur in SLOS, Gorlin syndrome,
GCPS, PHS, and the polydactyly syndromes. Overexpression, or activating sequence variants, affecting the SHH pathway results in cancer,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

791

Sonic Hedgehog
Cleavage
N-SHH
Cholesterol
Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Short, upturned nose
• Hypospadias
• Postaxial polydactyly

Holoprosencephaly
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Failure of CNS
lateralization
• Hypotelorism

N-SHH•Chol
Patched 1

Smoothened

Gorlin Syndrome
• Macrocephaly
• Wide-set eyes
• Basal cell
carcinoma
• Rib anomalies

Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Prominent beaked nose
• Broad thumbs
• Hirsutism

GLI-1
GLI-2
GLI-3 • CBP
Twist

GLI1
PTC1
HNF3

Holoprosencephaly
Smith-Lemli-Opitz
Gorlin Syndrome
Greig Syndrome

Pallister-Hall
Syndrome
• Hypothalamic
hamartoma
• Short, upturned
nose
• Central and
postaxial
polydactyly
• Bifid epiglottis

Greig
Cephalopolysyndactyly
Syndrome
• Macrocephaly
• Hypertelorism
• Pre- and postaxial
polydactyly

Pallister-Hall Syndrome
Rubinstein-Taybi

including basal cell carcinomas, medulloblastomas, glioblastomas, and
rhabdomyosarcomas.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

101.3 Ciliopathies
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert
Cilia are microtubule-­containing organelles that project from the surface of most human cells. Three types of cilia exist in humans: motile
cilia, nodal cilia, and primary cilia. Motile cilia typically contain a
sweeping motion and play important roles in the respiratory epithelium (see Chapter 455 for discussion of structure of cilia and their
role in primary ciliary dyskinesia and respiratory disorders). Nodal
cilia play a very brief role during embryonic development, and their
whirling flow in the Henson’s node during gastrulation is central in
determining the left-­right body axis. Defects in this process manifest as
alterations in body orientation, including situs inversus and heterotaxy
(see Chapter 480.11).
Primary cilia are nonmotile and are present in nearly all cells.
The membrane of each cilium is continuous with the plasma membrane. There are unique differences in its membrane that allow
cilia to detect changes in the extracellular environment to function as mechanoreceptors, osmosensors, and chemosensors and

Fig. 101.3 Signaling components and clinical
features of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway. Deleterious sequence variants
in genes that function together in a developmental pathway typically have overlapping
clinical manifestations. Several components of
the SHH pathway have been identified and
their relationships elucidated. Pathogenic variants in several members of this pathway result
in phenotypes with facial anomalies, as seen
in holoprosencephaly, Smith-­
Lemli-­
Opitz syndrome, Gorlin syndrome, Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, Pallister-­
Hall syndrome,
and Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome. CNS, Central
nervous system.

convey this information via various intracellular signaling pathways to regulate diverse cellular processes (proliferation, polarity, nerve growth, differentiation, and tissue maintenance). These
pathways may include Hedgehog (HH), G-­protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), Wingless and Int-­1 (WNT), RTKs, and transforming
growth factor β (TGF-­β).
Pathogenic changes to genes that control the function and signaling
within the cilia give rise to conditions called ciliopathies. Given the extent
of cilia located throughout the human body, symptoms associated with
ciliopathies can be variable and extensive. Defects can occur to many
different organs during fetal development through adulthood. Organ
systems generally affected in ciliopathies include the brain, eyes, liver, kidneys, and skeleton (Fig. 101.4). There are many well-­described ciliopathy
effects, including retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss, infertility, primary
ciliary dyskinesia, polycystic kidney disease, and nephronophthisis, as
well as a number of syndromes including Joubert, Bardet-­Biedl, Meckel-­
Gruber, and orofaciodigital syndromes (Table 101.4).
The diagnosis of a ciliopathy is generally based on recognition of
the clinical features followed by either targeted gene testing, a multigene panel, or exome/genome sequencing. If a diagnosis is established
with molecular testing, additional studies may be indicated to evaluate
for additional medical and developmental concerns. Surveillance for
potential changes to the kidneys, liver, and eyes should be routinely
performed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

792 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Motile cilia
Non-motile cilia
Both types of cilia
Eyes

• Ataxia
• Epilepsy
• Mental disability
• Brain malformations

Retinal dystrophy

Nose

Anosmia

Ears

Hearing loss

Brain

Hydrocephalus

Fig. 101.4 Ciliopathies of motile and/or

nonmotile cilia encompass most human
organ systems. Different organ systems or
tissues are affected in diverse ciliopathies,
with the most common phenotypic manifestations for each organ. Ciliopathies
caused primarily by defects in motile cilia
are in orange, those in nonmotile (primary) cilia are in blue, and those associated
with defects in nodal cilia are in green.
NPHP, Nephronophthisis; PKD, polycystic
kidney disease. (Modified from Reiter JF,
Leroux MR. Genes and molecular pathways underpinning ciliopathies. Nat Rev
Molec Cell. 2017;18:533–547. Fig. 2.)

Facial anomalies
Organ
placement

Organ laterality
defects

Energy
homeostasis

Central obesity

Skeleton

Reproductive
system

Congenital heart
defects

Heart

Chronic
respiratory problems

Respiratory
system

Infertility

Renal anomalies
(PKD, NPHP)

Kidney

• Hypogonadism
• Genital anomalies

Hepatic disease
(liver fibrosis)

Liver

Skeletal anomalies
(polydactyly, rib cage)

Table 101.4  Childhood Diseases and Syndromes Associated with Motile and Primary/Sensory Ciliopathies
PEDIATRIC CILIOPATHY
MOTOR
Primary ciliary dyskinesia

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

SELECTED GENE(S)

Chronic bronchitis, rhinosinusitis, otitis media,
laterality defects, infertility, CHD

DNAI1, DNAH5, DNAH11, DNAI2, KTU,
TXNDC3, LRRC50, RSPH9, RSPH4A,
CCDC40, CCDC39

PRIMARY/SENSORY
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease

RFD, CHF

PKHD1

Nephronophthisis

RFD, interstitial nephritis, CHF, RP

NPHP1-­8, ALMS1, CEP290

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

Obesity, polydactyly, ID, RP, renal anomalies,
anosmia, CHD

BBS1-­12, MKS1, MKS3, CEP290

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

RFD, polydactyly, ID, CNS anomalies, CHD,
cleft lip, cleft palate

MKS1-­6, CC2D2A, CEP290, TMEM216

Joubert syndrome

CNS anomalies, ID, ataxia, RP, polydactyly,
cleft lip, cleft palate

NPHP1, JBTS1, JBTS3, JBTS4, CORS2, AHI1,
CEP290, TMEM216

Alström syndrome

Obesity, RP, DM, hypothyroidism,
hypogonadism, skeletal dysplasia,
cardiomyopathy, pulmonary fibrosis

ALMS1

Orofaciodigital syndrome type I

Polydactyly, syndactyly, cleft lip, cleft palate,
CNS anomalies, ID, RFD

OFD1

Ellis van Creveld syndrome

Chondrodystrophy, polydactyly, ectodermal
dysplasia, CHD

EVC, EVC2

Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy

Narrow thorax, RFD, RP, dwarfism, polydactyly

IFT80

Sensenbrenner syndrome

Dolichocephaly, ectodermal dysplasia, dental
dysplasia, narrow thorax, RFD, CHD

IFT122, IFT43, WDR35

Short rib–polydactyly syndromes

Narrow thorax, short limb dwarfism,
polydactyly, renal dysplasia

WDR35, DYNC2H1, NEK1

CHD, Congenital heart disease; CHF, congenital hepatic fibrosis; CNS, central nervous system; DM, diabetes mellitus; ID, intellectual disabilities; RFD, renal fibrocystic disease; RP,
retinitis pigmentosa.
From Ferkol TW, Leigh MW. Ciliopathies: the central role of cilia in a spectrum of pediatric disorders. J Pediatr. 2012;160:366–371.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

101.4 Craniosynostoses
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert
To permit appropriate brain growth, the cranial sutures do not completely fuse until adulthood. Growth of the skull occurs perpendicular
to the direction of each suture. Craniosynostosis arises when one or
more cranial sutures prematurely ossify, which usually becomes apparent between the third trimester of pregnancy and the first year of life (see
Chapter 631.10). The shape of the skull is often the clue to the affected
suture (Fig. 101.5). Most patients with craniosynostosis do not have
additional syndromic features; this may depend on the sutures involved.
Patients with bicoronal or multisuture craniosynostosis often have an
associated genetic syndrome, whereas patients with isolated sagittal craniosynostosis do not have features of an identifiable genetic cause.
Craniosynostosis can result from reduced intrinsic factors (poor
brain growth), increased extrinsic forces (primiparity, multiple pregnancy, fetal position, high birth weight), or genetic abnormalities leading to uncontrolled cranial bone growth. Genes commonly associated
with syndromic craniosynostosis include three fibroblast growth factor
receptor genes (FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3), TWIST1, and EFNB1. FGFR1,

793

FGFR2, and FGFR3 are associated with recognizable conditions such
as Crouzon, Pfeiffer, Apert, and Muenke syndromes; TWIST1 with
Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome; and EFNB1 with craniofrontonasal syndrome. Distinguishing between the FGFR-­
related craniosynostosis
syndromes can often be made based on additional features, particularly
of the hands and feet (see Chapter 631.10).
Other pathogenic gene variants have been identified in patients with
syndromic and nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (Table 101.5). Given
the overlap of clinical features of many of the craniosynostosis conditions, appropriate genetic testing for patients with craniosynostosis
could include either a multigene panel or exome/genome sequencing.
The diagnosis is made based on the genetic abnormality and clinical
features.
Management of patients with craniosynostosis is often complex
and performed with a multidisciplinary team of various specialists,
including audiology, dentistry, genetics, neurosurgery, ophthalmology,
orthodontics, otolaryngology, pediatrics, plastic surgery, and speech
therapy (see Chapter 631.10).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Types of Craniosynostosis

Front

Metopic (Frontal) Suture

Frontal Bone
Coronal Suture

Anterior Fontanelle

Right

Left
Parietal Bone

Sagittal Suture

Posterior Fontanelle

Lambdoid Suture

Back

Metopic

Sagittal

Synostotic Trigonocephaly

Bicoronal
Synostotic Brachycephaly

Occipital Bone

Lambdoid

Synostotic Scaphocephaly

Synostotic Posterior Plagiocephaly

Unicoronal

(All Sutures Open)

Synostotic Anterior Plagiocephaly Deformational Posterior Plagiocephaly

Fig. 101.5 Types of craniosynostosis. (From Buchanan EP, Xue Y, Xue AS, Olshinka A, Lam S. Multidisciplinary care of craniosynostosis. J Multidiscip
Healthcare. 2017;10:263–270. Fig. 1. Dove Medical Press Ltd.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

794 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 101.5  Core Genes For Which Specific Types of Variants Are Associated with Craniosynostosis in More Than Half of
Affected Individuals
INHERITANCE
PATTERN

CLINICAL DISORDER
(MIM#)

PREVALENCE
(%)

ASXL1 (612990)

AD (n)

Bohring-­Opitz
syndrome (605039)

—

Metopic

Forehead nevus flammeus, ulnar
deviation and flexion of wrists
and metacarpophalangeal joints,
severe intellectual disability

CDC45 (603465)

AR

—

—

Coronal

Thin eyebrows, small ears, variable
short stature

COLEC11 (612502)

AR

3MC syndrome 2
(265050)

—

Metopic

Hypertelorism, blepharoptosis,
arched eyebrows, cleft lip/palate,
hearing loss, radioulnar synostosis,
genital and vesicorenal anomalies

EFNB1 (300035)

XLD (male sparing)

Craniofrontonasal
syndrome (304110)

0.8

Coronal

Hypertelorism, notched nasal tip,
chest anomalies, longitudinal
splitting of nails; heterozygous
females more severely affected
than hemizygous males

ERF (611888)

AD

ERF-­related
craniosynostosis
(600775)

1.1

Multisuture

Exorbitism, midface hypoplasia,
Chiari type I malformation, postnatal
onset of craniosynostosis

FGFR1 (136350)

AD

Pfeiffer syndrome
(101600)

—

Coronal

Mild craniofacial features, broad
medially deviated thumbs and
halluces, cutaneous syndactyly,
specific amino acid substitution
p.Pro252Arg

FGFR1

AD (n)

Osteoglophonic
dysplasia (166250)

—

Multisuture

Prominent brow ridges, depressed
nasal bridge, rhizomelic dwarfism,
localized lytic lesions of metaphyses

FGFR2 (176943)

AD (n)

Apert syndrome
(101200)

3.6

Coronal, multisuture

Midface hypoplasia, dilated cerebral
ventricles, complex syndactyly of
the hands and feet

FGFR2

AD (n)

Beare-­Stevenson
syndrome (123790)

*

Multisuture

Choanal atresia, prominent umbilical
stump, furrowed scalp/neck skin,
acanthosis nigricans in survivors

FGFR2

AD

Crouzon syndrome
(123500)

2.4

Multisuture, coronal,
sagittal

Exorbitism, midface hypoplasia,
beaked nose (“crouzonoid” facies),
clinically normal hands and feet

FGFR2

AD (n)

Pfeiffer syndrome
(101600)

0.8

Multisuture

Broad thumbs and halluces; in
severe cases, cloverleaf skull, brain
anomalies, tracheal sleeve, fused
elbows

FGFR2

AD (n)

Bent bone dysplasia
(614592)

*

Coronal

Osteopenia, reduced mineralization
of the calvaria, bent long bones;
perinatal lethal

FGFR3 (134934)

AD

Muenke syndrome
(602849)

4.0

Coronal

Defined by specific amino acid
substitution p.Pro250Arg; may
include sensorineural hearing loss,
mild brachydactyly, cone-­shaped
epiphyses

AD (n)

Crouzon/acanthosis
nigricans (612247)

0.4

Multisuture

Crouzonoid facies, choanal stenosis,
hydrocephalus, acanthosis
nigricans; specific amino acid
substitution p.Ala391Glu

AD (n)

Thanatophoric
dysplasia II (187601)

*

Multisuture

Lethal skeletal dysplasia, micromelic
limb shortening, straight femora;
specific amino acid substitution
p.Lys650Glu

AD

Philadelphia
craniosynostosis
(185900)

—

Sagittal

Cutaneous and osseous syndactyly

GENE (MIM#)

IHH (600726)

TYPICAL SUTURE
FUSION

MAJOR PHENOTYPIC
FEATURES

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

795

Table 101.5  Core Genes For Which Specific Types of Variants Are Associated with Craniosynostosis in More Than Half of
Affected Individuals—cont’d
INHERITANCE
PATTERN

CLINICAL DISORDER
(MIM#)

PREVALENCE
(%)

IL11RA (600939)

AR

Craniosynostosis and
dental anomalies
(614188)

—

Multisuture

Maxillary hypoplasia, delayed
tooth eruption, supernumerary
teeth, minor digit abnormalities,
conductive hearing loss

MEGF8 (604267)

AR

Carpenter syndrome 2
(614796)

—

Metopic

Hypertelorism, arched eyebrows,
lateralization defects, brachydactyly,
syndactyly, preaxial polydactyly

MSX2 (123101)

AD

Boston craniosynostosis
(604757)

—

Sagittal, coronal,
multisuture

None diagnostic; syndrome defined
by specific amino acid substitutions
p.Pro148His, p.Pro148Leu

POR (124015)

AR

Antley-­Bixler syndrome
(201750)

—

Bicoronal,
multisuture

Choanal stenosis, radiohumeral
synostosis, bowed femora,
multiple joint contractures,
genital abnormalities; abnormal
steroidogenesis

RAB23 (606144)

AR

Carpenter syndrome 1
(201000)

—

Multisuture

Obesity, cardiac defects,
polysyndactyly, brachydactyly,
genu valgum, hypogenitalism,
umbilical hernia, learning disability

RUNX2 (600211)

AD (n)

—

—

Multisuture

None diagnostic; syndrome defined
by specific gene duplication

SKI (164780)

AD (n)

Shprintzen-­Goldberg
syndrome (182212)

—

Sagittal, multisuture

Hypertelorism, micrognathia,
high-­arched palate, arachnodactyly,
joint contractures, pectus deformity,
aortic root aneurysm, mitral valve
prolapse, learning disability

TCF12 (600480)

AD

TCF12-­related
craniosynostosis
(615314)

1.3

Coronal

Resembles mild Saethre-­Chotzen
syndrome; diagnosis defined
by presence of mutations in the
gene, ∼50% nonpenetrance

TWIST1 (601622)

AD

Saethre-­Chotzen
syndrome (101400)

3.6

Coronal

Low frontal hairline, hypertelorism,
eyelid ptosis, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, blocked tear
ducts, small ears with prominent
crus helicis

WDR35 (613602)

AR

Cranioectodermal
dysplasia 2 (613610)

—

Sagittal

Facial dysmorphism, narrow thorax,
short long bones, brachydactyly,
sparse hair, hypoplastic teeth,
cystic kidneys, hepatic fibrosis

ZIC1 (600470)

AD (n)

ZIC1-­related
craniosynostosis

0.2

Coronal

Severe learning disability

GENE (MIM#)

TYPICAL SUTURE
FUSION

MAJOR PHENOTYPIC
FEATURES

The prevalence figures are for percent total craniosynostosis cases with specified mutation, from the cohort attending the Craniofacial Unit, Oxford, born between 1998 and 2008 (n =
531) and surgically treated before end of 2013.
*Usually lethal at birth.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XLD, X-­linked dominant; (n), usually arises by new mutation.
From Twigg SRF, Wilkie AOM. A genetic-­pathophysiological framework for craniosynostosis. Am J Hum Genetics. 2015;97:359–377. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

796 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Chapter 102

Chromatin Regulatory
Disorders
Kosuke Izumi
Pathogenic variants in genes that encode chromatin proteins that
orchestrate gene expression in a range of human tissues frequently
cause pediatric developmental disorders that include developmental
delay/intellectual disability and facial dysmorphisms.

KABUKI SYNDROME

Kabuki syndrome (MIM: 147920 and 300867) is a genetic disorder
characterized by facial features, mild to moderate intellectual disability,
growth deficiency, and skeletal anomalies. Kabuki syndrome was originally named “Kabuki make-­up syndrome” due to patients’ facial features, suggestive of those of Kabuki actors (Fig. 102.1). Approximately
1:32,000 to 1:86,000 individuals are estimated to have Kabuki syndrome.

Molecular Etiology

Heterozygous KMT2D pathogenic variants (∼90%), and hemizygous
(in males) or heterozygous (in females) KDM6A pathogenic variants
(∼10%) cause classic Kabuki syndrome; KMT2D encodes a histone
methyltransferase and KDM6A encodes a histone demethylase. Both of
these histone modification enzymes regulate histone codes to orchestrate global gene expression. Most genetic changes causing Kabuki syndrome are due to de novo changes. However, because KDM6A locates
on the X chromosome, its inheritance pattern can be complex, with
most KDM6A pathogenic variants being de novo, but maternal transmission of pathogenic KDM6A variants has been seen. Kabuki-­like
syndromes share many clinical features but do not have pathogenic
variants in KMT2D or KDM6A.

Clinical Features of Kabuki Syndrome (Table 102.1)

Physical features: Common features of Kabuki syndrome include long
palpebral fissures with eversion of the lateral third of the lower eyelid, arched broad eyebrows, a short columella, depressed nasal tip,
large, prominent or cupped ears, and persistent fingertip pads (see
Fig. 102.1). Dental anomalies such as widely spaced teeth and hypodontia are commonly seen.
Growth and feeding: Individuals with Kabuki syndrome often have
short stature and feeding difficulties. The degree of difficulty with

feeding and growth varies, but it is not uncommon for infants or
children with Kabuki syndrome to require feeding tubes.
Development and behavior: Global developmental delay is commonly seen in children with Kabuki syndrome, and individuals with Kabuki syndrome typically have mild to moderate intellectual disability. Most individuals speak and ambulate independently. Although
infrequent, autism is seen in Kabuki syndrome.
Neurology: Hypotonia is a common feature. Structural brain differences are typically not seen, but individuals with Kabuki syndrome
have an ∼30% risk for seizures.
Congenital heart disease: Approximately 70% of children with Kabuki syndrome have a structural heart defect. The most common
types include coarctation of the aorta and septal defects, although
complex congenital heart disease is also seen.
Gastrointestinal: In addition to feeding difficulties, structural anomalies such as anal atresia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH),
and cholestasis can be seen.
Endocrinology: Hypoglycemia or hyperinsulinemia can be seen,
and some females with Kabuki syndrome have early premature
thelarche.
Ophthalmology: The common everted lower eyelid seen in Kabuki
can lead to excessive tearing. Other eye differences can include ptosis, cataracts, corneal differences, blue sclerae, or strabismus.
Ear, nose, and throat: Hearing loss, mainly conductive hearing loss,
and more rarely sensorineural hearing loss, is seen in up to 50% of
individuals with Kabuki syndrome. Chronic otitis media is a major
cause of conductive hearing loss. Individuals with Kabuki syndrome
can also have cleft lip and/or palate.
Genitourinary: Kidney and urinary tract disorders occur in more than
25% and can include abnormal renal location, duplicated collecting
system, hypospadias and cryptorchidism in males, and hypoplastic
labia in females.
Musculoskeletal: Many individuals have joint hypermobility that can
manifest with scoliosis. Spinal abnormalities such as sagittal clefts
and hemivertebrae can be seen in individuals with Kabuki syndrome.
Immunology and hematology: Frequent and recurrent infections including sinopulmonary infections and otitis media are common in
children with Kabuki syndrome. Some can have hypogammaglobulinemia and immune dysfunction, with some needing regular intravenous immunoglobulin injection. Autoimmune disorders such as
vitiligo, immune thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, and coagulopathy are also common.
Molecular diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome: This is often made using sequencing and deletion/duplication analyses of KMT2D and KDM6A
following clinical suspicion or by exome sequencing. Often, parental
testing is performed to determine whether the identified variant is
de novo. In addition, a DNA methylation profile has been identified for Kabuki syndrome caused by KMT2D and KDM6A variants,
and a matching profile can support the diagnosis in the context of
uncertain pathogenicity of identified KMT2D or KDM6A variants.

RUBINSTEIN-­TAYBI SYNDROME

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome (RSTS; MIM 180849 and 613684) is characterized by down-­slanted palpebral fissures, broad thumb and first
toe, developmental delay/intellectual disability, and short stature (Fig.
102.2). It occurs in ∼1 in 125,000 births.

Molecular Etiology
A

B

Fig. 102.1 Physical features of Kabuki syndrome. A, Patient with
KMT2D c.10201C>T, p.Gln3401* pathogenic variant. Dysmorphic features include long and up-­slanted palpebral fissures and large prominent
ears. B, Patient with KDM6A c.3717G>A; p.Trp1239* pathogenic variant.
Dysmorphic features include long and up-­slanted palpebral fissures.

RSTS is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in CREBBP and
EP300 genes. These genes encode transcriptional co-­activators as histone lysine acetyltransferases. RSTS is caused by pathogenic variants,
typically de novo in CREBBP in 55% and in EP300 in ∼8%. CREBBP
pathogenic variants tend to result in more typical RSTS features,
with EP300 alterations resulting in a wider, often milder, phenotypic
spectrum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 102 u Chromatin Regulatory Disorders

797

Table 102.1  Kabuki Phenotype Scoring List
CLINICAL FEATURES

POSSIBLE SCORE

FEATURES

Facial features

0-­5 points (0-­3 features = 1 point; 4-­6 = 2 point;
7-­9 = 3 point; 10-­12 = 4 point; 13-­15 = 5 point)

Long palpebral fissures; everted lower eyelids; large dysplastic
ears; arched eyebrows, sparse lateral one third; flat nasal tip;
abnormal dentition; high/cleft palate; strabismus; blue sclera;
micrognathia; ptosis; broad nasal root; oligodontia; thin
upper and full lower lip; lip nodules

Limb/extremity features

Up to 1 point (0-­1 features = 0 point; 2-­4 = 1 point)

Persistent fetal pads; brachy-­or clinodactyly; lax joints; hip
dislocation

Microcephaly

1 point

Short stature

1 point

Heart

1 point

Kidney

1 point

Sum

0-­10

From Wang YR, Xu NX, Wang J, Wang XM. Kabuki syndrome: review of the clinical features, diagnosis and epigenetic mechanisms. World J Pediatr. 2019;15:528–535. Table 1.

septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, coarctation of the aorta,
pulmonary stenosis, aortic stenosis, and vascular ring.
Respiratory: Obstructive sleep apnea is common.
Genitourinary: Kidney anomalies include hydronephrosis and duplications. Many males have cryptorchidism.
Gastrointestinal: Feeding problems due to gastroesophageal reflux
and constipation are common.
Musculoskeletal: Joint laxity, scoliosis, and vertebral abnormalities
can be seen. Hypotonia is common.
Molecular diagnosis: This can be made using a gene panel (sequencing and deletion/duplication analyses of CREBBP and EP300). For
individuals with clinical features with atypical RSTS features, exome
sequencing is recommended.

A

B

Fig. 102.2 Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome. A, A 21-­month-­old child. Note

CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME

the hirsutism, down-­slanting palpebral fissures, maxillary hypoplasia,
prominent nose with nasal septum extending below alae nasi, and low,
posteriorly rotated ears. B, Broad thumbs with radial angulation and
persistent fingertip pads. (A courtesy Dr. Marilyn C. Jones, Children’s
Hospital, San Diego, California; from Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo
M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1C, p. 108 and Fig. 2C, p. 109.)

Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; MIM 122470) is characterized by craniofacial features including synophrys, high-­
arched
eyebrows and thin downturned upper lip, hirsutism, intellectual
disability, microcephaly, growth retardation, limb anomalies, such
as micromelia, phocomelia, and oligodactyly, and several other systemic abnormalities. Its population incidence is approximately 1 in
50,000.

Clinical Features of RSTS

Molecular Mechanism of CdLS

Physical features: Characteristic facial features include arched eyebrows,
down-­slanting palpebral fissures, low-­hanging columella, and grimacing smile. Individuals often have broad thumbs and/or halluces.
Growth: Prenatal growth is usually normal, but most individuals have
short stature caused by slow postnatal growth. Obesity may be seen
during childhood or adolescence.
Development: Global developmental delay is typical with milder features often seen in individuals with EP300 pathogenic variants. The
average age of walking is 30 months and first words 25 months.
Speech delay occurs in 90% of children and some remain nonverbal.
Features of autism spectrum disorder, as well as impulsivity, distractibility, mood instability, and stereotypies can be seen.
Intellectual disability: This is in the moderate to severe range is typical
for individuals with RSTS, with an IQ range of 25-­79. Verbal ability
is typically poorer than other skills.
Neurologic: Craniospinal and posterior fossa abnormalities, such as
Chiari malformation or cervical cord compression, can be seen as
well as seizures or abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG).
Eye findings: These can include refractory errors, ptosis, cataracts,
coloboma, nystagmus, strabismus, and glaucoma.
Congenital heart defects: These are seen in ∼30% of individuals with
RSTS. Common defects include atrial septal defect, ventricular

CdLS is caused by pathogenic variants in genes encoding the structural and regulatory components of the cohesin complex. Variants
have been found in NIPBL, HDAC8, RAD21, SMC1A, and SMC3 in
CdLS. The cohesin complex is composed of SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21,
and other subunits that comprise a ringlike structure that “embraces”
chromatin. NIPBL encodes a protein that controls cohesin complex
genome loading. The SMC3 component of the cohesin complex
becomes acetylated once loaded onto the genome and is subsequently
deacetylated by HDAC8 for cohesin protein recycling. Pathogenic
variants in BRD4 are an infrequent cause of CdLS. Cohesin has shown
to play a key role in transcriptional regulation, and global transcriptional alterations due to cohesin dysfunction are thought to lead to
the pathogenesis of CdLS.
NIPBL pathogenic variants are found in approximately 60% of the
individuals with CdLS and are more likely to be identified in more
severely (or “classically”) affected individuals, with loss-­of-­function
variants resulting in a more severe phenotype. Pathogenic variants in
SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, HDAC8, and BRD4 can be found in 1–5% of
the individuals with CdLS. Pathogenic variants in all related genes are
typically acquired de novo, although instances of inherited variants
from minimally affected mothers have been noted for the X-­linked
HDAC8 and SMC1A genes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

798 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Fig. 102.3 Physical features of Cornelia de Lange

A

syndrome. A, Patient with NIPBL c.3100_3106del;
p.K1034QfsX7 pathogenic variant. Dysmorphic features include synophrys, long eyelashes, upturned nasal tip with anteverted nares, long philtrum, and micrognathia. Severe reduction defects of upper extremities
are also depicted. B, Patient with SMC1A c.2077C>G;
p.R693G mutation. Dysmorphic features include mild
synophrys.

B

Clinical Manifestations of CdLS

Facial features: Include synophrys with highly arched and/or thick
eyebrows, long/thick eyelashes, short nasal bridge, upturned nasal
tip with anteverted nares, long and/or smooth philtrum, thin vermilion of the upper lip, downturned corners of the mouth, highly
arched palate with or without cleft palate, small widely spaced teeth,
and micrognathia (Fig. 102.3).
Growth failure: Prenatal-­onset growth failure and microcephaly are
common.
Ophthalmologic: Common manifestations include ptosis, myopia,
and nystagmus.
Otolaryngologic: Sensorineural hearing impairment is common, but
conductive hearing loss can be seen.
Cardiovascular: Approximately 50% of individuals with CdLS have
congenital heart disease. The most common abnormalities include
pulmonic or peripheral pulmonic stenosis, ventricular septal defects, atrial septal defects, coarctation or hypoplastic aortic arch,
aortic valve anomaly, tetralogy of Fallot, double-­outlet right ventricle, and atrioventricular canal.
Gastrointestinal: Gastroesophageal reflux disease is present in nearly
all instances, and some require a feeding tube during infancy/childhood. Other rare gastrointestinal abnormalities include pyloric stenosis (4%), intestinal malrotation (2%), and CDH (1%).
Genitourinary. Renal abnormalities such as vesicoureteral reflux and
cryptorchidism are common.
Skeletal: Severe abnormalities of the upper extremities are seen in 25%
of individuals with classical CdLS. Upper extremity deficiencies
range from severe reduction defects such as complete absence of the
forearms to mild fifth finger clinodactyly (see Fig. 102.3). Radioulnar synostosis is also common.
Skin: Hypertrichosis is common, and scalp hair, typically thick, can
extend onto the temporal regions.
Developmental delay/intellectual disability: Most individuals with
classical CdLS demonstrate global developmental delay. The overall
range of IQ levels is broad, from below 30 to 85, with an average
IQ of 53. Those affected individuals with classic features are more
likely to have severe to profound intellectual disability. Fifty percent of children with CdLS walk by 24 months and 95% by 10 years
old. A range of behavioral issues have been reported, and behavior
problems are often directly related to frustration from an inability
to communicate.
Neurologic: Approximately 25% of individuals with CdLS experience
seizures.
Molecular Diagnosis of CdLS: Due to a relatively high frequency of
mosaic variants not detected in blood, a next-­generation sequencing panel of CdLS genes (NIPBL, SMC1A, HDAC8, SMC3, RAD21,
and BRD4) performed on DNA extracted from buccal cells has been
recommended as the most effective way of detecting causal variants.
For individuals with atypical CdLS features, exome sequencing is
recommended.

A

B

Fig. 102.4 Coffin-­Siris syndrome. Note the coarse face and wide

mouth with full lips (A), and hypoplastic fifth fingernails (B). (From Jones
KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of
Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1A and
1D, p. 819.)

COFFIN-­SIRIS SYNDROME

Coffin-­Siris syndrome (CSS) is characterized by thick eyebrows, periorbital fullness, wide mouth with full lips, and coarse facial features; fifth
fingernail hypoplasia; absence of terminal phalanges; hypertrichosis;
developmental delay/intellectual disability; and short stature (Fig. 102.4).

Molecular Mechanism of CSS

CSS is typically caused by de novo heterozygous germline pathogenic
variants in genes encoding a component of BAF (BRG1/hBRM-­associated
factors) complex, which belongs to the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeler complex family. Pathogenic variants have been found in ARID1A,
ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, SMARCE1, and SOX11. Variants in
one of these genes can be found in ∼60–70% of the patients with CSS.

Clinical Features of CSS

Facial features: Characteristic facial features of CSS include wide
mouth with thick, everted upper and lower lips, broad nasal bridge
with broad nasal tip, thick eyebrows, and long eyelashes. Facial features typically coarsen over time.
Growth: Prenatal growth profile tends to be normal, but postnatal weight
and height measurements are usually below the 50th percentile.
Development: Global developmental delay is common and variable;
children sit around 12 months, walk at around 30 months, and say
their first words at 24 months. Most individuals have intellectual disability, typically moderate to severe (IQ range: 40-­69). Some individuals with CSS have behavioral concerns, aggression, or autistic features.
Neurologic: The majority of children with CSS have hypotonia. Structural brain malformations such as Dandy-­
Walker variant, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 103 u Genetics of Common Disorders
­agenesis of the corpus callosum may be seen. Seizures occur in up to
50% of individuals. Hearing impairment can occur.
Ophthalmology: Visual impairment is common, and ocular abnormalities include ptosis, strabismus and myopia.
Gastrointestinal: Feeding issues and slow growth are common.
Genitourinary: Renal malformation such as horseshoe kidney, and
genitourinary malformation such as cryptorchidism and hypospadias have been noted.
Musculoskeletal: Fifth digit nail and distal phalanx hypoplasia or aplasia, a diagnostic criterion in the pre-­exome era, is commonly seen.
Brachydactyly of the fifth finger, joint laxity, and scoliosis are also
frequent.
Cardiac: Congenital heart defects can be seen and include ventricular
septal defects, atrial septal defects, and tetralogy of Fallot.
Skin: Hirsutism and hypertrichosis are typical.

Molecular Diagnosis of CSS

For those whom clinical diagnosis of CSS is strongly suspected, CSS
gene sequencing and deletion/duplication panel is recommended. For
those with atypical clinical features, comprehensive genetic testing
such as exome sequencing is warranted.

OTHER CHROMATIN DISORDERS

An increasing number of genetic disorders, due to mutations in
genes encoding chromatin transcriptional regulatory proteins, have
been identified. These disorders include CHARGE syndrome due
to CHD7 pathogenic variants, Wiedemann-­Steiner syndrome due
to KMT2A pathogenic variants, Arboleda-­Tham syndrome due to
KAT6A pathogenic variants, and Say-­
Barber-­
Biesecker/Young-­
Simpson syndrome due to KAT6B pathogenic variants. CHD7 is
a chromatin remodeler protein with a chromodomain histone-­
modification recognition motif. KAT6A and KAT6B encode histone
modification enzymes. Common manifestations of genetic diagnoses due to these chromatin remodelers and histone modification
enzyme defects include developmental delay, hypotonia, and facial
dysmorphisms. Some of the clinical features enable astute clinicians
to distinguish between typical cases of these syndromes. However, in
their atypical presentations, a clinical diagnosis may not be feasible.
Exome sequencing is recommended in any children with facial dysmorphisms as well as developmental delay to detect possible chromatin disorders.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 103

Genetics of Common
Disorders
Neil A. Hanchard and Brendan Lee
Common pediatric diseases, like many common adult-­onset diseases,
are usually multifactorial. The combination of many genes and environmental factors contribute to a complex sequence of events leading
to disease. The complexity of the combination of contributing factors
increases the challenge of finding genetic variants that cause disease.
Genetic tools include public databases of genetic variants and the
human haplotype map. Genotyping has permitted very large numbers
of common genetic variants (those with population frequencies >5%)
to be efficiently tested in large numbers of patients. Genetic sequencing technologies are being used to investigate the role of rare coding

799

sequence variants in common diseases. The incorporation of these
tools into large, well-­designed population studies has developed into
the field of genetic epidemiology.

103.1 Major Genetic Approaches to the
Study of Common Pediatric Disorders
Neil A. Hanchard and Brendan Lee
Millions of genetic variants are present in every person. Many of these
variants have no known impact on health, while others have a measurable influence. Sometimes, sequence changes in a single gene consistently cause a disease, as seen with cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia;
more often, specific genetic changes are insufficient to determine the
manifestation of a specific medical condition by themselves. Rather,
these changes can contribute indirectly or partially to the development
of disease, and these are best conceptualized as modifiers of disease
risk. Figure 103.1 demonstrates the relationship between variant frequency and the relative medical impact of the allele. The spectrum of
variant impact ranges widely from a slightly increased risk of illness
to predetermined, fully expressed disease. Studies aimed at discovering rare variants with strong health effects require only small sample
populations to achieve statistical significance, whereas those studying
common variants that contribute partially to the overall effect often
require much larger sample sizes because of the small impact of multiple variants.
In many cases, genetic susceptibility is the result of the cumulative
risk of many common variants. For common conditions, the genetic
predisposition alone is not sufficient to cause disease. Everyone inherits a different degree of disease vulnerability, which is then augmented
by exposure to certain environmental or other factors. Figure 103.2 is
a model for the contribution of common genetic variants to individual
health. One goal of medical genetics is to identify the genes that contribute to initial genetic susceptibility and help prevent the occurrence of
disease, either by avoiding inciting environmental factors or by instituting interventions that reduce risk. For persons who cross the threshold
of disease, the goal is to better understand the pathogenesis in the hope
that this will suggest better approaches to treatment. Common genetic
variation can also influence responses to medications and the risk of
adverse drug reactions, as well as augments the impact of environmental
exposures.
Complex traits may be inherently difficult to study if the precision
of diagnosis (phenotype) is low, as often occurs with neurobehavioral
traits. A starting point in the genetic analysis of a complex trait, therefore, is to obtain evidence in support of a genetic contribution and to
estimate the relative strength of genetic and environmental factors.
Complex traits typically exhibit familial clustering but are not transmitted in a distinct pattern as seen with classical mendelian autosomal
dominant or recessive inheritance. Complex traits often show variation
between groups of different ancestries, possibly reflecting the differences in frequency and/or effect of genetic variants within these groups.
Assessing the potential genetic contribution begins by determining
whether the trait is seen among related individuals more often than
in the general population. A common measure of familiality is the
first-­degree relative risk (usually designated by the symbol λs), which
is equal to the ratio of the prevalence rate in siblings and/or parents to
the prevalence rate in the general population. The λs for type 1 diabetes
is about 15. The relative strength of genetic and nongenetic risk factors
can be estimated by variance components analysis. The heritability of
a trait is the estimate of the fraction of the total variance contributed by
genetic factors (Fig. 103.3).
A minority of cases of common diseases such as diabetes may be
caused by single-­gene pathogenic variants (mendelian inheritance),
chromosomal disorders, and other genomic disorders (see Chapter
629.4). However, these unique causes of the disease can provide important insight into the molecular pathways involved. Chromosomal
regions with genes that might contribute to disease susceptibility have
historically been located with linkage mapping, which locates regions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

800 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Effect size
5.0
Few examples of
high-effect
common variants
influencing
common disease

Rare alleles
causing
Mendelian
disease

High

3.0

Fig. 103.1 Relationship between allele frequency and relative strength of genetic effect. Alleles
with large effect tend to be very rare but can be
studied with a small sample size because of the
relative ease of allele detection when medical
impact is high. Common variants tend to have a
modest or low effect on health, requiring large
datasets to visualize statistically small effects. The
vast majority of disease-­associated alleles identified to date have the characteristics shown within
the diagonal dotted lines. GWA, Genome-­wide association. (Adapted from McCarthy MI, Abecasis
GR, Cardon LR, et al. Genome-­wide association
studies for complex traits: consensus, uncertainty
and challenges. Nat Rev Genet. 2008;9:356–369.)

Low-frequency
variants with
intermediate effect

Intermediate
1.5

Common
variants
implicated in
common disease
by GWA

Rare variants of
small effect
very hard to identify
by genetic means

Modest
1.1
Low

0.001
Very rare

0.005
Rare

0.05
Low frequency

Common

Allele frequency

ence of gene-­
environment interaction on genetic susceptibility to
common diseases. Everyone inherits common variants that determine
initial genetic liability for disease
risk. For multifactorial disorders,
the initial genetic susceptibility is
insufficient to produce disease on
its own. Over time, exposure to
environmental factors increases the
likelihood of a disease state. Identifying the gene variants responsible
for risk can lead to prevention strategies or treatments.

Genetic
susceptibility

viro
n
Fa ment
cto
al
rB

Pre

ven

tion

Prenatal



VG



Path 3

En
tal
en
m
A
on
vir tor
En Fac

Infancy

A

Pre

l

ven

tion

l
nta
me
n
A
viro
En actor
F
Pr
ev
en
tio
n
B

Childhood

A

nta
me
n
o
C
vir
En actor
F

Prevention C
Path 2

ntal
Environme
B
r
o
Fact
Adolescence

Path 1

Adulthood

Time

Genetic Environmental Measurement
variance
variance
variance

Phenotypic
variance
VP

Disease Risk

Disease threshold

Fig. 103.2 Model for the influ-

Path 4

VE



VM

h2  VG / VP
Heritability

Fig. 103.3 Heritability concept. The phenotypic variance of a particu-

lar trait can be partitioned between the contributions of the genetic
variance, environmental variance, and measurement variance. This is
usually empirically determined. Heritability is defined by the proportion
of the phenotypic variance that is accounted for by the genetic variance. One can estimate the heritability from correlation of a quantitative trait between relatives.

of DNA that are inherited in families with the specific disease. In practical terms, however, this has become quite difficult for most complex
traits either because of a dearth of families or because the effects of
individual genetic loci are weak; thus linkage mapping is seldom used
anymore.
Genetic association studies are a powerful way of identifying common gene variants (>5% in the population) that each have an effect on
the risk of disease. Detection of the usually small to moderate effect of
each variant alongside interactions with environmental factors requires
well-­powered studies that often include thousands of individuals. A
number of parallel approaches for analyzing the aggregate effects of
rare variants in genes have also been developed. Such rare variant association methods also require large sample sizes because the gene effects
also appear to be relatively weak.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 103 u Genetics of Common Disorders
What is an SNP?
. . . G GTA A CTG ...
Different people can have a
different nucleotide or base at
a given location on a chromosome . . . GG CA A CTG ...
What is an SNP map?
Location of SNPs
on human DNA

Human
DNA

How can an SNP map be used to predict drug response?
Section of SNP genotype profile
Patients with efficacy
in clinical trials
Patients without efficacy
in clinical trials
Predictive of efficacy
Predictive of no efficacy

Fig. 103.4 Different combinations of single nucleotide polymor-

phisms (SNPs) are found in different individuals. The locations of these
SNPs can be pinpointed on maps of human genes. Subsequently, they
can be used to create profiles that are associated with difference in
response to a drug, such as efficacy and nonefficacy. (Adapted from
Roses A. Pharmacogenetics and the practice of medicine. Nature.
2000;405:857–865.)

Association studies require markers along the DNA that can be
genotyped (ascertaining the combination of alleles at a locus in a
diploid organism), typically with large-­scale, high-­throughput laboratory techniques. Markers that are typically used are single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; Fig. 103.4). A sample of the same
region of genome from 50 people will reveal that approximately 1
in every 200 bases varies between individuals. Catalogues of SNPs
identified in thousands of individuals from multiple populations
consist of tens of millions of SNPs across the genome (dbSNP; h
ttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/). Although most SNPs lack an
obvious function, some will alter the amino acid sequence of the
protein, and many have been shown to regulate the expression of
nearby or distant genes (https://gtexportal.org/home/) or indirectly
impact expression by altering the level of surrounding DNA methylation or the ability of proteins to act (The ENCODE Project Consortium). Some of these functional alterations can directly affect
susceptibility to disease.
A complex clinical phenotype can be defined by the presence
or absence of a disease as a dichotomous trait, or by selection of
a clinically meaningful continuous or quantitative trait, such as
serum glucose in type 2 diabetes. Although it might not be possible to define subgroups of patients in advance based on disease
mechanisms, the more uniform the phenotype, the more likely that
a genetic study will be informative. Locus heterogeneity refers to
the situation in which a similar trait results from alteration of different genes. Allelic heterogeneity is when more than one variant
in a particular gene can contribute to different diseases. The development of a trait or disease from a nongenetic mechanism results in
a phenocopy. These three factors often contribute to the difficulty
in identifying individual disease susceptibility genes, because they
reduce the effective size of the study population and thus require
even larger sample sizes.
For genetic variants that directly lead to disease, a person bearing
any variant or allele (inherited unit, DNA segment, or chromosome)
in a gene has a given probability of being affected with a specific gene
variant–associated disease. This is called the penetrance. Some diseases manifest signs only later in life (age-­related penetrance), which
could lead to misclassifying children with the disease-­producing variant to be classified as unaffected. Single-­gene disorders are typically
caused by pathogenic variants with relatively high penetrance. In contrast, most common variants have low penetrance because their overall contribution to the disease is small. Many such common variants

801

can contribute to disease risk for a complex trait; for example, human
height is influenced by >400 genes.
Ideally, important environmental exposures should be measured
and accounted for in a population because there may be a dependent
interaction between the environmental factor and specific genetic variant. An example is the likely requirement for a viral infection preceding
onset of type 1 diabetes. Although gene-­environment interactions are
strongly suspected to play an important role in common diseases, it is
difficult to identify and measure them. Very large studies with uniform
collection of information about environmental exposures are rare, but
are becoming more common with the expansion of large biorepositories that are integrated with electronic health records. Methods, such as
genome-­wide analyses of DNA methylation, sometimes referred to as
epigenome-­wide association studies, have been used to assess evidence
for early environmental exposures that influence common diseases
in later life. This apparent relationship between the environment and
DNA methylation (and related genetic features) is being used to discover and validate other possible gene-­environment interactions.

GENOME-­WIDE APPROACHES TO ASSOCIATION

For multifactorial common diseases, association analyses have been
used to identify disease-­related genes. There are two types of association study: direct association, in which the risk-­altering variant
itself is tested to see whether its presence correlates with disease, and
indirect association, in which markers that are physically close to the
biologically important variant are used as proxies. The correlation of
markers with other genetic variants in a small region of the genome
is called linkage disequilibrium. Indirect association is enabled by
the construction of linkage disequilibrium maps in continental reference populations (e.g., Europeans, Asians, West Africans) (International HapMap Project). SNPs that proxy most genetic variation have
been identified across most of the genome and can be genotyped at
low cost using specially designed microarrays that typically include
2-­5 million genetic markers. This resolution provides a good proxy of
genetic variation in relatively homogenous populations where linkage
disequilibrium is generally high (such as Europeans), thus facilitating
“genome-­wide” testing of variants in those populations.
Three basic study designs are used for association testing:
1.	Case-­control design: the frequency of an allele in an affected group
is compared with an unaffected group. This is the mostly commonly
used framework for association testing, as it aligns with many more
traditional epidemiologic study designs.
2.	Cohort design: large numbers of people are ascertained and then
followed for the onset of any number of diseases. Cohort analysis is very expensive, and there are few true cohort studies. However, investments in genomics of large-­scale population-­based cohorts in Iceland (https://www.decode.com/), the United Kingdom
(https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/), and the United States (https://allof
us.nih.gov/) include hundreds of thousands of individuals all tied to
electronic health records and have begun to show unique insights to
disease risk and pathogenesis.
3.	Family-­based control design: parents or siblings of an affected individual are used as the controls. Family-­based control study designs
are somewhat attractive for pediatric diseases because it is usually
possible to enroll parents. These studies also solve a major problem
in testing for association because the parents are perfectly matched
for genetic background; however, family-­based study designs are
inherently less efficient to recruit than case-­control studies and are
used less commonly.
The success of any association analysis depends on the design of a
well-­powered study and an accurately measured trait to avoid phenotypic misclassification. In large, population-­based studies, confounding by ethnicity or population stratification, could distort results.
Variants more common in people from a particular ancestry group
could cause an apparent association of a variant with a disease. This
association would not be a true association between an allele and a
disease, because the association would be confounded by genetic background. Methods for measuring subtle mismatching between cases
and controls using many thousands of markers routinely genotyped

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

802 Part VIII u Human Genetics
in genome-­wide association studies allow researchers to account for
this effect. The implementation of stringent thresholds for statistical
significance replicate associations in other groups have helped make
genome-­wide association studies robust and reproducible.
Association studies are a powerful tool to find genetic variation
that confers risk to an individual; however, the effect of any single
genetic variant will be a small contribution to the overall risk and
pathogenesis of disease. Hundreds of thousands of genetic associations between a variant or gene and disease, such as the APOEε4 allele
with an increased risk of Alzheimer disease, have now been observed
for thousands of complex diseases and traits, including autoimmune
disease, asthma, and bone density/fractures. Genetic variants that
implicate a novel gene in a process drive research into systems and
pathways that can alter disease outcome. With increasingly large datasets and advances in statistical analyses, all the genetic variants that
impact common disease risk can also be combined to derive a composite genetic risk score. This score can then be integrated with known
environmental risk factors to identify individuals at particularly high

risk of disease who might require more urgent intervention or monitoring. In adults, this approach is being developed to identify individuals at high risk for coronary heart disease, although concerns about
how well genetic risk scores work in different population groups are
yet to be overcome.
Low-­cost methods for sequencing the complete coding (exomes)
and full DNA sequence (genomes) of individuals have facilitated comprehensive evaluation of a wider range of genetic variants involved in
common diseases. Rare genetic variants, including small insertions
or deletions, are important in pediatric diseases such as neurodevelopmental disorders, cardiovascular malformations, and other birth
defects. Common traits such as height, obesity, diabetes, and autoimmune diseases are also affected by rare variants. In common severe disorders such as intellectual disability and complex heart malformations,
de novo pathogenic variants (i.e., pathogenic variants not present in
either parent) play an important role.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Metabolic Disorders
Chapter 104

An Approach to Inborn
Errors of Metabolism
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and
Charles P. Venditti
Many childhood conditions are caused by single-­gene pathogenic
variants that encode specific proteins. These pathogenic variants can
change the primary protein structure or the amount of protein synthesized. The function of a protein, whether it is an enzyme, receptor,
transport vehicle, membrane component, transcriptional coregulator, or structural element, may be compromised or abolished.
Hereditary diseases that disrupt normal biochemical processes are
termed inborn errors of metabolism or inherited metabolic diseases (Fig. 104.1).
Most genetic changes are clinically inconsequential and represent
benign variants. However, pathogenic variants produce diseases that
range in severity of presentation and the time of onset. Severe metabolic disorders usually become clinically apparent in the newborn
period or shortly thereafter, whereas milder forms may present later
in childhood and even in adulthood. With some exceptions, the presenting symptoms of most metabolic conditions lack the specificity
to enable a definitive diagnosis without further evaluation. The combination of low specificity of presenting symptoms and low prevalence
of metabolic disorders makes specific diagnosis difficult. Progressive symptoms, the absence of a plausible nongenetic diagnosis after
detailed evaluation, history of overlapping symptoms in a patient’s
relatives, or consanguinity should alert a pediatrician to seek a consultation with a geneticist and prompt metabolic testing early in the
evaluation.
Correct diagnosis is often only the beginning of a long medical journey for most families affected by metabolic conditions (see Chapter
95). Although each inherited metabolic disorder is individually rare,
improved diagnosis and increasing survival of patients with metabolic
conditions virtually ensure that a pediatrician will encounter and provide care to affected patients. Pediatricians can play a critical role in
establishing the continuity of care; managing some aspects of treatment; fostering adherence; and delivering routine pediatric interventions such as immunizations, referrals to specialists, and elements of
genetic counseling (see Chapter 98.1).
The greater awareness of metabolic conditions, wider availability
of biochemical laboratories, global metabolomic analysis, and routine
application of exome and genome sequencing dramatically increased
the detection rate of the known disorders and contributed to the discovery of new metabolic disorders. Nonetheless, collection and analysis of family history remain critical screening tests that a healthcare
provider can use to identify an infant or child at risk for a metabolic
disorder. The identification of consanguinity or a particular ethnic
background with an unusually high incidence of inborn errors of
metabolism can be important to direct further studies. For example,
tyrosinemia type 1 is more common among French Canadians of Quebec, maple syrup urine disease is seen with higher frequency in the U.S.
Amish population, and Canavan disease is more common in patients
of the Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry.

PART

IX

NEWBORN SCREENING

The individual rarity of inborn errors of metabolism, the importance of
early diagnosis, and the ensuing genetic counseling ramifications make
a strong argument for the universal screening of all newborn infants.
Tandem mass spectrometry of metabolites and enzyme assays form
the foundation of first-­tier newborn screening. Worldwide, newborn
screening programs have begun incorporating reflex second-­tier testing using molecular analysis of target genes. These methods require
only a few drops of blood to be placed on a filter paper and delivered
to a central laboratory for assay. Many genetic conditions can be identified by these methods, and the list of disorders continues to grow
(Tables 104.1 and 104.2). Pediatricians need to be aware of the general screening procedure and limitations of screening. As a screening
method, a positive result may require a repeat newborn screen or confirmatory testing to secure the diagnosis. The time required to return
the results varies from country to country and even within states in
the same country. Some metabolic conditions can be severe enough to
cause clinical manifestations before the results of the newborn screening become available. Conversely, diagnostic metabolites in milder
forms of screened disorders may not reach a set threshold to trigger
secondary studies, thus leading to negative newborn screen results and
delayed diagnosis. Therefore negative newborn screening in a patient
with symptoms suggestive of a metabolic disorder warrants a referral to a
genetics specialist for further evaluation.
Universal newborn screening may also identify mild forms of inherited metabolic conditions, some of which may never cause clinical
manifestations in the lifetime of the individual. For example, short-­
chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency has been identified with
unexpectedly high frequency in screening programs using tandem
mass spectrometry, but most of these children have remained asymptomatic. This highlights the need for an ongoing evaluation of metabolite cutoff values and approaches to confirmatory testing to maximize
the diagnostic yield and minimize potential psychosocial and economic implications of such findings. Premature infants represent a
special population in whom the incidence of false-­positive or false-­
negative test results can be especially high.
With the advent of genetic therapy for spinal muscular atrophy
(SMA) and enzyme replacement therapy for some lysosomal storage
diseases (e.g., Pompe disease, Fabry disease, Gaucher disease,
and mucopolysaccharidosis type 1), most state newborn screening programs include screening for SMA and lysosomal storage
disorders.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF GENETIC
METABOLIC DISEASES

Physicians and other healthcare providers who care for children should
familiarize themselves with early manifestations of inborn errors of
metabolism, because (1) severe forms of some of these conditions may
cause symptoms before the results of screening studies become available and (2) the current screening methods, although quite extensive,
identify a small number of all inherited metabolic conditions. In the
newborn period, the clinical findings are usually nonspecific and similar to those seen in infants with sepsis. An inborn error of metabolism
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a severely ill newborn infant, and special studies should be undertaken if the index of
suspicion is high (see Fig. 104.1).
Signs and symptoms such as lethargy, hypotonia, hypothermia,
convulsions (Table 104.3), poor feeding, and vomiting may develop as
early as a few hours after birth. Occasionally, vomiting may be severe
enough to suggest the diagnosis of pyloric stenosis, which is usually
not present, although it may occur simultaneously in some infants.

803
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

804 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

*

Fig. 104.1 Sunburst chart depicting the hierarchical nature of the International Classification of Inherited Metabolic Disorders. The size of each

section of the chart is directly proportional to the number of disorders in that group. *Including phosphatidylinositol (with lesser numbers for ether
lipids and lesser still for phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylserine, and phosphatidylethanolamine) (From Ferreira CR, Rahman S, Keller M, et al. An
international classification of inherited metabolic disorders [ICIMD]. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2021;44:164–177, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 104 u An Approach to Inborn Errors of Metabolism

805

Table 104.1  Core Conditions on the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel by the Advisory Committee on Heritable
Disorders in Newborns and Children of the U.S. Health Resources & Services Administration*
DISORDERS OF ORGANIC ACID METABOLISM
Propionic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia (methylmalonyl-­CoA mutase)
Methylmalonic acidemia (cobalamin disorders)
Isovaleric acidemia
3-­Methylcrotonyl-­CoA carboxylase deficiency
3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methyglutaric aciduria
Holocarboxylase synthase deficiency
β-­Ketothiolase deficiency
Glutaric acidemia type I
DISORDERS OF FATTY ACID METABOLISM
Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Very-­long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Long-­chain 3-­hydroxy-­acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Trifunctional protein deficiency
Systemic primary carnitine deficiency
DISORDERS OF AMINO ACID METABOLISM
Classic phenylketonuria
Maple syrup urine disease
Homocystinuria
Citrullinemia type 1
Argininosuccinic acidemia
Tyrosinemia type I

HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES
Sickle cell anemia (hemoglobin SS disease)
Hemoglobin S/β-­thalassemia
Hemoglobin S/C disease
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Primary congenital hypothyroidism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
OTHER DISORDERS
Classic galactosemia
Biotinidase deficiency
Glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe disease)
Mucopolysaccharidosis type 1
X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy
Cystic fibrosis
Hearing loss
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)
Critical congenital heart disease
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) due to homozygous deletion of exon
7 in SMN1

*Adopted from https://www.hrsa.gov/advisory-­committees/heritable-­disorders/rusp/index.html, last revised in February 2020.

Table 104.2  Secondary Conditions on the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel by the Advisory Committee on Heritable
Disorders in Newborns and Children of the U.S. Health Resources & Services Administration
ORGANIC ACID METABOLISM DISORDERS
Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria
Malonic acidemia
2-­Methyl-­3-­hydroxybutyric aciduria
Isobutyryl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
2-­Methylbutyryl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
3-­Methylglutaconic aciduria
FATTY ACID OXIDATION DISORDERS
Short-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Glutaric acidemia type 2
Medium-­/short-­chain 3-­hydroxy-­acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Medium-­chain ketoacyl-­CoA thiolase deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase IA deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency
Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency
2,4-­Dienoyl-­CoA reductase deficiency

AMINO ACID METABOLISM DISORDERS
Hyperphenylalaninemia, benign (not classic phenylketonuria)
Tyrosinemia type II
Tyrosinemia type III
Defects of biopterin cofactor biosynthesis
Defects of biopterin cofactor regeneration
Argininemia
Hypermethioninemia
Citrullinemia type II (citrin deficiency)
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES
Hemoglobin variants (including hemoglobin E)
OTHERS
Galactose epimerase deficiency
Galactokinase deficiency
T-­cell–related lymphocyte deficiencies

Table 104.3  Select Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated with Neurologic and Laboratory Manifestations in Neonates
DETERIORATION IN CONSCIOUSNESS
Metabolic Acidosis
Organic acidemias
Disorders of pyruvate metabolism
Fatty acid oxidation defects
Fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphatase deficiency
Glycogen storage diseases
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Disorders of ketone metabolism

HYPOGLYCEMIA*
Fatty acid oxidation defects
Disorders of gluconeogenesis
Disorders of fructose and galactose metabolism
Glycogen storage diseases
Disorders of ketogenesis
Organic acidemias
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemias
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency
Disorders of pyruvate metabolism
Carbonic anhydrase VA deficiency
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

806 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 104.3  Select Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated with Neurologic and Laboratory Manifestations in
Neonates—cont’d
HYPERAMMONEMIA**
Urea cycle disorders
Organic acidemias
Fatty acid oxidation disorders
Disorders of pyruvate metabolism
GLUD1-­related hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Carbonic anhydrase VA deficiency
SEIZURES AND HYPOTONIA
Antiquitin deficiency (pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy)
Pyridoxamine 5′-­phosphate oxidase (PNPO) deficiency (pyridoxal
phosphate-­responsive epilepsy)
Folate metabolism disorders
Multiple carboxylase deficiency (holocarboxylase synthetase
deficiency and biotinidase deficiency)
Urea cycle disorders
Organic acidemias
Fatty acid oxidation disorders
Disorders of creatine biosynthesis and transport

Disorders of neurotransmitter metabolism
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency and sulfite oxidase deficiency
Serine deficiency disorders
Glycine encephalopathy
Asparagine synthetase deficiency
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Zellweger spectrum disorders
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Purine and pyrimidine metabolism defects
NEONATAL APNEA
Glycine encephalopathy
Asparagine synthetase deficiency
Urea cycle disorders
Organic acidemias
Disorders of pyruvate metabolism
Fatty acid oxidation defects
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects

*Refer to Table 104.4 for more details on the metabolic disorders associated with neonatal hypoglycemia.
**Refer to Table 104.5 for more details on the differential diagnosis of neonatal and infantile hyperammonemia.
Modified from El-­Hattab AW. Inborn errors of metabolism. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:413–439, Box 1.

Table 104.4  Select Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated with Neonatal Hypoglycemia
CATEGORY OF
DISORDERS

DISORDERS

Fatty acid oxidation
disorders

Carnitine-­acylcarnitine translocase
deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase Ia deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency
Long-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA
dehydrogenase
Deficiency/trifunctional protein deficiency
Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency
Very-­long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency
Multiple acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency

Disorders of
gluconeogenesis

Fructose-­1,6-­diphosphatase deficiency
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
deficiency

Disorders of fructose and
galactose metabolism

Hereditary fructose intolerance
Classic galactosemia

Glycogen storage
diseases (GSD)

GSD type Ia (glucose-­6-­phosphatase
deficiency)
GSD type Ib (impaired glucose-­6-­phosphate
exchanger)
GSD type III (glycogen debrancher enzyme
deficiency)
GSD type VI (liver glycogen phosphorylase
deficiency)
GSD type IX (phosphorylase kinase
deficiencies)

CATEGORY OF
DISORDERS

DISORDERS

Disorders of ketone
metabolism

3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­CoA lyase
deficiency
Mitochondrial 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­CoA
synthase deficiency
Succinyl-­CoA:3-­oxoacid-­CoA transferase
(SCOT) deficiency
β-­Ketothiolase deficiency

Disorders of amino acid
metabolism

Maple syrup urine disease

Organic acidemias

Propionic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia
Isovaleric acidemia
Multiple carboxylase deficiency
(holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency
and biotinidase deficiency)

Hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia

HADH-­related disorder
(3-­alpha-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency)
GLUD1-­related disorder
(hyperammonemia-­hyperinsulinism
syndrome [HIHA])

Other

Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused
by citrin deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Carbonic anhydrase VA deficiency

Modified from Zinn AB. Inborn errors of metabolism. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant,
10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 99.17, p. 1605.

Lethargy, poor feeding, seizures, and coma may also be seen in infants
with hypoglycemia (Table 104.4) (see Chapters 113 and 147), hypocalcemia (Chapters 69 and 611), and hyperammonemia (Table 104.5)
(Chapter 105). Measurements of blood concentrations of glucose and
calcium and prompt response to intravenous injection of glucose or
calcium help guide the diagnostic decisions.

Every organ can be affected by metabolic disorders. However,
physical examination usually reveals nonspecific findings; most signs
are related to the central nervous system such as lethargy, coma, seizures, hyperventilation, or opisthotonus. Hepatomegaly is a common
finding in a variety of inborn errors of metabolism (Table 104.6).
Cardiomyopathy (Table 104.7), dysmorphic features (Table 104.8),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 104 u An Approach to Inborn Errors of Metabolism

807

Table 104.5  Differential Diagnosis of Hyperammonemia
INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Urea Cycle Enzyme Defects
N-­acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) deficiency
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase one (CPS1) deficiency
Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency
Argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) deficiency (citrullinemia type 1)
Argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) deficiency (argininosuccinic aciduria)
Arginase 1 deficiency
Transport and Synthesis Defects of Urea Cycle Intermediates
Hyperornithinemia-­hyperammonemia-­homocitrullinemia (HHH
syndrome)
Citrullinemia type 2 caused by citrin deficiency
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Ornithine aminotransferase deficiency
Carbonic anhydrase VA deficiency
Organic Acidemias
Propionic acidemia
MMUT-­related methylmalonic acidemia and cobalamin metabolism
disorders
Isovaleric acidemia
Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders
Long-­chain fatty acid oxidation defects
Systemic primary carnitine deficiency
Other
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
GLUD1-­related hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Neonatal iron overload disorders (e.g., hereditary hemochromatoses)

ACQUIRED DISORDERS
Transient Hyperammonemia of the Newborn
Diseases of the Liver and Biliary Tract
Liver failure
Biliary atresia
Severe Systemic Neonatal Illness
Neonates sepsis
Heart failure
Medications
Valproic acid
Cyclophosphamide
5-­Pentanoic acid
Asparaginase
Other
Reye syndrome
ANATOMIC VARIANTS
Vascular bypass of the liver (e.g., a portosystemic anastomosis)
TECHNICAL
Inappropriate sample collection (e.g., capillary blood or prolonged
placement of a tourniquet)
Sample not immediately analyzed

Modified from El-­Hattab AW. Inborn errors of metabolism. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:413–439, Box 8.

and fetal hydrops (Table 104.9) are additional potential manifestations of a metabolic disorder (Table 104.10). Occasionally, a peculiar odor may offer an invaluable clue leading to the right diagnosis
(Table 104.11).
In an increasing number of patients, a metabolic condition may be
recognized months or years after birth. This is more typical in patients
carrying milder autosomal recessive pathogenic variants, in mitochondrial disorders, in females affected by X-­linked recessive conditions, and specific metabolic conditions that usually present later in
life. There may be an episodic or intermittent pattern, with episodes
of acute clinical manifestations separated by periods of seemingly
disease-­free states. The episodes are usually triggered by stress or nonspecific catabolic stress such as an infection, overfeeding, prolonged
fasting, or physical exertion. Thus an inborn error of metabolism
should be considered in any child with one or more of the following
unexplained clinical manifestations: failure to thrive; coarse facial
features and reduced range of motion in the joints; developmental
delay; intellectual disability; developmental regression; motor deficits
or adventitious movements (e.g., dystonia, choreoathetosis, ataxia);
seizures; catatonia; myopathy; intermittent episodes of unexplained
vomiting, acidosis, mental deterioration, psychosis, or coma; hepatomegaly; renal stones; renal dysfunction, especially Fanconi syndrome
or renal tubular acidosis; cardiomyopathy; persistent leukopenia;
megaloblastic anemia; and unusual odor (particularly during an acute
illness) (Table 104.12).
Diagnosis usually requires a variety of specific laboratory studies.
Plasma amino acid analysis, total plasma homocysteine, plasma acylcarnitine profile, total and free carnitine levels, and urine organic acid
assay, although not exhaustive in their diagnostic scope, are useful as
initial screening tests to evaluate for a suspected inborn error of metabolism. Measurements of plasma ammonia, glucose, lactate, bicarbonate, and pH are readily available in hospitals and very helpful initially
in differentiating major causes of genetic metabolic disorders (Table
104.13 and Fig. 104.2). Elevation of blood ammonia is usually caused
by defects of urea cycle enzymes, organic acidemias, and disorders of
fatty acid oxidation. Infants with elevated blood ammonia levels from

urea cycle defects tend to have normal serum pH and bicarbonate values; without measurement of blood ammonia, they may remain undiagnosed and succumb to their disease. In organic acidemias, elevated
plasma ammonia is accompanied by severe acidosis caused by accumulation of organic acids, ketone bodies, and lactate in body fluids.
When blood ammonia, pH, and bicarbonate values are normal, other
aminoacidopathies (e.g., hyperglycinemia) or galactosemia should be
considered. Galactosemic infants may also manifest cataracts, hepatomegaly, ascites, and jaundice.
Currently, more targeted assays, such as those used with newborn
screening, have the highest sensitivity in the diagnosis or monitoring of
specific disorders in question. However, some success has been shown
in the context of undiagnosed individuals where metabolomic (assays
for entire small molecule metabolites) data can be correlated with
genomic information to provide supporting evidence for a pathogenic
variant in a suspected causal gene.

TREATMENT

Most patients with genetic disorders of metabolism respond to one or
more of the following treatments:
1.	Special diets play an important role in the treatment of affected children. Dietary changes should be tailored to the pathophysiology of
the condition and vary greatly among disorders.
2.	Hemodialysis for expeditious removal of accumulated noxious compounds. This is a very effective modality for treatment of the acute
phase of the condition.
3.	Catabolic states in patients at risk for metabolic crisis can be treated
with fluids containing dextrose and electrolytes.
4.	Administration of the deficient metabolite.
5.	Administration of the cofactor or coenzyme to maximize the residual enzyme activity.
6.	Activation of alternative pathways to reduce the noxious compounds
accumulated because of the genetic abnormality.
7.	Administration of the deficient enzyme.
8.	Bone marrow transplantation.
9.	Liver and kidney transplantation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

808 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 104.6  Select Metabolic Disorders Associated with
Hepatic Dysfunction

Table 104.7  Select Metabolic Disorders Associated
with Cardiomyopathy

CATEGORY OF
DISORDERS

CATEGORY OF
DISORDERS

DISORDERS

Disorders of amino
acid metabolism

Tyrosinemia type I
Citrullinemia type II caused by citrin
deficiency
Disorders of methionine metabolism
Urea cycle disorders

Biliary tract disorders
and disorder of bile
acid synthesis

See Chapter 383

Disorders of fructose
and galactose
metabolism

Hereditary fructose intolerance
Classic galactosemia
Epimerase deficiency galactosemia

Congenital disorders
of glycosylation

Multiple types

Fatty acid oxidation
disorders

Carnitine-­acylcarnitine translocase
deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase Ia deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency
Long-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA
dehydrogenase
deficiency/trifunctional protein deficiency
Very-­long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency
Multiple acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency

Glycogen storage
disorders (GSD)

GSD type 1a (deficiency of glucose-­6-­
phosphatase catalytic activity)
GSD type 1b (a defect in glucose-­6-­
phosphate exchanger encoded by
SLC37A4)
GSD type III (glycogen debrancher enzyme
deficiency)
GSD type IV (glycogen branching enzyme
deficiency)
GSD type VI (liver glycogen phosphorylase
deficiency)

Peroxisomal disorders

Zellweger spectrum disorders
Disorders of peroxisomal β-­oxidation

Mitochondrial
respiratory chain
(RC) defects

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear
DNA (nDNA) defects:
Specific single-­nucleotide pathogenic
variants in mtDNA
Large-­scale mtDNA re-­arrangements
(Pearson syndrome)
Disorders of mitochondrial translation
(e.g., tRNAGlu)
Disorder of protein synthesis of RC
complexes
Disorders affected the assembly or
stabilization of RC complexes (e.g., BCS1L)
Disorders of cofactor biosynthesis (e.g.,
coenzyme Q10)
Disorders of mitochondrial transport and
dynamics
mtDNA depletion syndromes (e.g.,
DGUOK, MPV17, POLG, SUCLG1)

Lysosomal storage
disorders

Niemann-­Pick disease type C

Other

α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency

DISORDERS

Organic acidemias

Propionic acidemia
Cobalamin C deficiency
3-­methylglutaconic acidurias (e.g., Barth
syndrome and DCMA syndrome)

Lysosomal storage
disorders

Sphingolipidoses (e.g., Fabry disease)
Oligosaccharidoses and mucolipidoses
(e.g., I-­cell disease)
Mucopolysaccharidoses

Glycogen storage
disorders (GSD)

GSD type II (Pompe disease)
GSD type III (glycogen debrancher enzyme
deficiency)
PRKAG2-­related disorders (includes lethal
congenital glycogen storage disease of
heart)

Congenital disorders
of glycosylation

Multiple types

Fatty acid oxidation
disorders

Carnitine-­acylcarnitine translocase deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency
Long-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA
dehydro­genase
deficiency/trifunctional protein deficiency
ACAD9-­related disorder (mitochondrial
acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency)
Multiple acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
(includes glutaric aciduria type 2)
Very-­long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency
Systemic primary carnitine deficiency

Mitochondrial
respiratory chain
(RC) defects

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear
DNA (nDNA) defects:
Specific single-­nucleotide pathogenic
variants in mtDNA
Large-­scale mtDNA deletions
Disorders of mitochondrial translation (e.g.,
tRNALeu)
Disorders of protein synthesis of RC
complexes (e.g., MT-­ATP6, MT-­ATP8,
NDUFS2, NDUFV2, SDHA, SCO2, COX10,
COX15)
Disorders affecting the assembly or
stabilization of RC complexes (e.g.,
TMEM70)
Disorders of cofactor biosynthesis (e.g.,
coenzyme Q10)
Disorders of mitochondrial transport and
dynamics (e.g., SLC25A3)
mtDNA depletion syndromes (e.g., SUCLG1)

Other

Danon disease

DCMA, dilated cardiomyopathy with ataxia.
Modified from Zinn AB. Inborn errors of metabolism. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh
MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and
Infant, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 99.4, p. 1576.

Modified from Zinn AB. Inborn errors of metabolism. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh
MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and
Infant, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 99.5, p. 1579.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 104 u An Approach to Inborn Errors of Metabolism

809

Table 104.8  Select Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated with Dysmorphic Features
CATEGORY OF
DISORDERS

DISORDERS

Congenital
disorders of
glycosylation

N-­Glycosylation disorders (e.g., PMM2-­CDG and
ALG3-­CDG)
O-­Glycosylation disorders (e.g., Walker-­Warburg
syndrome)

Disorders of
cholesterol
biosynthesis

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
Desmosterolosis
Lathosterolosis
EBP-­related disorder (includes Conradi-­
Hunermann syndrome)

CATEGORY OF
DISORDERS

DISORDERS

Lysosomal storage
disorders

Sphingolipidoses
Oligosaccharidoses and mucolipidoses
Mucopolysaccharidoses

Organic acidurias

Multiple acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
(includes glutaric aciduria type 2)
Mevalonic aciduria*

Peroxisomal
disorders

Zellweger spectrum disorders
Disorders of peroxisomal β-­oxidation

Other

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency

*Mevalonic aciduria has been classified as an organic acidemia based on the method used for its diagnosis, but it can also be classified as a peroxisomal single-­enzyme disorder or as
a defect in cholesterol biosynthesis because of its intracellular location or function.
Modified from Zinn AB. Inborn errors of metabolism. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant,
10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 99.8, p. 1583.

Table 104.9  Select Inborn Errors of Metabolism Associated with Hydrops Fetalis
LYSOSOMAL STORAGE DISORDERS
Mucopolysaccharidoses types I, IVA, and VII
Sphingolipidoses (e.g., Gaucher disease, Farber disease, Niemann-­
Pick disease A, GM1 gangliosidosis, multiple sulfatase deficiency)
Lipid storage diseases (Wolman and Niemann-­Pick disease C)
Oligosaccharidases (e.g., sialidosis type I)
Mucolipidoses (e.g., I-­cell disease)

ZELLWEGER SPECTRUM DISORDERS
Glycogen storage disease type IV
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Transaldolase deficiency

Modified and adapted from El-­Hattab AW. Inborn errors of metabolism. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:413–439, Box 6.

Table 104.10  Physical Examination Findings Associated with Inborn Errors of Metabolism (Select Examples)
FINDINGS
Hepatomegaly

Hepatosplenomegaly

DISORDERS

FINDINGS

Disorders of fructose and galactose
metabolism (e.g., classic galactosemia and
hereditary fructose intolerance)
Glycogen storage diseases
Disorders of gluconeogenesis
Disorders of fatty acid oxidation and
transport
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Tyrosinemia type 1
Urea cycle disorders
Zellweger spectrum disorders
Niemann-­Pick disease type C
Congenital disorders of glycosylation

Macroglossia

Glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe
disease)
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Oligosaccharidoses and mucolipidoses
Sphingolipidoses
Galactosialidosis

Dystonia or
extra­pyramidal signs

Gaucher disease type 2
Glutaric acidemia type 1
Methylmalonic acidemia
Propionic acidemia
Krabbe disease
Crigler-­Najjar syndrome
Disorders of neurotransmitter metabolism
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency

Macular “cherry-­red
spot”

GM1 gangliosidosis
Tay-­Sachs disease (GM2 gangliosidosis)
Farber disease (acid ceramidase deficiency)
Galactosialidosis
Niemann-­Pick disease type A
Sialidosis
Multiple sulfatase deficiency

“Bull eye”
maculopathy

cblC and cblD deficiency (combined
methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria,
type C)

Retinitis pigmentosa

Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Peroxisomal disorders
Abetalipoproteinemia

Optic nerve atrophy or
hypoplasia

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency
Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Peroxisomal disorders
Propionic acidemia
MMUT-­related methylmalonic acidemia and
cobalamin metabolism disorders

Mucopolysaccharidoses
Niemann-­Pick disease types A, B, and C
Sphingolipidoses (e.g., GM1 gangliosidosis
or Gaucher disease)
Wolman disease
Farber disease (acid ceramidase deficiency)

Macrocephaly

Glutaric acidemia type 1
Canavan disease

Microcephaly

Mitochondrial respiratory chain defects
Disorders of intracellular cobalamin
metabolism (e.g., cblC deficiency)
Cholesterol metabolism disorders
(e.g., Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome)
Serine synthesis disorders

Coarse facial features

Mucopolysaccharidoses
Oligosaccharidoses and mucolipidoses
(e.g., α-­mannosidosis)
Sphingolipidoses (e.g., GM1 gangliosidosis)
Galactosialidosis

DISORDERS

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

810 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 104.10  Physical Examination Findings Associated with Inborn Errors of Metabolism (Select Examples)—cont’d
FINDINGS

DISORDERS

FINDINGS

DISORDERS

Corneal clouding or
opacities

Mucolipidoses
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Steroid sulfatase deficiency
Tyrosinemia type II
Cystinosis

Ichthyosis

Gaucher disease type 2
Steroid sulfatase deficiency
Refsum disease
ELOVL4-­related disorder
Serine deficiency disorders

Cataracts

Disorders of galactose metabolism (e.g.,
classic galactosemia)
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) defects
Peroxisomal disorders
Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome

Alopecia

Multiple carboxylase deficiency
(holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency and
biotinidase deficiency)

Steely or kinky hair

Menkes disease

Trichorrhexis nodosa

Argininosuccinic aciduria (ASL deficiency)

Dislocated lens

Cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency and sulfite
oxidase deficiency

Megaloblastic anemia

Skeletal dysplasias and
dysostosis multiplex

Oligosaccharidoses and mucolipidoses
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Sphingolipidoses
Galactosialidosis
Peroxisomal disorders
Disorders of cholesterol biosynthesis
Congenital disorders of glycosylation

Cobalamin metabolism disorders
Folate metabolism disorders
Mevalonic aciduria
Orotic aciduria
Pearson syndrome

Leukopenia

Folate metabolism disorders
Organic acidemias
Pearson syndrome

Persistent diarrhea

Glucose-­galactose malabsorption
Congenital lactase deficiency
Congenital chloride diarrhea
Sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
Abetalipoproteinemia
Congenital folate malabsorption
Wolman disease
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Classic galactosemia

Thick skin

Oligosaccharidoses and mucolipidoses
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Sphingolipidoses

Desquamating,
eczematous, or
vesiculobullous skin
lesions

Acrodermatitis enteropathica
Essential amino acid deficiencies in organic
acidemias
Hartnup disorder
Multiple carboxylase deficiency
(holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency and
biotinidase deficiency)
Porphyrias

Modified from Cederbaum S. Introduction to metabolic and biochemical genetic diseases. In: Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn, 10th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2018: Table 21.1, p. 227.

Table 104.11  Inborn Errors of Amino Acid Metabolism Associated with Peculiar Odor
INBORN ERROR OF METABOLISM

URINE ODOR

Isovaleric acidemia
Glutaric acidemia (type II)

“Sweaty feet,” acrid

Maple syrup urine disease

Maple syrup, burnt sugar

Multiple carboxylase deficiency
3-­Methylcrotonyl-­CoA carboxylase
deficiency
3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaric aciduria

Cat urine

Phenylketonuria

Mousey or musty

In select inborn errors of metabolism, organ transplantation modalities may offer the best treatment modality to stabilize a metabolic
patient and improve quality of life. To date, replacement of the affected
gene with a normal copy using gene therapy has been successful in only
a few diseases.
Treatment of genetic disorders of metabolism is complex and
requires medical and technical expertise. Effective treatment is best
achieved by a team of specialists—metabolic genetics specialist, nutritionist, neurologist, and psychologist—in a major medical center. The

INBORN ERROR OF METABOLISM

URINE ODOR

Trimethylaminuria
Dimethylglycine dehydrogenase
deficiency

Rotten fish

Tyrosinemia type 1

Boiled cabbage, rancid
butter

Hypermethioninemia

Boiled cabbage

Cystinuria
Tyrosinemia type I

Sulfur

Hawkinsinuria

“Swimming pool”

Oasthouse urine disease

Hopslike

therapeutic regimen often needs to be tailored to the individual patient
because of large phenotypic variations in the severity of the disease,
even within a single family. Providing genetic counseling, education,
and ongoing social services support for the family is the key to successful long-­term therapy. Even in patients with poor prognoses, every
effort should be made to establish correct diagnoses premortem.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 104 u An Approach to Inborn Errors of Metabolism

811

Table 104.12  Clinical Findings That Should Prompt a Metabolic Workup
Family history

Sibling(s) who died from unexplained causes
or exhibit overlapping symptoms
Ethnic groups with a high prevalence of
metabolic disorders
Consanguinity

Perinatal history

Intrauterine growth restriction, sepsis-­like
presentation in the neonatal period,
nonimmune fetal hydrops

Growth

Postnatal failure to thrive, microcephaly,
macrocephaly, short stature

Central and
peripheral nervous
systems

Progressive encephalopathy, lethargy, coma,
intractable seizures, developmental delay,
developmental regression, intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorder,
hypotonia, spasticity, dystonia, strokes,
ataxia, psychosis, intracranial calcifications,
white matter disease, peripheral
neuropathy

Respiratory system

Hyperventilation, apnea

Cardiovascular system

Cardiac failure with or without
cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia

Musculoskeletal
system

Rhabdomyolysis, myopathy
Osteopenia, early-­onset osteoporosis,
skeletal dysplasia, epiphyseal
abnormalities, bone crises

Eye

Retinitis pigmentosa, macular dystrophy,
cataracts, corneal opacities, nystagmus,
cherry-­red spot

Hearing

Sensorineural hearing loss

Gastrointestinal
system

Hepatomegaly, hepatic adenoma,
splenomegaly, liver failure, Reye syndrome,
cholestasis, cirrhosis, chronic diarrhea,
vomiting, acute pancreatitis

Kidney

Renal dysfunction, renal Fanconi syndrome,
renal stones

Hematologic system

Anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
pancytopenia, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome

Skin

Hair abnormality, alopecia, lipodystrophy,
recalcitrant eczema

Table 104.13  Laboratory Findings That Should Prompt a
Metabolic Workup
Hyperammonemia
Metabolic acidosis
Lactic acidosis
Ketosis

Hypoglycemia
Liver dysfunction
Pancytopenia

Initial findings include
one or more of the following:
a) Poor feeding
b) Vomiting (not due to GI anomalies)
c) Lethargy
Not responsive to
d) Convulsion { intravenous glucose, calcium or vitamin B
6
e) Coma

Metabolic disorder

Infection, trauma, CNS anomalies

Obtain
plasma ammonia

High

Normal

Obtain
blood pH, CO2, HCO3

Obtain
blood pH, CO2, HCO3

Normal anion gap

High anion gap

Normal anion gap

Acidosis

Urea cycle defects

Organic acidemias

Aminoacidopathies
or galactosemia

Fig. 104.2 Algorithm showing the initial clinical approach to a full-­term newborn infant with a suspected genetic metabolic disorder. This schema
is a guide to elucidate some of the metabolic disorders in newborn infants. Although some exceptions to this schema exist, it is appropriate for most
cases affected by disorders or intermediate metabolism. CNS, Central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; HCO3−, bicarbonate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

812 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Chapter 105

Defects in Metabolism of
Amino Acids
105.1 Phenylalanine
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid. Dietary phenylalanine that
is not used for protein synthesis is normally degraded by way of the
tyrosine pathway (Fig. 105.1). Deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine
hydroxylase (PAH) or one of its cofactors tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)
causes accumulation of phenylalanine and its metabolites in body fluids
and in the brain.
Elevations of phenylalanine in the plasma reflect the degree of
enzyme deficiency, presenting as a spectrum of biochemical and clinical findings. In patients with severe PAH deficiency (also referred to
as classical phenylketonuria), plasma phenylalanine levels on an unrestricted diet usually exceed 20 mg/dL (>1,200 μmol/L). Patients with
milder PAH pathogenic variants have plasma phenylalanine levels
between 10 mg/dL (600 μmol/L) and 20 mg/dL (1,200 μmol/L). Levels
between 2 and 10 mg/dL (120 and 600 μmol/L) on an unrestricted
diet are observed in patients with mild hyperphenylalaninemia. In
affected infants with plasma concentrations >20 mg/dL, excess phenylalanine is metabolized to phenylketones (phenylpyruvate and
phenylacetate; see Fig. 105.1) that are excreted in the urine, giving
rise to the term phenylketonuria (PKU). These metabolites have no
known role in the mechanisms of central nervous system (CNS) damage in PKU patients, but their presence in body fluids can signify the
severity of the condition. The brain is most vulnerable to the damage
incurred by PKU, but the exact mechanism of injury remains elusive. Both toxic elevations of phenylalanine and insufficient tyrosine
may play roles. Phenylalanine hydroxylase converts phenylalanine to
tyrosine, which is necessary for the production of neurotransmitters
such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine (Fig. 105.2). If
the degree of enzymatic block is severe, tyrosine becomes an essential
amino acid and may be deficient if its intake is not adequate. On the
other hand, observations that lower concentrations of phenylalanine
in plasma and brain tissue are associated with improved neurobehavioral outcomes support the view that toxic levels of phenylalanine are
key to PKU pathogenesis. High blood levels of phenylalanine can saturate the transport system across the blood-­brain barrier (BBB) and
inhibit the cerebral uptake of other large neutral amino acids such as
the branched-­chain amino acids tyrosine and tryptophan, impairing
brain protein synthesis.

SEVERE PHENYLALANINE HYDROXYLASE
DEFICIENCY (CLASSIC PHENYLKETONURIA)

Elevations of plasma phenylalanine >20 mg/dL (>1,200 μmol/L), if
untreated, invariably result in the development of signs and symptoms
of classic PKU, except in uncommon and unpredictable cases.

Clinical Manifestations

The affected infant appears normal at birth. Profound intellectual
disability gradually develops if the infant remains untreated. Cognitive delay may not be evident for the first few months. In untreated
patients, 50–70% will have an IQ below 35, and 88–90% will have an
IQ below 65. Less than 5% of untreated patients attain IQ scores in the
average range. Vomiting, sometimes severe enough to be misdiagnosed
as pyloric stenosis, may be an early symptom. Older untreated children
become hyperactive and show autistic behaviors, including stereotypic
hand movements and rhythmic rocking.

Untreated and undertreated infants are lighter in their complexion
than unaffected siblings. Some may have a seborrheic or eczematoid
rash, which is usually mild and disappears with age. Affected children
have an odor of phenylacetic acid, which has been described as musty
or “mousey.” Neurologic signs include seizures (approximately 25%),
spasticity, hyperreflexia, tremors, and athetosis; >50% have electroencephalographic (EEG) abnormalities. Microcephaly, prominent
maxillae with widely spaced teeth, enamel hypoplasia, and growth
retardation are other common findings in untreated children. Low
bone mineral density and osteopenia have been reported in affected
individuals of all ages. Although inadequate intake of natural proteins
seems to be the major culprit, the exact pathogenesis of this sequela
remains unclear.
Long-­term care of patients with PKU is best achieved by a team of
experienced professionals (metabolic specialist, nutritionist, and psychologist), typically in a regional treatment center. The clinical manifestations of classical PKU are rarely seen in countries where neonatal
screening programs for the detection of PKU are in effect.

Non-­PKU Hyperphenylalaninemia

Implementation of universal screening for PKU led to identification of a group of infants in whom initial plasma concentrations of phenylalanine are above normal (i.e., >2 mg/dL, or 120
μmol/L) but <20 mg/dL (1,200 μmol/L). These infants typically do
not excrete phenylketones. Patients with non-­PKU hyperphenylalaninemia may still require dietary therapy, depending on their
untreated plasma phenylalanine level. Attempts have been made to
classify these patients into different subgroups depending on the
degree of hyperphenylalaninemia, but the effects of this classification on PKU management and outcomes remain to be clarified.
The possibility of deficiency of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) should
be investigated in all infants, especially those with milder forms of
hyperphenylalaninemia.

Diagnosis

Because of the gradual and nonspecific nature of early clinical symptoms such as vomiting, developmental delay, or eczematoid rash, hyperphenylalaninemia is usually diagnosed through newborn screening in
all developed countries. In infants with positive screening results, the
diagnosis should be confirmed by quantitative measurement of plasma
phenylalanine concentration and molecularly by identifying pathogenic variants in PAH. Identification and measurement of phenylketones in the urine have no place in any screening program. In countries
and places where such programs are not in effect, identification of phenylketones in the urine by ferric chloride may offer a simple test for the
diagnosis of infants with developmental and neurologic abnormalities.
All patients with a biochemical diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninemia
should undergo pterin measurements in blood or urine to evaluate for
defects in BH4 synthesis or recycling.

Neonatal Screening for Hyperphenylalaninemia

Effective and relatively inexpensive methods for mass screening
of newborn infants are used in the United States and many other
countries. A few drops of blood, which are placed on a filter paper
and mailed to a central laboratory, are used for assay. The screening method of choice uses tandem mass spectrometry, which can
identify all forms of hyperphenylalaninemia with a low false-­positive
rate and excellent accuracy and precision. The addition of the
phenylalanine:tyrosine molar ratio can improve test specificity and
reduce the number of false-­positive results. Diagnosis must be confirmed by measurement of plasma phenylalanine concentration and,
ultimately by identifying pathogenic variants in PAH. Blood phenylalanine in affected infants with PKU may rise to diagnostic levels as
early as 4 hours after birth, even in the absence of protein feeding.
However, to reduce the number of false-­negative results, especially in
the milder forms of the condition, it is recommended that the blood
for screening be obtained in the first 24-­48 hours of life after feeding
protein.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
Protein synthesis

813

Protein synthesis

PKU
1
Phenylethylamine

CH2

COOH

4-carbinolaminetetrahydrobiopterin

Tetrahydrobiopterin
(BH4)

4-OH-phenylacetate

CH

COOH

Fig. 103.2

NH2
Tyrosine

BH4*

10

Tyrosinemia II

2

Phenylacetate

3
Glutamine

6

8

Phenylacetylglutamine

4-OH-phenylpyruvate

7

7-biopterin (primapterin)
(urine)

7

Tyrosinemia III

6-Pyruvoyl
tetrahydropterin

5

Homogentisic
acid

BH4*

BH4*
Guanosine triphosphate

4

Hawkinsin
4-OH-cyclohexylacetate

11

6

8
Sepiapterin

Hawkinsinuria

1'-OH-2'-Oxopropyl
tetrahydropterin

7

NE

Glutathione

6

6-Lactoyl
tetrahydropterin

Dihydrobiopterin

Dihydrobiopterin
quinonoid (BH2)

BH4*

9

9

6

CH2

HO

NH2
Phenylalanine

Phenylpyruvate

Phenyllactate

CH

12
Dihydroneopterin
triphosphate

Alkaptonuria

Maleylacetoacetate
13

Neopterin
(urine)

Succinylacetoacetate

Succinylacetone

Fumarylacetoacetate

14

Fumarate

Tyrosinemia I

Acetoacetate

CO2  H2O

Fig. 105.1 Pathways of phenylalanine and tyrosine metabolism. Enzyme defects causing genetic conditions are depicted as horizontal bars

crossing the reaction arrow(s). Pathways for synthesis of cofactor BH4 are shown in purple. BH4* refers to defects of BH4 metabolism that affect
the phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan hydroxylases (see Figs. 105.2 and 105.5). PKU, Phenylketonuria; NE, nonenzymatic. Enzymes: (1) Phenylalanine hydroxylase, (2) pterin-­carbinolamine dehydratase, (3) dihydrobiopterin reductase, (4) guanosine triphosphate (GTP) cyclohydrolase,
(5) 6-­pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase, (6) sepiapterin reductase, (7) carbonyl reductase, (8) aldolase reductase, (9) dihydrofolate reductase, (10)
tyrosine aminotransferase, (11) 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase, (12) homogentisic acid dioxygenase, (13) maleylacetoacetate isomerase, (14)
fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase.

Treatment

The mainstay of treatment of PKU is a low-­phenylalanine diet. The
general consensus is to start diet treatment immediately in patients
with blood phenylalanine levels >10 mg/dL (600 μmol/L). It is recommended that infants with persistent (more than a few days) plasma
levels of phenylalanine ≥6 mg/dL (360 μmol/L) should also be treated
with a phenylalanine-­restricted diet similar to that in classic PKU.
The goal of therapy is to reduce phenylalanine levels in the plasma
and brain. Formulas free of or low in phenylalanine are commercially
available. The diet should be started as soon as the diagnosis is established. Because phenylalanine is not synthesized endogenously, the
diet should provide phenylalanine to prevent phenylalanine deficiency.
Dietary phenylalanine tolerance is determined based on age and severity of the PAH deficiency. Phenylalanine deficiency is manifested by
lethargy, failure to thrive, anorexia, anemia, rashes, diarrhea, and even
death. Furthermore, tyrosine can become an essential amino acid in
this disorder, and its adequate intake must be ensured. Special food
items low in phenylalanine are commercially available for dietary treatment of affected children and adults.

There is no firm consensus concerning optimal levels of blood
phenylalanine in affected patients either across different countries or
among treatment centers in the United States. The current recommendation is to maintain blood phenylalanine levels between 2 and
6 mg/dL (120 and 360 μmol/L) throughout life. Discontinuation of
therapy, even in adulthood, may cause deterioration of neurocognitive
performance.
Lifelong adherence to a low-­phenylalanine diet is extremely difficult.
Patients who maintain good control as children but discontinue the
phenylalanine-­restricted diet as teenagers or adults may experience
significant difficulties with executive function, concentration, emotional liability, and depression. Executive dysfunction may also occur
in early-­treated children despite diet treatment.
Given the difficulty of maintaining a strict low-­phenylalanine diet,
there are continuing attempts to find other modalities for treatment of
these patients. Administration of large neutral amino acids (LNAAs)
is one approach to dietary therapy. LNAAs (tyrosine, tryptophan,
leucine, isoleucine, valine, methionine, histidine, and phenylalanine)
use the same transporter protein (LNAA type 1 or LAT-­1) for transit

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

814 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Melanosome
Tyrosinase
Tyrosine

BH4*

DOPA

Albinism (OCA1)
BH2
5
3-O-Methyldopa (3-OMD)

3,4,dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA)

AADC deficiency

2

MAO deficiency
HVA
6

3-Methoxy
dopamine

efic
AO d

M
VMA

MAO

TH deficiency

CH2

CH

COOH

DβH deficiency
Thyroxine

Norepinephrine

Normetanephrine

DOPA Quinone

NH2
Tyrosine

Dopamine

5

6

6

HO
1

5
3

iency

Tyrosinase

BH4

Pheomelanin
(yellow-red polymer)

Eumelanin
(black polymer)

4
5

defic

iency

Metanephrine

Epinephrine

Fig. 105.2 Other pathways involving tyrosine metabolism. BH4* indicates hyperphenylalaninemia caused by tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiency

(see Fig. 105.1). HVA, Homovanillic acid; VMA, vanillylmandelic acid. Enzymes: (1) Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), (2) aromatic l-­amino acid decarboxylase (AADC), (3) dopamine β-­hydroxylase (DβH), (4) phenylethanolamine-­N-­methyltransferase (PNMT), (5) catechol O-­methyltransferase (COMT), (6)
monoamine oxidase (MAO).

through the intestinal cell membrane and BBB. Binding of LNAAs
to the transporter is a competitive process. Therefore when LNAAs
compete with phenylalanine at the transport level, their large concentrations in the intestinal lumen and blood can reduce the uptake of
phenylalanine into the bloodstream and the brain, respectively. Large,
controlled clinical trials are necessary to establish the efficacy of this
treatment.
Oral administration of BH4, the cofactor for PAH, may result in the
reduction of plasma phenylalanine in some patients with PAH deficiency. Plasma phenylalanine in these patients may decrease enough
to allow for considerable modification of their dietary restriction. In
very rare cases the diet may be discontinued because the phenylalanine remains under 6 mg/dL (360 μmol/L). The response to BH4 cannot be predicted consistently based on the genotype alone, especially
in compound heterozygous patients. Sapropterin dihydrochloride, a
synthetic form of BH4, which acts as a cofactor in patients with residual
PAH activity, is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) and the European Medicine Agency (EMA) to reduce phenylalanine levels in PKU. A sustained decrease of plasma phenylalanine
by at least 30% is consistent with sapropterin responsiveness. Injectable PEGylated recombinant phenylalanine ammonia–lyase has been
approved by the FDA and EMA for adult PKU patients with uncontrolled blood phenylalanine levels greater than 600 μmol/L despite
prior management.

Pregnancy in Women with PAH Deficiency (Maternal
Phenylketonuria)

Pregnant women with PAH deficiency who are not on a phenylalanine-­
restricted diet have a very high risk of having offspring with intellectual
disability, microcephaly, growth retardation, congenital malformations, and congenital heart disease. These complications are directly
correlated with elevated maternal blood phenylalanine levels during
pregnancy. Prospective mothers who have been treated for PAH deficiency should be maintained on a phenylalanine-­restricted diet before
and during pregnancy. The best observed outcomes occur when strict
control of maternal blood phenylalanine concentration is instituted
before pregnancy. Plasma phenylalanine levels >6 mg/dL (360 μmol/L)
after conception are associated with increased incidence of intrauterine
growth restriction and congenital malformations, as well as lower performance on neurocognitive testing. However, there is strong evidence
that phenylalanine control instituted after conception can also result in
improved outcomes. The recommended phenylalanine concentration

is 2-­6 mg/dL (120-­360 μmol/L) throughout the pregnancy, although
some expert groups advocate plasma phenylalanine levels <4 mg/dL
(<240 μmol/L). All women with PAH deficiency who are of childbearing age should be counseled properly regarding the risk of congenital
anomalies in their offspring.

HYPERPHENYLALANINEMIA CAUSED
BY DEFICIENCY OF THE COFACTOR
TETRAHYDROBIOPTERIN

In 1–3% of infants with hyperphenylalaninemia, the defect resides in
one of the enzymes necessary for production or recycling of the cofactor BH4 (see Fig. 105.1). If these infants are misdiagnosed as having
PKU, they may deteriorate neurologically despite adequate control of
plasma phenylalanine. BH4 is synthesized from guanosine triphosphate (GTP) through several enzymatic reactions (see Fig. 105.1). In
addition to acting as a cofactor for PAH, BH4 is also a cofactor for
tyrosine hydroxylase and tryptophan hydroxylase, which are involved
in the biosynthesis of dopamine (see Fig. 105.2) and serotonin (see
Fig. 105.5), respectively. Therefore patients with hyperphenylalaninemia resulting from BH4 deficiency also manifest neurologic findings related to deficiencies of these neurotransmitters. Four enzyme
deficiencies leading to defective BH4 formation cause hyperphenylalaninemia with concomitant deficiencies of dopamine and serotonin:
autosomal recessive GTP cyclohydrolase I deficiency (encoded by
GCH1), 6-­
pyruvoyl-­
tetrahydropterin synthase deficiency (encoded
by PTS), dihydropteridine reductase deficiency (encoded by QDPR),
and pterin-­4-­α-­
carbinolamine dehydratase deficiency (encoded by
PCBD1). 6-­Pyruvoyl-­tetrahydropterin synthase is the most frequent
cause of hyperphenylalaninemia-­associated BH4 deficiency. Autosomal
dominant forms of GTP cyclohydrolase I deficiency and sepiapterin
reductase deficiency result in deficiencies of neurotransmitters without
hyperphenylalaninemia (see Chapter 105.11).

Clinical Manifestations

Infants with cofactor BH4 deficiency are identified during screening
programs for PKU because of hyperphenylalaninemia. Plasma phenylalanine levels may be as high as those in classic PKU or may be in the
milder range. However, clinical manifestations of the neurotransmitter
disorders differ greatly from those of PKU. Neurologic symptoms of
the neurotransmitter disorders often manifest in the first few months
of life and include extrapyramidal signs (choreoathetotic or dystonic
limb movements, axial and truncal hypotonia, hypokinesia), feeding

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
difficulties, and autonomic abnormalities. Intellectual disability, seizures, hypersalivation, and swallowing difficulties can also be seen.
The symptoms are usually progressive and often have a marked diurnal fluctuation. Prognosis and outcome strongly depend on the age of
diagnosis, treatment, and the underlying enzyme defect.

Diagnosis

Despite the low incidence of BH4 synthesis and recycling defects, all
newborns with hyperphenylalaninemia detected through newborn
screening must be screened for BH4 synthesis defects. BH4 deficiency
and the responsible enzyme defect may be diagnosed by several studies.

Measurement of Neopterin and Biopterin

Neopterin (an oxidative product of dihydroneopterin triphosphate)
and biopterin (an oxidative product of dihydrobiopterin and BH4) are
measured in body fluids, especially urine (see Fig. 105.1). In patients
with the autosomal recessive form of GTP cyclohydrolase I deficiency,
urinary excretion of both neopterin and biopterin is reduced and is
often very low. In patients with 6-­pyruvoyl-­tetrahydropterin synthase
deficiency, there is a marked elevation of neopterin excretion and a
concomitant decrease in biopterin excretion. Patients with pterin-­4-­
α-­carbinolamine dehydratase deficiency can be identified by detecting urinary primapterin (an isomer of biopterin). In dihydropteridine
reductase deficiency, no consistent pattern in the excretion of neopterin and biopterin has been observed, thus necessitating enzymatic
studies of DHPR in erythrocytes and/or molecular confirmation
through QDPR gene analysis.

Cerebrospinal Fluid Studies

Examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may reveal decreased levels
of dopamine and serotonin metabolites (see Chapter 105.11).

BH4 Loading Test

An oral dose of BH4 (20 mg/kg) normalizes plasma phenylalanine and
the phenylalanine:tyrosine ratio in patients with BH4-­responsive deficiency within 4-­12 hours. The baseline blood phenylalanine should
be elevated (>400 μmol/L) to enable interpretation of the results. This
may be achieved by discontinuing diet therapy for 2 days before the
test. In BH4-­responsive PAH deficiency, blood phenylalanine levels
may decrease during the BH4 loading test but increase later, even with
BH4 supplementation. Patients who demonstrate phenylalanine levels
within the normal range over at least 1 week without a phenylalanine-­
restricted diet can continue BH4 supplementation as the sole treatment
for the hyperphenylalaninemia. However, it is imperative that plasma
phenylalanine levels be monitored prospectively to ensure that phenylalanine levels remain within the normal range.

Molecular Testing

Sequencing and deletion/duplication analysis are clinically available
and have an important role in confirming the biochemical diagnosis
of PAH deficiency and of the BH4 synthesis and recycling disorders.

815

interfere with the transport of neurotransmitter precursors (tyrosine and tryptophan) into the brain. Plasma phenylalanine should
be maintained as close to normal as possible (<6 mg/dL or <360
μmol/L). This can be achieved by oral supplementation of BH4 (5-­
20 mg/kg/day). Sapropterin dihydrochloride, the synthetic form of
BH4, is commercially available but expensive. In patients receiving
dietary interventions, phenylalanine and tyrosine deficiencies should
be avoided.
Lifelong supplementation with neurotransmitter precursors such
as l-­dopa and 5-­hydroxytryptophan, along with carbidopa to inhibit
degradation of l-­dopa before it enters the CNS, is necessary in most of
these patients even when treatment with BH4 normalizes plasma levels
of phenylalanine. BH4 does not readily enter the brain to restore neurotransmitter production. To minimize untoward side effects (especially l-­dopa–induced dyskinesia), the treatment should be started
with low doses of l-­dopa/carbidopa and 5-­hydroxytryptophan. The
treatment should be gradually adjusted based on response to therapy
and clinical improvement for each individual patient. Supplementation
with folinic acid is also recommended in patients with dihydropteridine reductase deficiency. Unfortunately, attempting to normalize neurotransmitter levels using neurotransmitter precursors usually does
not fully resolve the neurologic symptoms because of the inability to
attain normal levels of BH4 in the brain. Patients often demonstrate
intellectual disability, fluctuating abnormalities of tone, eye movement
abnormalities, poor balance and coordination, decreased ability to
ambulate, and seizures despite supplementation with neurotransmitter
precursors.
Hyperprolactinemia occurs in patients with BH4 deficiency and
may be the result of hypothalamic dopamine deficiency. Measurement
of serum prolactin levels may be a convenient method for monitoring
adequacy of neurotransmitter replacement in affected patients.
Some drugs, such as trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, methotrexate,
and other antileukemic agents, are known to inhibit dihydropteridine
reductase enzyme activity and should be used with great caution in
patients with BH4 deficiency.

Genetics and Prevalence

All defects causing hyperphenylalaninemia are inherited as autosomal
recessive traits. Autosomal dominant forms of GTP cyclohydrolase I
deficiency and sepiapterin reductase deficiency result in neurotransmitter disorders without hyperphenylalaninemia (see Chapter 105.11).
The prevalence of PKU in the United States is estimated at 1 in 14,000
to 1 in 20,000 live births. The prevalence of non-­PKU hyperphenylalaninemia is estimated at 1 in 50,000 live births. Most patients are compound heterozygotes for two different pathogenic variants.

TETRAHYDROBIOPTERIN DEFECTS WITHOUT
HYPERPHENYLALANINEMIA
See Chapter 105.11.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Enzyme Assay

The activity of dihydropteridine reductase can be measured in the
dry blood spots on the filter paper used for screening purposes or in
erythrocytes. 6-­
Pyruvoyl-­
tetrahydropterin synthase activity can be
measured in liver tissue, fibroblasts, and erythrocytes. Pterin-­4-­α-­
carbinolamine dehydratase activity can be measured in liver tissue and
fibroblasts. GTP cyclohydrolase I activity can be measured in the liver
and in cytokine (interferon-­γ)–stimulated mononuclear cells or fibroblasts (the enzyme activity is normally very low in unstimulated cells).
Molecular testing offers a more convenient method to secure the diagnosis in this group of disorders.

Treatment

The goals of therapy are to correct hyperphenylalaninemia and to
restore neurotransmitter deficiencies in the CNS. Control of hyperphenylalaninemia is important in patients with cofactor deficiency
because high levels of phenylalanine cause intellectual disability and

105.2 Tyrosine
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Tyrosine is derived from ingested proteins or is synthesized endogenously from phenylalanine. It is used for protein synthesis and as a precursor of dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, melanin, thyroxine,
and quinoproteins. Excess tyrosine is metabolized to carbon dioxide
and water through the tyrosine degradation pathway (see Fig. 105.1).
Hereditary causes of hypertyrosinemia include deficiencies of the
enzymes fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH), tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT), and 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (4-­HPPD).
Acquired hypertyrosinemia may occur in severe hepatocellular dysfunction (liver failure), scurvy (vitamin C is a cofactor for 4-­HPPD),
and hyperthyroidism. Hypertyrosinemia is common in blood samples
obtained soon after eating and in premature infants.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

816 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
TYROSINEMIA TYPE I (FUMARYLACETOACETATE
HYDROLASE DEFICIENCY, HEPATORENAL
TYROSINEMIA)

Tyrosinemia type I is a severe multisystemic disease caused by FAH
deficiency. Liver, kidney, and nerve damage is likely caused by metabolites of tyrosine degradation, especially fumarylacetoacetate and
succinylacetone.

Clinical Manifestations and Natural History

Affected infants may appear healthy at birth but develop symptoms in
the first year of life. Most patients present between 2 and 6 months of
age but rarely may become symptomatic in the first month or appear
unaffected beyond the first year of life. Earlier presentation confers poorer prognosis. In untreated children, a 1-­year mortality can
approach 60% if infants develop symptoms before 2 months of age and
decrease to 4% in infants who become symptomatic after 6 months.
An acute hepatic crisis typically heralds the disease onset and is
usually precipitated by an intercurrent illness leading to a catabolic
state. Fever, irritability, vomiting, hemorrhage, hepatomegaly, jaundice,
elevated levels of serum transaminases, hypoglycemia, and neuropathy are common. An odor resembling boiled cabbage resulting from
increased methionine metabolites may be present. Without treatment,
hepatic crises may progress to liver failure and death. Between the crises, varying degrees of failure to thrive, hepatomegaly, and coagulation
abnormalities often persist. Cirrhosis and eventually hepatocellular
carcinoma occur with increasing age.
Episodes of acute peripheral neuropathy resembling acute porphyria occur in approximately 40% of affected children. These crises,
often triggered by a minor infection, are characterized by severe pain,
often in the legs, associated with extensor hypertonia of the neck and
trunk, vomiting, paralytic ileus, and occasionally self-­induced injuries
of the tongue or buccal mucosa. Marked weakness occurs in about 30%
of episodes, which may lead to respiratory failure requiring mechanical
ventilation. Crises typically last 1-­7 days, but recuperation from paralytic crises can take weeks to months.
Renal involvement manifests as a Fanconi renal syndrome with
hyperphosphaturia, hypophosphatemia, normal–anion gap metabolic
acidosis, and vitamin D–resistant rickets. Nephromegaly and nephrocalcinosis may be present on ultrasound examination. Glomerular
abnormalities can be observed in adolescents and older patients.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and hyperinsulinism are seen in
some infants.

Laboratory Findings

Elevated levels of succinylacetone in serum and urine are diagnostic
for tyrosinemia type I (see Fig. 105.1). Succinylacetone levels may fall
below the diagnostic threshold in patients treated with nitisinone. In
untreated patients, serum α-­fetoprotein is increased, often greatly, and
liver-­synthesized coagulation factors are decreased in most patients.
Increased levels of α-­fetoprotein are present in the cord blood of
affected infants, indicating liver damage beginning prenatally. Serum
transaminase levels are often increased, with marked increases during acute hepatic episodes. Serum concentration of bilirubin is usually normal but can be increased in severe liver failure. Plasma tyrosine
levels are usually elevated at diagnosis, but this is a nonspecific finding and can vary depending on dietary intake. Plasma levels of other
amino acids, particularly methionine, may also be elevated in patients
with liver damage. Hyperphosphaturia, hypophosphatemia, and generalized aminoaciduria may occur. Urinary 5-­aminolevulinic acid (also
known as delta-­aminolevulinic acid) is elevated due to the inhibition
of 5-­aminolevulinate dehydratase by succinylacetone (see Fig. 112.1).
Diagnosis is usually established by demonstration of elevated succinylacetone in urine or blood. Neonatal screening for hypertyrosinemia
using tyrosine alone detects only a fraction of patients with tyrosinemia
type I. Succinylacetone assayed by many neonatal screening programs
has higher sensitivity and specificity than tyrosine and is the preferred
metabolite for screening. Tyrosinemia type I should be differentiated
from other causes of hepatitis and hepatic failure in infants, including galactosemia, hereditary fructose intolerance, neonatal iron storage

disease, giant cell hepatitis, citrullinemia type II, citrin deficiency, and
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (see Chapter 105.12).

Treatment and Outcome

A diet low in phenylalanine and tyrosine can slow, but not halt, the
progression of the condition. The treatment of choice is nitisinone
(NTBC), which inhibits 4-­HPPD, reduces the flux of tyrosine metabolites to FAH, and decreases the production of the offending compounds
fumarylacetoacetate and succinylacetone (see Fig. 105.1). The dose of
nitisinone is titrated to the lowest, most effective dose (usually targeting
the blood range of 20-­40 μmol/L), aiming to suppress succinylacetone
production while maintaining a plasma tyrosine level <400 μmol/L
(7.2 mg/dL). This treatment with nitisinone can prevent acute hepatic
and neurologic crises. Although nitisinone greatly slows disease progression, pretreatment liver damage cannot be completely reversed.
Therefore patients must be followed for the development of cirrhosis
or hepatocellular carcinoma. On imaging, the presence of even a single
liver nodule usually indicates underlying cirrhosis. Most liver nodules
in FAH-­deficient patients are benign, but current imaging techniques
cannot accurately distinguish all malignant nodules. For patients with
severe liver failure not responding to nitisinone, liver transplantation is
an effective therapy, which can also alleviate the risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma. The impact of nitisinone treatment on liver transplantation
is under study, but the greatest positive effect is seen in patients treated
early, such as children detected by neonatal screening, before developing clinical symptoms. In early-­treated patients, nitisinone has greatly
reduced the need for liver transplantation. Because nitisinone treatment can increase plasma tyrosine, a low-­tyrosine, low-­phenylalanine
diet is recommended. Rarely, nitisinone-­treated patients develop corneal crystals, presumably composed of tyrosine, but these tend to be
reversible with strict dietary compliance. This finding, combined with
observations of developmental delay in some patients with tyrosinemia
type II who chronically have elevated tyrosine levels, suggest that a diet
low in phenylalanine and tyrosine should be continued in patients
treated with nitisinone. The dietary treatment of patients with tyrosine
and phenylalanine restriction necessitates surveillance of growth and
development by ensuring adequate intake of amino acids and other
nutrients.

Genetics and Prevalence

Tyrosinemia type I is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait and is
caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in FAH. DNA analysis is useful for carrier testing in groups at risk for specific pathogenic variants,
such as French Canadians from the Saguenay-­Lac Saint-­Jean region of
Quebec. The prevalence of tyrosinemia type I is estimated to be 1 in
1,846 live births in the Saguenay-­Lac Saint-­Jean region and approximately 1 in 100,000 live births worldwide. Prenatal screening can be
performed by measurement of succinylacetone in amniotic fluid.

TYROSINEMIA TYPE II (TYROSINE AMINOTRANSFERASE DEFICIENCY, RICHNER-­HANHART
SYNDROME, OCULOCUTANEOUS TYROSINEMIA)

Tyrosinemia type II is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by
deficiency of cytosolic tyrosine aminotransferase that results in palmar
and plantar hyperkeratosis, herpetiform corneal ulcers, and intellectual
disability (see Fig. 105.1). Ocular manifestations, which may occur as
early as 6 months of age, include excessive tearing, redness, pain, and
photophobia. Corneal lesions are presumed to be caused by tyrosine
crystals deposition. In contrast to herpetic ulcers, corneal lesions in
tyrosinemia type II stain poorly with fluorescein and often are bilateral.
Skin lesions, which may develop later in life, include painful, nonpruritic hyperkeratotic plaques on the soles, palms, and fingertips. Intellectual disability, which occurs in approximately 50% of patients, is
usually mild to moderate. The contribution of consanguinity in this
rare disorder is incompletely understood.
The principal laboratory finding in untreated patients is marked
hypertyrosinemia, >500 μmol/L, and it may reach 1,100-­2,750 μmol/L.
Surprisingly, in some patients urinary 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid
and its metabolites can be elevated despite them being downstream

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
from the metabolic block (see Fig. 105.1). It is hypothesized that other
transaminases in the presence of high tyrosine concentrations can produce 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid in mitochondria, where it cannot
be further degraded. In contrast to tyrosinemia type I, liver and kidney function tend to be normal, as are serum concentrations of other
amino acids and succinylacetone. Tyrosinemia type II is caused by
tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) gene pathogenic variants, causing a
deficiency of cytosolic TAT activity in the liver.
Diagnosis of type II tyrosinemia is established by an assay of plasma
tyrosine concentration in patients with suggestive findings and can be
confirmed molecularly. An assay of hepatic TAT requires a liver biopsy
and is rarely indicated.
Treatment with a diet low in tyrosine and phenylalanine, aiming to
achieve plasma tyrosine levels <500 μmol/L, helps improve skin and
eye manifestations. Early dietary intervention can lead to improved
intellectual outcomes.

TYROSINEMIA TYPE III (PRIMARY DEFICIENCY OF
4-­HYDROXYPHENYLPYRUVATE DIOXYGENASE)

Tyrosinemia type III is an autosomal recessive condition caused by
biallelic pathogenic variants in HPD encoding the enzyme 4-­HPPD.
Only a few patients with tyrosinemia type III have been reported. Most
were detected by amino acid chromatography performed for various
neurologic findings. Therefore ascertainment bias likely confounds
current understanding of this disorder. Some asymptomatic infants
with 4-­HPPD deficiency have been identified by neonatal screening
for hypertyrosinemia. Age at presentation varied between 1 and 17
months. In symptomatic patients, developmental delay, seizures, intermittent ataxia, and self-­injurious behavior have been reported. Liver
and renal abnormalities tend to be absent.
The role of 4-­HPPD deficiency in the disease needs further study. The
diagnosis is suspected in children with sustained moderate increases in
plasma levels of tyrosine (typically 350-­700 μmol/L on a normal diet)
and the presence of 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid and its metabolites,
urinary 4-­hydroxyphenyllactate and 4-­hydroxyphenylacetate. The diagnosis should be confirmed by demonstrating biallelic pathogenic variants in HPD or, rarely, by demonstrating a low activity of the 4-­HPPD
enzyme. The latter requires a liver biopsy and is not usually indicated.
Given a possible association with neurologic abnormalities and corneal deposition of tyrosine crystals, dietary control of plasma tyrosine
levels is recommended. One could also consider a trial with vitamin
C, the cofactor for 4-­HPPD, which can help lower plasma tyrosine in
some patients.

HAWKINSINURIA

Hawkinsinuria is a condition allelic to tyrosinemia type III (4-­HPPD
deficiency). Some specific missense variants (e.g., p.Ala33Thr or
p.Asn241Ser) in HPD that encode 4-­HPPD can result in uncoupling
of typical oxidization of 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvate to homogentisic
acid and lead to premature release of quinolacetic acid. The abnormal
enzyme, incapable of normally oxidizing 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvate to
homogentisic acid, forms an intermediate that reacts with glutathione
to form the unusual organic acid hawkinsin ([2-­l-­cystein-­S-­yl-­1,4-­dih
ydroxycyclohex-­5-­en-­1-­yl]acetic acid, see Fig. 105.1). As a result, secondary glutathione deficiency may ensue. Hawkinsinuria is inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait. In one patient, compound heterozygosity for alleles associated with hawkinsinuria and tyrosinemia type
III produced biochemical features of hawkinsinuria.
The clinical course of this rare disorder is incompletely understood.
Individuals with hawkinsinuria may present with symptoms only during infancy. The symptoms usually appear in the first few months of
life, typically after weaning from breastfeeding and with the introduction of a high-­protein diet. Severe metabolic acidosis, ketosis, failure
to thrive, anemia, mild hepatomegaly, renal tubular acidosis, and an
unusual odor are reported manifestations of this disorder. Neurocognitive development is usually normal.
Symptomatic infants and asymptomatic affected children and
adults excrete hawkinsin, 4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvate, and its metabolites (4-­
hydroxyphenyllactate and 4-­
hydroxyphenylacetate) as well

817

as 4-­hydroxycyclohexylacetate and 5-­oxoproline (due to secondary
glutathione deficiency) in their urine. Plasma tyrosine is moderately
elevated in symptomatic infants and may normalize in asymptomatic
older patients.
Treatment consists of a low-­protein diet during infancy. Breastfeeding is encouraged. Successful long-­term use of N-­acetyl-­l-­cysteine to
treat secondary glutathione deficiency has been reported. A trial with
vitamin C is recommended. Although the affected enzyme is susceptible to inhibition by nitisinone, clinical studies showing its efficacy in
symptomatic infants are lacking, and the indications for its use are not
known.

TRANSIENT TYROSINEMIA OF THE NEWBORN

In a small number of newborn infants, plasma tyrosine may be as high
as 3,300 μmol/L during the first 2 weeks of life. Most affected infants
are premature and are on a high-­protein diet. Transient tyrosinemia is
thought to result from delayed maturation of 4-­HPPD (see Fig. 105.1).
Lethargy, poor feeding, and decreased motor activity are noted in some
patients. Most are asymptomatic and are identified by a high blood phenylalanine or tyrosine level on routine newborn screening. Laboratory
findings include marked elevation of plasma tyrosine with a moderate increase in plasma phenylalanine. The finding of hypertyrosinemia
differentiates this condition from PKU. 4-­Hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid
and its metabolites are present in the urine. Hypertyrosinemia tends to
resolve spontaneously in the first 2 months of life and can be improved
by reducing dietary protein to below 2 g/kg/day and by administering
vitamin C. Mild intellectual deficits have been reported in some infants
who had this condition, but the causal relationship to hypertyrosinemia has not been conclusively established.

ALKAPTONURIA

Alkaptonuria is a rare (approximately 1 in 250,000 live births) autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of homogentisate
1,2-­dioxigenase encoded by HGD. Large amounts of homogentisic acid
are formed (see Fig. 105.1) and excreted in urine or deposited in tissues. Alkaptonuria has a worldwide distribution, with a higher disease
prevalence in the Dominican Republic and Slovakia.
The main clinical manifestations of alkaptonuria consist of ochronosis and arthritis in adulthood. The only sign in children is blackening of
the urine on standing, caused by oxidation and polymerization of homogentisic acid. A history of gray-­or black-­stained diapers should suggest
the diagnosis. This sign may never be noted, thus delaying the diagnosis
until adulthood. Ochronosis, seen clinically as dark spots on the sclera
or ear cartilage, results from the accumulation of the black polymer of
homogentisic acid. Arthritis is another result of this deposition and can
be disabling with advancing age. It can involve the spine and large joints
(shoulders, hips, and knees) and is usually more severe in males. As with
rheumatoid arthritis, the alkaptonuric arthritis has acute exacerbations,
but its radiologic findings are more typical of osteoarthritis, with characteristic narrowing of the joint spaces and calcification of the intervertebral disks. A high incidence of heart disease (mitral and aortic valvulitis,
calcification of heart valves, myocardial infarction) has been reported.
The diagnosis is confirmed by finding massive excretion of homogentisic acid on urine organic acid testing. Tyrosine levels are normal.
The enzyme is expressed in high levels only in the liver and kidneys.
Treatment of the arthritis is symptomatic. In clinical trials, nitisinone, an inhibitor of 4-­HPPD, has been shown to reduce urinary
homogentisic acid. Additional studies are needed to establish its clinical efficacy and safety profile.

TYROSINE HYDROXYLASE DEFICIENCY
See Chapter 105.11.

ALBINISM

See also Chapters 662 and 694.
Albinism is caused by impaired synthesis and distribution of
melanin, the main pigment of the skin and eye (Table 105.1). Melanin is synthesized by melanocytes from tyrosine in a membrane-­
bound intracellular organelle, the melanosome. Melanocytes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

818 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 105.1  Classification of Major Causes of Albinism
TYPE

GENE

DISTINGUISHING MOLECULAR AND CLINICAL FEATURES

OCULOCUTANEOUS ALBINISM (OCA)
OCA1A (severe deficiency)

TYR

OCA1A (no melanin synthesis) vs OCA1B (minimal amounts of melanin
present). OCA1A results in poorer visual outcomes.

OCA2 (tyrosinase positive)

OCA2

Newborns typically have light pigment, and hair color can darken with age.

OCA3 (Rufous, red OCA)

TYRP1

TYRP1 is required for maturation of eumelanin, but not reddish pheomelanin.

OCA4

SLC45A2

Newborns typically have light pigment, and hair color can darken with age.
Clinically, it tends to overlap with OCA2.

OCA6

SLC24A5

SLC24A5 encodes the protein NCKX5 involved in the maturation of
melanosomes.

OCA7

LRMDA

Tends to be associated with poorer visual outcomes.

OCA8

DCT

DCT encodes dopachrome tautomerase involved in the melanin synthesis
upstream of TYRP1.
Likely results in milder forms of OCA.

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome

Multiple genes

A multisystemic, genetically heterogenous disorder characterized by OCA,
bleeding tendency, interstitial pneumonia, and granulomatous colitis,
among other complications.

Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome

LYST

Results in partial OCA, bleeding tendency, immunodeficiency, and
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

OCULAR ALBINISM (OA)
OA1 (Nettleship-­Falls ocular albinism)

GPR143

X-­linked inheritance.
Affected males present with significant ocular manifestations with minor skin
involvement.

LOCALIZED ALBINISM
Piebaldism

KIT and SNAI2

Pathogenic variants in KIT have been associated with a number of
phenotypes, including piebaldism, mastocytosis, familial, and sporadic
cancers.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS1-­WS4)

See text.

See text.

originate from the embryonic neural crest and migrate to the skin,
eyes (choroid and iris), hair follicles, and inner ear. The melanin in
the eye is confined to the iris stromal and retinal pigment epithelia,
whereas in skin and hair follicles, it is secreted into the epidermis
and hair shaft. Albinism can be caused by deficiencies of melanin
synthesis, by some hereditary defects of melanosomes, or by disorders of melanocyte migration. Neither the biosynthetic pathway of
melanin nor many facets of melanocyte cell biology are completely
elucidated (see Fig. 105.2). The end products are two pigments: pheomelanin, which is a yellow-­red pigment, and eumelanin, a brown-­
black pigment.
Clinically, primary albinism can be generalized or localized. Primary
generalized albinism can be ocular or oculocutaneous. Some syndromes
feature albinism in association with platelet, immunologic, or neurologic dysfunction. In generalized oculocutaneous albinism, hypopigmentation can be either complete or partial. Individuals with complete
albinism do not develop either generalized (tanning) or localized (pigmented nevi) skin pigmentation.
The diagnosis of albinism is usually evident, but for some children
whose families are particularly light-­skinned, normal variation may be
a diagnostic consideration. Unlike patients with albinism, unaffected
fair-­skinned children progressively develop pigmentation with age, do
not exhibit the eye manifestations of albinism, and have pigmentary
development similar to other family members. The clinical diagnosis
of oculocutaneous albinism, as opposed to other types of cutaneous
hypopigmentation, requires the presence of characteristic eye findings.
The ocular manifestations of albinism include hypopigmentation
of the iris and retina, often with foveal hypoplasia, along with reduced
visual acuity, refractive errors, nystagmus, alternating strabismus, and
iris transillumination (diffuse reddish hue of the iris produced during
ophthalmoscopic or slit-­lamp examination of the eye).

Albinism is also associated with an abnormality in routing optic fibers
at the chiasm. Unlike in pigmented individuals, in patients with albinism,
the majority of nerve fibers from the temporal side of the retina cross to
the contralateral hemisphere of the brain. This results in impaired depth
perception, alternating strabismus, and a characteristic pattern of visual
evoked potentials. These findings are highly specific for albinism. Regular
ophthalmologic follow-­up is recommended for patients with oculocutaneous albinism. Correction of refractive errors can maximize visual function.
Usually, the alternating strabismus does not result in amblyopia and does
not require surgery.
Patients with albinism should be counseled to avoid ultraviolet (UV)
radiation by wearing protective long-­sleeved clothing and by using
sunscreens with a sun protection factor (SPF) rating >30. Melanin is
also present in the cochlea; therefore albino individuals may be more
susceptible to ototoxic agents such as gentamicin.

Genetics of Albinism

Oculocutaneous albinism is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Many
clinical forms of albinism have been identified. Some of the seemingly distinct clinical forms are caused by different pathogenic variants of the same
gene. Implicated genes are involved in different stages of melanogenesis
and melanosome maturation (see Table 105.1). The classification outlined
next is based on the distribution of albinism in the body and the affected
genes. Genetic analysis is clinically available for most forms of albinism
(see Table 105.1). Molecular diagnosis is of little use therapeutically in isolated albinism but can be helpful for precise genetic counseling of families.

Oculocutaneous (Generalized) Albinism

Lack of pigment is generalized, affecting skin, hair, and eyes. At least
eight genetically distinct forms of oculocutaneous albinism (OCA)
have been identified of which seven have pathogenic variants in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
associated genes (OCA1, OCA2, OCA3, OCA4, OCA6, OCA7, and
OCA8). Many forms of OCA may not be clinically distinguishable
from one another. All affected individuals have ocular manifestations
of albinism. All known forms of OCA are inherited as autosomal recessive traits.

OCA1

The defect in patients with OCA1 resides in the tyrosinase gene, TYR.
Many pathogenic variants have been identified. Most affected individuals are compound heterozygotes. A clinical clue to the diagnosis
of OCA1 is complete lack of pigment at birth. The condition can be
subdivided into OCA1A and OCA1B, based on enzyme activity and
difference in clinical manifestations as a function of age. In patients
with OCA1A, the most severe form of OCA, both TYR alleles have
pathogenic variants that completely inactivate tyrosinase. Clinically,
lack of pigment in the skin (milky white), hair (white hair), and eyes
(red-­gray irides) is evident at birth and remains unchanged throughout
life. They do not tan and do not develop pigmented nevi or freckles.
Patients with OCA1B have TYR gene pathogenic variants that preserve some residual activity. Clinically, they completely lack pigment
at birth but with age become light blond with light-­blue or hazel eyes.
They develop pigmented nevi and freckles, and they may tan.

OCA2

OCA2 is the most common form of generalized OCA, particularly in
patients of African ancestry. Clinically, the phenotype is highly variable; most patients demonstrate some pigmentation of the skin and
eyes at birth and continue to accumulate pigment throughout life. The
hair is yellow at birth and may darken with age. They have pigmented
nevi and freckles, and some may tan. They may be clinically indistinguishable from OCA1B patients. Individuals with OCA2, however,
have normal tyrosinase activity in hair bulbs. The defect is in the OCA2
gene, which is an orthologue of the p (pink-­eyed dilution) gene in the
mouse. This gene produces the P protein, a melanosome membrane–
bound protein. Patients with Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes
caused by microdeletion of chromosome 15q12 that includes the OCA2
gene have mild pigmentary deficiency (see Chapter 98.8).

OCA3

This form has been identified predominantly in patients of African
and Asian ancestry. Patients with OCA3 can make pheomelanin but
not eumelanin. Patients have reddish hair and reddish-­brown skin
as adults. The skin color is peculiar to this form. In young persons
the coloration may resemble that of OCA2. The altered gene TYRP1
encodes the tyrosinase-­related protein 1, the function of which is not
well-­understood.

OCA4

Similar manifestations to OCA2 (both in the skin and the eyes) have
been observed in OCA4 patients (mostly from Japan) with pathogenic
variants in the SLC45A2 gene.

Ocular Albinism

Patients with ocular albinism (OA) present in the first months of life
with nystagmus, hypopigmentation of the iris and fundus, foveal hypoplasia, and decreased visual acuity. Electron microscopy demonstrates
characteristic macromelanosomes in skin biopsies or hair root specimens. Most patients affected by OA have ocular albinism type 1 (OA1),
an X-­linked disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the GPR143
gene. A rare form of OA with late-­onset sensorineural deafness and
apparent autosomal dominant inheritance has also been reported.

Ocular Albinism Type 1 (Nettleship-­Falls Ocular
Albinism)

OA1 is an X-­linked disorder characterized by congenital nystagmus,
reduced pigmentation of ocular structures, and visual impairment in
affected males. Heterozygous females may present with segments of
abnormal retinal pigmentations. Infrequently, depending on the pattern of X chromosome inactivation, heterozygous females may also

819

present with severe manifestations, including nystagmus, iris and
foveal hypopigmentation, foveal hypoplasia, and reduced visual acuity.
In families with darker skin complexion, mild skin hypopigmentation
can be seen. The diagnosis of OA1 is suspected in males with features
of albinism in the eye, normal to mildly reduced skin pigmentation,
and a family history suggestive of an X-­linked transmission. It is a nonprogressive disorder, and the eye findings often improve with age. In
patients who are the first of their families to be affected, genetic analysis
of GPR143 helps confirm the diagnosis.

Syndromic Forms of Generalized Albinism
Hermansky-­Pudlak Syndrome

This group of autosomal recessive disorders is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in one of ten genes (HPS1, AP3B1, HPS3, HPS4, HPS5,
HPS6, DTNBP1, BLOC1S3, BLOC1S6, AP3D1). Hermansky-­Pudlak
syndrome (HPS) can be suspected in patients with albinism associated
with a bleeding diathesis, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and/or
pulmonary fibrosis. Disease subtype can be established with molecular studies (see Chapter 533). Genes associated with HPS are required
for normal structure and function of lysosome-­derived organelles,
including melanosomes and platelet-­dense bodies. Patients have a
tyrosinase-­positive OCA of variable severity associated with platelet
dysfunction (caused by the absence of platelet-­dense bodies). A ceroid-­
like material accumulates in tissues. HPS is pan-­ethnic. Patient ancestry can help develop a cost-­effective testing strategy. HPS is prevalent
in two regions of Puerto Rico (type 1 in the northwest and type 3 in
the central regions because of different founder effects). The cutaneous and ocular symptoms of albinism are present. Patients can develop
epistaxis, postsurgical bleeding, or abundant menses. Bleeding time is
prolonged, but platelet count is normal. Major complications include
progressive pulmonary fibrosis in young adults and Crohn’s-­like IBD
in adolescents and young adults. Kidney failure and cardiomyopathy
have been reported. Neutropenia has been described in HPS type 2.
Treatment is symptomatic.

Chédiak-­Higashi Syndrome

Patients with this rare autosomal recessive condition have OCA of variable severity and susceptibility to infection (see Chapter 156). Bacterial infections of the skin and the upper respiratory tract are common.
Giant peroxidase-­positive lysosomal granules can be seen in granulocytes in a blood smear. Patients have a reduced number of melanosomes, which are abnormally large (macromelanosomes) and can have
silvery-­gray hair. The bleeding tendency is typically mild. If treatment
is not successful, children can reach a stage of the disease known as
the accelerated phase, which is a major, life-­threatening complication
of Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome. It is caused by macrophage activation
resulting in hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis with manifestations
that include fever, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, cytopenia,
and an elevated plasma ferritin level. Patients surviving childhood
may develop cerebellar atrophy, peripheral neuropathy, and cognitive
delay. Pathogenic variants in LYST are the only known cause for this
syndrome. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation offers an effective
approach to control immunodeficiency and hematologic abnormalities
and to prevent development of the accelerated phase.

Other Disorders Featuring Generalized Albinism

Hypopigmentation can be a feature in other syndromes, some with
abnormalities of lysosomal biogenesis or melanosome biology. Griscelli
syndrome patients have silver-­gray hair, pigmentary dilution of skin,
and melanosomal clumping in hair shafts and the center of melanocytes,
with intellectual disability or macrophage activation with hemophagocytosis in different subtypes. All forms are autosomal recessive caused
by pathogenic variants in MLPH, MYO5A, or RAB27A. Vici syndrome
patients have combined immunodeficiency, intellectual disability, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cataracts, and cleft lip/palate. It is autosomal
recessive, caused by pathogenic variants in EPG5. Patients with MAPBP-­
interacting protein deficiency have a short stature, recurrent infections,
and neutropenia, and inheritance occurs in an autosomal recessive manner due to pathogenic variants in the gene LAMTOR2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

820 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Localized Albinism

Localized albinism refers to localized patches of hypopigmentation
of skin and hair, which may be evident at birth or develop with time.
These conditions are caused by abnormal migration of melanocytes
during embryonic development.

Piebaldism

Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant inherited condition in which the
individual is usually born with a white forelock. The underlying skin is
depigmented and devoid of melanocytes. In addition, there are usually
white macules on the face, trunk, and extremities. Pathogenic variants
in the KIT and SNAI2 genes have been identified in affected patients.

Waardenburg Syndrome

In Waardenburg syndrome, a white forelock is often associated with lateral displacement of the inner canthi of the eyes, a broad nasal bridge,
heterochromia of irides, and sensorineural deafness. This condition
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with four main subtypes
known. Patients with Waardenburg syndrome type 1 (WS1, the most
common form) have all the previous clinical findings, including lateral
displacement of the inner canthi. The condition is typically caused by
pathogenic variants (>90%) in the PAX3 gene. Patients with Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (WS2) have the clinical findings of WS1 except
for the lateral displacement of the inner canthi. Genetically, this is a
heterogeneous condition caused by pathogenic variants in several
genes, including MITF, SOX10, and SNAI2. Patients with Waardenburg syndrome type 3 (WS3) have all the findings seen in individuals with WS1 plus hypoplasia and contractures of the upper limbs. It
is caused by heterozygous or homozygous pathogenic variants of the
PAX3 gene. Finally, Waardenburg syndrome type 4 (WS4), associated
with Hirschsprung disease, is genetically heterogeneous, with pathogenic variants in different genes (EDN3, EDNRB, or SOX10) identified.
Other causes of localized hypopigmentation include vitiligo and
hypomelanosis of Ito (see Chapter 694).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.3 Methionine
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
The usual pathway for catabolism of methionine, an essential amino
acid, produces S-­adenosylmethionine, which serves as a methyl group
donor for methylation reactions for a variety of compounds, and cysteine, which is formed through a series of reactions collectively called
trans-­sulfuration (Fig. 105.3).

HOMOCYSTINURIA (HOMOCYSTINEMIA)

Normally, most homocysteine, an intermediate compound of methionine degradation, is remethylated to methionine. This methionine-­
sparing reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme methionine synthase,
which requires a metabolite of folic acid (5-­methyltetrahydrofolate) as
a methyl donor and a metabolite of vitamin B12 (methylcobalamin) as a
cofactor (see Fig. 105.3). In healthy individuals, most plasma homocysteine is either protein-­bound or exists as disulfides. Three major forms
of homocystinemia and homocystinuria have been identified.

Homocystinuria Caused by Cystathionine β-­Synthase
Deficiency (Classic Homocystinuria)

Classic homocystinuria is the most common inborn error of methionine metabolism. It is an autosomal recessive condition caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in CBS encoding cystathionine β-­synthase.
Clinical presentation in the first years of life is nonspecific. Universal newborn screening to detect elevated methionine in dried blood
spot samples can identify most affected infants. Second-­tier testing
after a positive newborn screen result should include plasma methionine and total plasma homocysteine and followed up by confirmatory
testing using CBS molecular gene analysis. Most affected patients are

compound heterozygotes for two different alleles. Heterozygous carriers are asymptomatic.
Infants with classic homocystinuria appear healthy at birth. Clinical
manifestations during infancy are nonspecific and may include failure to thrive and developmental delay. Without newborn screening,
the diagnosis can be delayed and is usually made after 3 years of age,
when subluxation of the ocular lens (ectopia lentis) occurs. This causes
severe myopia and iridodonesis (quivering of the iris). Astigmatism,
glaucoma, staphyloma, cataracts, retinal detachment, and optic atrophy may develop later in life. Progressive intellectual disability is common. Neurocognitive scores in the average range have been reported;
IQ scores range from 10 to 135. Higher IQ scores are seen in vitamin
B6–responsive patients. Psychiatric and behavioral disorders have been
observed in more than 50% of affected patients. Seizures are seen in
approximately 20% of untreated patients. Affected individuals with
homocystinuria manifest skeletal abnormalities resembling those of
Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743): tall with elongated limbs and
arachnodactyly. Scoliosis, pectus excavatum or pectus carinatum, genu
valgum, pes cavus, high-­arched palate, and crowding of the teeth have
been reported. These children usually have a fair complexion, blue eyes,
and a peculiar malar flush. Generalized osteoporosis, especially of the
spine, is the main x-­ray finding. Thromboembolic episodes involving
both large and small vessels, especially those of the brain, are common
and may occur at any age. Optic atrophy, paralysis, cor pulmonale,
and severe hypertension (from renal infarcts) are among the serious
consequences of thromboembolism, which is likely caused by elevated
homocysteine levels leading to abnormal angiogenesis and inhibition
of fibrinolytic activity. The risk of thromboembolism increases after
surgical procedures or dehydration. Spontaneous pneumothorax and
acute pancreatitis are rare complications.
Elevations of both total plasma homocysteine and methionine in
body fluids are the diagnostic laboratory findings. Cysteine is low or
absent in plasma. Total plasma homocysteine is the preferred analyte
for screening and management of classic homocystinuria. Free plasma
homocysteine may normalize or remain normal when total plasma
homocysteine is lowered. If urinary homocystine is used for diagnostic purposes, a freshly voided urine sample is preferred because this
compound is unstable and may disappear after prolonged storage. The
diagnosis may be established by molecular analysis of CBS. Prenatal
diagnosis is feasible by DNA analysis or by performing an enzyme
assay of cultured amniotic cells.
Treatment with high doses of vitamin B6 (100-­200 mg/day) can produce significant improvement in patients who are responsive to this
therapy. Approximately 40% of affected patients respond to high doses
of vitamin B6 and usually have milder clinical manifestations than those
who are unresponsive to vitamin B6 therapy. The degree of response to
vitamin B6 treatment may vary across families. Some patients may not
respond because of folate depletion; a patient should not be considered unresponsive to vitamin B6 until folic acid (1-­5 mg/day) has been
added to the treatment regimen. For patients who are unresponsive
to vitamin B6, lifelong restriction of methionine intake in conjunction with cysteine supplementation is also recommended. The need
for dietary restriction and its extent remains controversial in patients
with the vitamin B6–responsive form. In some patients with this form,
addition of betaine may obviate the need for any dietary restriction.
Betaine (trimethylglycine, 6 g/day for adults or 100-­200 mg/kg/day
for children) lowers homocysteine levels in body fluids by remethylating homocysteine to methionine (see Fig. 105.3), which may result
in elevation of plasma methionine levels. This treatment has produced
clinical improvement (preventing vascular events) in patients who are
unresponsive to vitamin B6 therapy. Cerebral edema has occurred in
a patient with vitamin B6–nonresponsive homocystinuria and dietary
noncompliance during betaine therapy.
More than 100 pregnancies in women with classic homocystinuria
have been reported with favorable outcomes for both mothers and
infants. The majority of infants were full-­term and healthy at birth.
Postpartum thromboembolic events occurred in a few mothers.
The screening of newborn infants for classic homocystinuria has
been performed worldwide, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

821

NH2
CH3

Folic acid

S

(CH2)2

CH

COOH

Methionine

Serine

Methioninemia

Tetrahydrofolate
(FH4)
1
Dimethyl
glycine

S-Adenosylmethionine

Glycine
cblC, D, E, F, G, J, X*
vit B12
Methyl Cbl 9

Methioninemia

2
7

Homocystinuria
N5,N10methylene-FH4

N5-methyl
FH4

S-Adenosylhomocysteine
Betaine

Choline

8
3
Methioninemia

Homocystinuria
Homocysteine

Serine

+
Classic
Homocystinuria

4

Cystathionine
Cystathioninemia

α-Ketobutyric acid

5

Homoserine

Cysteine

Propionic acid

Glutathione
Sulfite

Taurine
See Fig. 103.4

11
10
GTP

13

12
cPMP

Molybdopterin

Molybdenum cofactor
deficiency

Molybdenum
Cofactor

6

Sulfite oxidase
deficiency

Sulfate

Fig. 105.3 Pathways in the metabolism of sulfur-­containing amino acids. Enzymes: (1) Methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT I/III), (2) glycine N-­
methyltransferase, (3) S-­adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, (4) cystathionine synthase, (5) cystathionase, (6) sulfite oxidase, (7) betaine homocysteine
methyltransferase, (8) methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase, (9) methionine synthase (cblG), (10) molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein 1, (11)
molybdopterin synthase, (12) adenylyltransferase and sulfurtransferase (MOCS3), (13) gephyrin. GTP, Guanosine triphosphate; cPMP, cyclic pyranopterin monophosphate. *Defects in cblC, D, F, J, and X result in methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria.

200,000 to 1 in 350,000 live births, although it can be more common
in some parts of the world (e.g., 1 in 1,800 in Qatar). Early treatment
of patients identified by screening has produced favorable results. The
mean IQ of patients with the vitamin B6–unresponsive form treated in
early infancy was in the normal range. Dislocation of the lens appeared
to be preventable in some patients.

Homocystinuria Caused by Defects in
Methylcobalamin Formation

Methylcobalamin is the cofactor for methionine synthase, which catalyzes remethylation of homocysteine to methionine. At least seven distinct defects in the intracellular metabolism of cobalamin may interfere
with the formation of methylcobalamin (for a more detailed discussion
on cobalamin metabolism, see Chapter 105.6 and Figs. 105.3 and 105.4).
The seven defects are designated as cblC, cblD (including cblD variant 1),
cblE (methionine synthase reductase), cblG (methionine synthase), cblF,
cblJ, and cblX. Patients with cblC, cblD, cblF, cblJ, and cblX defects have
methylmalonic acidemia in addition to homocystinuria, because the
formation of both adenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin is impaired.

Patients with cblE, cblG, and cblD variant one defects are unable to
form methylcobalamin and develop homocystinuria without methylmalonic acidemia (Fig. 105.4). The clinical manifestations are similar
in patients with these three defects. Nonspecific symptoms such as
vomiting, poor feeding, failure to thrive, lethargy, hypotonia, seizures,
and developmental delay may occur in the first few months of life.
Late-­onset forms of these disorders may present with neurocognitive
defects, psychosis, and peripheral neuropathy. Laboratory findings
include megaloblastic anemia, hyperhomocysteinemia, homocystinuria, and hypomethioninemia. The absence of hypermethioninemia
differentiates these conditions from cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency. Renal artery thrombosis, hemolytic uremic syndrome, pulmonary hypertension, and optic nerve atrophy have been reported in
some patients with these defects.
Diagnosis is established by DNA testing or using complementation studies performed in cultured fibroblasts. Prenatal diagnosis can
be accomplished by studies in amniotic cell cultures. cblE, cblG, and
cblD variant one deficiencies are inherited as autosomal recessive traits.
The gene for cblE is MTRR, encoding methionine synthase reductase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

822 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Extracellular space
Cell membrane

Protein synthesis
CH3
CH3

CH

CH3
CH

COOH

CH2

CH3

CH

NH2
Valine

Biotin

C

N

CH3
CH

COOH

CH3

CH

CH2

NH 2
Isoleucine

CH

COOH

NH2
Leucine

Cytosol

Protein

O
Proteolytic
degradation

2-Ketoisovaleric acid
Maple syrup
urine disease

Biocytin

2-Keto-3-methylvaleric acid
Maple syrup
urine disease

Thiamine B

Isobutyryl-CoA

2-Ketoisocaproic acid
Maple syrup
urine disease

Thiamine B

Thiamine B

Isovaleryl-CoA

2-Methylbutyryl-CoA

Isovaleric
acidemia

Biotinidase
deficiency

Methacrylyl-CoA

Tiglyl-CoA

3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA
CO2

3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA

2-Methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA

Cytosol

Biotin

Methylmalonyl-CoA
semialdehyde

2-Methylacetoacetyl-CoA

3-Methylglutaconyl-CoA

β-Ketothiolase
deficiency

CO2

CO2

3-Hydroxyisovaleric acid
3-MethylcrotonylCoA carboxylase
deficiency

3-Methylglutaconic
aciduria

Biotin

Propionic
acidemia

Methylmalonyl-CoA
epimerase deficiency

Acetyl-CoA

Propionyl-CoA

D-Methylmalonyl-CoA

Oxaloacetate

2-Methylcitrate
L-Methylmalonyl-CoA

MMA

MUT

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA

Odd-chain
fatty acids
Threonine
Methionine
Side chains of
cholesterol

cblA
cblB

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaric
aciduria

Cbl+ 2

Adenosyl-Cbl

Acetoacetic acid

Acetyl CoA

Acetone

Krebs cycle

MMA
HCU

HCU
Succinyl-CoA

cblDV2
Krebs cycle

MMA

Cbl+2

Methionine

cblE

cblDV1
Cbl+ 2

Methyl Cbl
cblG HCU

CO2 + H2O

MMA + HCU

Mitochondria

Cbl+ 1

cblD

Homocysteine

cblC, cblX

cblF
cblJ

Cbl+ 3

Cbl+ 3

MMA +
HCU

TC
TC
Cbl+ 3

Cell membrane
Extracellular space

Lysosome
Transcobalamin
receptor deficiency

Cystosol
Cell membrane

TC
Cbl+ 3

Fig. 105.4 Pathways in the metabolism of the branched-­chain amino acids, biotin, and vitamin B12 (cobalamin). Adenosyl Cbl, Adenosylcobalamin;
Cbl, cobalamin; cbl, defect in metabolism of cobalamin; cblDV1, cblD variant 1; cblDV2, cblD variant 2; HCU, homocystinuria; methyl Cbl, methylcobalamin; MMA, methylmalonic acidemia; MUT, mutase; OHCbl, hydroxycobalamin; TC, transcobalamin; TCR, transcobalamin receptor. See text
for the name of the enzymes.

The gene for cblG is MTR, encoding methionine synthase. The cblD
variant one deficiency is caused by pathogenic variants affecting the
C-­terminal of the MMADHC gene.
Treatment with vitamin B12 in the form of high-­dose parenteral
hydroxycobalamin (0.3 mg/kg/day) helps improve the clinical and biochemical findings. Results vary among both diseases and sibships.

Homocystinuria Caused by Deficiency of Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (MTHFR Deficiency)

This enzyme reduces 5,10-­
methylenetetrahydrofolate to form
5-­methyltetrahydrofolate, which provides the methyl group needed for
remethylation of homocysteine to methionine (see Fig. 105.3). The severity of the enzyme defect and the clinical manifestations vary considerably

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
in different families. Clinical findings vary from apnea, seizure, microcephaly, coma, and death to developmental delay, ataxia, motor abnormalities, peripheral neuropathy, and psychiatric manifestations.
Thromboembolism has also been observed. Exposure to the anesthetic
nitrous oxide (which inhibits methionine synthase) in patients with
MTHFR deficiency may result in neurologic deterioration and death.
Laboratory findings include moderate hyperhomocysteinemia and
homocystinuria. The methionine concentration is low or low-­normal.
This finding helps differentiate MTHFR deficiency from classic homocystinuria caused by cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency. The diagnosis
can be confirmed by molecular analysis of MTHFR or by the enzyme
assay in cultured fibroblasts or leukocytes.
MTHFR deficiency should be differentiated from mild hyperhomocysteinemia due to two common variants in the MTHFR gene.
Two “thermolabile” polymorphisms have been extensively studied:
c.665C>T (p.Ala222Val, previously referred to as c.677C>T) and
c.1286A>C (p.Glu429Ala, formerly referred to as c.1298A>C). These
variants may minimally affect levels of plasma total homocysteine in
some patients and are often confounded by dietary folate deficiency.
Population-­based studies revealed a surprisingly high prevalence of
homozygosity for these polymorphisms in the general population: up
to 10–15% of North American Whites and >25% in some Hispanics.
The best data support a role for the c.665C>T polymorphic variant
(formerly c. 677C>T) as a risk factor for neural tube defects. Although
clinical tests for this polymorphic variant are widely available, meta-­
analyses have not supported the association between the MTHFR polymorphic variants and risk for venous thromboembolism or between
mild hyperhomocysteinemia and an increased risk for coronary heart
disease. It is hypothesized that fortification of flour with folate may
have decreased the strength of associations observed in the past.
Homocystinuria caused by the loss of function in MTHFR (MTHFR
deficiency) is an autosomal recessive disorder. The diagnosis can
be confirmed by MTHFR gene analysis. Prenatal diagnosis can be
achieved by molecular analysis of MTHFR of known familial pathogenic variants or by measuring MTHFR enzyme activity in cultured
chorionic villus cells or amniocytes.
Treatment of MTHFR deficiency with a combination of folic acid,
vitamin B6, vitamin B12, methionine supplementation, and betaine has
been tried. Of these, early treatment with betaine appears to have the
most beneficial effect.

HYPERMETHIONINEMIA
Primary (Genetic) Hypermethioninemia

Elevation of plasma level of methionine occurs in several genetic conditions. These should be differentiated from acquired (nongenetic)
forms of hypermethioninemia, which can occur under various conditions of physiologic stress, especially when involving liver dysfunction.

Classic Homocystinuria
See earlier discussion.

Hepatic Methionine Adenosyltransferase (MAT I/MAT III)
Deficiency (Mudd Disease). This hepatic enzyme, which has two

isoforms, MAT I (tetrameric) and MAT III (dimeric), is encoded by
a single gene, MAT1A, and is involved in the first step of methionine
catabolism (see Fig. 105.3). Another structurally similar enzyme,
MAT II, is encoded by a different gene, MAT2A, and is expressed
predominantly in nonhepatic tissues (e.g., kidney, brain, lymphocytes). Deficiency of MAT I/MAT III causes hypermethioninemia. In
severe deficiency, total plasma homocysteine can also be elevated. The
majority of these patients have been diagnosed in the neonatal period
through screening for classic homocystinuria. Most affected individuals have residual enzyme activity and remain asymptomatic throughout life despite persistent hypermethioninemia. Some complain of an
unusual odor to their breath, likely caused by accumulation of dimethylsulfide. A few patients with complete enzyme deficiency have had
neurologic abnormalities related to demyelination (intellectual disability, dystonia, dyspraxia).
Laboratory studies reveal markedly elevated levels of plasma methionine with a normal or low level of S-­adenosylmethionine, normal

823

concentrations of S-­adenosylhomocysteine, and normal or slightly
elevated total plasma homocysteine. These findings help differentiate
MAT I/MAT III deficiency from other causes of hypermethioninemia.
No uniformly accepted therapeutic regimen has yet emerged. Long-­
term follow-­up to monitor for neurologic and liver abnormalities should
be considered. Diets low in methionine result in lowering of plasma
methionine, but the advisability of such diets has been questioned
because lowering plasma methionine, an essential amino acid, causes
further lowering of S-­adenosylmethionine, thus interfering with reactions of remethylation. Supplementation with S-­adenosylmethionine
in conjunction with a low-­methionine diet seems prudent, but no large
clinical experience is yet available. Normal pregnancies producing
normal offspring have been reported in mothers with MAT I/MAT III
(MAT1A) deficiency. The condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, although the pathogenic variant p.Arg264His in MAT1A
appears to disrupt protein dimerization and may result in mild hypermethioninemia even in heterozygous patients.
Glycine N-­Methyltransferase Deficiency. Glycine N-­methyl­
transferase (GNMT) mediates catabolism of S-­adenosylmethionine
to S-­adenosylhomocysteine (see Fig. 105.3). A few patients with deficiency of this enzyme have been reported to date. Clinically, patients
were asymptomatic except for mild hepatomegaly and elevated serum
levels of aminotransferases. Other laboratory findings included hypermethioninemia and very high levels of serum S-­adenosylmethionine.
No specific treatment has yet been identified. The condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
S-­Adenosylhomocysteine Hydrolase (SAHH) Deficiency. SAHH
deficiency (see Fig. 105.3) has been described infrequently. Intellectual
disability, severe hypotonia, and progressive liver dysfunction were
common clinical findings. Laboratory studies included elevated levels of serum creatine kinase, hypoalbuminemia (associated with fetal
hydrops in one family), hypoprothrombinemia, and greatly elevated
levels of serum S-­adenosylhomocysteine with moderate elevations of
plasma methionine and S-­adenosylmethionine. Marked elevation in S-­
adenosylhomocysteine has been thought to cause inhibition of methyltransferases, including those involved in the synthesis of creatine (see
Fig. 105.10) and choline, resulting in their deficiencies. Brain MRIs often
reveal delayed myelination of the white matter. The diagnosis can be
achieved by AHCY gene analysis or, if needed, by biochemical assay of
red blood cells, cultured skin fibroblasts, or liver biopsy. Treatment with
a low-­methionine diet has been used, but its long-­term effectiveness has
not been established.
Tyrosinemia Type I. See Chapter 105.2.
Citrin Deficiency. See Chapter 105.12.

Acquired (Nongenetic) Hypermethioninemia

Hypermethioninemia occurs in premature and some full-­term infants
receiving high-­protein diets, in whom it may represent delayed maturation of the enzyme MAT. Adjusting protein intake under the control
of plasma methionine usually resolves the abnormality. Hypermethioninemia is also commonly found in patients with various forms of
liver disease.

PRIMARY CYSTATHIONINEMIA
(CYSTATHIONINURIA)

Cystathionase (cystathionine γ-­
lyase encoded by CTH) deficiency
results in massive cystathioninuria and mild to moderate cystathioninemia. Cystathionase deficiency of this enzyme is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 14,000 live
births. A wide variety of clinical manifestations have been reported.
Lack of a consistent clinical picture and the presence of cystathioninuria in some individuals without apparent clinical findings suggest
that cystathionase deficiency may be of no clinical significance. Many
reported cases are responsive to oral administration of large doses of
vitamin B6 (∼100 mg/day). When cystathioninuria is discovered in a
patient, vitamin B6 treatment can be tried, but its beneficial effect has
not been established.
Primary cystathioninuria needs to be differentiated from secondary
cystathioninuria, which can occur in patients with vitamin B6 and/or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

824 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
B12 deficiency, liver disease (particularly damage caused by galactosemia), thyrotoxicosis, hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma, ganglioblastoma, or defects in remethylation of homocysteine.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.4 Cysteine and Cystine
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Cysteine is a sulfur-­containing amino acid synthesized from methionine (see Fig. 105.3). Oxidation of cysteine forms cystine, a poorly
soluble dimer. The most common genetic disorders of cysteine and
cystine metabolism are cystinuria (see Chapter 584) and cystinosis (see
Chapter 569.3).

SULFITE OXIDASE DEFICIENCY AND MOLYBDENUM
COFACTOR DEFICIENCY

In the last step in cysteine metabolism, sulfite is oxidized to sulfate by
sulfite oxidase, and the sulfate is excreted in the urine (see Fig. 105.3).
Sulfite oxidase is encoded by SUOX and requires a molybdenum-­pterin
complex called molybdenum cofactor. This cofactor is also necessary
for the function of two other enzymes in humans: xanthine dehydrogenase (oxidizes xanthine and hypoxanthine to uric acid) and aldehyde
oxidase (involved in oxidizing a number of natural compounds and
drugs). Three enzymes, encoded by three different genes (MOCS1,
MOCS2, and GPHN), are involved in the synthesis of the cofactor.
Deficiency of any of the three enzymes causes cofactor deficiency with
similar phenotypes. Most patients, who were originally diagnosed as
having sulfite oxidase deficiency, have been shown to have molybdenum cofactor deficiency. Sulfite oxidase deficiency and molybdenum
cofactor deficiency are autosomal recessive disorders.
The enzyme and cofactor deficiencies present with overlapping and
often nonspecific clinical manifestations. Refusal to feed, vomiting, an
exaggerated startle reaction, severe intractable seizures (tonic, clonic,
myoclonic), cortical atrophy with subcortical multicystic lesions, and
severe developmental delay may develop within a few weeks after birth.
The biochemical diagnosis should be considered in infants presenting with neonatal seizures and neonates with symptoms reminiscent
of hypoxic-­
ischemic encephalopathy. Bilateral dislocation of ocular lenses is a common finding in patients who survive the neonatal
period. The intractable seizures seen in this condition are in part a
consequence of secondary vitamin B6 dependency. The accumulation
of sulfites in body fluids in this condition causes the inhibition of the
antiquitin enzyme, which is necessary for the conversion of α-­amino
adipic semialdehyde to α-­aminoadipic acid; the resultant accumulation
of α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde and its cyclic form, P6C, causes the
inactivation of pyridoxal-­5-­phosphate (the active form of vitamin B6),
leading to vitamin B6–dependent epilepsy (see also Chapter 105.14).
Affected children excrete large amounts of sulfite, thiosulfate, S-­
sulfocysteine, xanthine, and hypoxanthine in the urine. Serum uric
acid and urinary excretion of sulfate and uric acid are diminished.
Fresh urine should be used for screening purposes and for quantitative
measurements of sulfite, because oxidation of sulfite to sulfate at room
temperature may produce false-­negative results. Increased concentrations of α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde and P6C can be found in the CSF,
plasma, and urine.
Diagnosis is confirmed by analysis of affected genes (often using
a multigene panel). Infrequently, measurement of sulfite oxidase and
molybdenum cofactor in fibroblasts and liver biopsies is required. Prenatal diagnosis is possible by DNA studies or by performing an assay of
sulfite oxidase activity in cultured amniotic cells, in samples of chorionic villi. The prevalence of these deficiencies in the general population
is not known but likely is very low.
Patients with MOCS1-­related molybdenum cofactor deficiency may
benefit from daily intravenous cyclic pyranopterin monophosphate
(a cPMP analogue), a compound under investigation in a multicenter
clinical trial. Large doses of vitamin B6 may alleviate the frequency and

severity of seizures but do not seem to alter the devastating neurologic
outcome. A cysteine-­restricted diet under control of plasma amino
acids to avoid essential amino acid deficiencies can be attempted in
some patients, but the long-­term efficacy of this approach is unknown.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.5 Tryptophan
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Tryptophan is an essential amino acid and a precursor for nicotinic
acid (niacin) and serotonin (Fig. 105.5). The genetic disorders of
metabolism of serotonin, one of the major neurotransmitters, are discussed in Chapter 105.11.

HARTNUP DISEASE

Hartnup disease is an autosomal recessive condition caused by biallelic
pathogenic variants in SLC6A19. This gene encodes a monoamino-­
monocarboxylic amino acid transporter (B0AT1), which facilitates
transport of neutral amino acids, including tryptophan, across the
intestinal mucosa and renal tubules. Patients show significant variability
in presentation, likely related to nutritional factors, environment, and
genetic heterogeneity of modifier genes (e.g., two proteins, TMEM27 and
ACE2, that interact with B0AT1). The prevalence of Hartnup disorder is
estimated to be 1 in 20,000 to 1 in 55,000 live births. Most children with
Hartnup disease remain asymptomatic. Decreased intestinal absorption of tryptophan in conjunction with its increased renal loss can lead
to reduced availability of tryptophan for niacin synthesis. Tryptophan
deficiency can be accentuated by malabsorption such as celiac disease.
One of the more noticeable clinical manifestations in the rare symptomatic patient is cutaneous photosensitivity. The skin becomes rough and
red after moderate exposure to the sun, and with greater exposure, a
pellagra-­like rash may develop. The rash may be pruritic, and a chronic
eczema may develop. The skin changes have been reported in affected
infants as young as 10 days of age. Some patients may have intermittent
ataxia manifested as an unsteady, wide-­based gait. The ataxia may last a
few days and can respond to niacin supplementation. Cognitive development is usually normal. Episodic psychiatric manifestations such as
irritability, emotional instability, depression, and suicidal tendencies,
have been observed; these changes are usually associated with bouts of
ataxia. Short stature and atrophic glossitis are seen in some patients.
Most children diagnosed with Hartnup disorder by neonatal screening have remained asymptomatic. This indicates that other factors are
also involved in the pathogenesis of the clinical condition.
The main laboratory finding is aminoaciduria, which is restricted to
neutral amino acids (alanine, serine, threonine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, tryptophan, histidine). Urinary excretion of
proline, hydroxyproline, and arginine remains normal. This finding helps
differentiate Hartnup disorder from other causes of generalized aminoaciduria, such as renal Fanconi syndrome. Plasma concentrations of neutral
amino acids are normal or mildly decreased. This seemingly unexpected
finding reflects compensatory mechanisms that maintain normal transport and utilization of amino acids. The indole derivatives (especially
indican) may be found in large amounts in some patients, resulting from
bacterial breakdown of unabsorbed tryptophan in the intestines.
Diagnosis of Hartnup disorder is established by the intermittent
nature of symptoms and characteristic findings on the urine amino
acid analysis. When necessary, the diagnosis can be confirmed molecularly by SLC6A19 gene analysis.
Treatment with nicotinic acid or nicotinamide (50-­300 mg/day)
and a high-­protein diet results in a favorable response in symptomatic
patients with Hartnup disorder. Because of the intermittent nature of
the clinical manifestations, the efficacy of these treatments is difficult
to establish. Normal outcome for both the mother and fetus has been
reported in several affected women.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

825

Protein synthesis

NH2
Indole

CH2

Gut

CH

1

N
Liver

Indican
In vitro

Tryptophan
Tryptophanemia
Formylkynurenine

BH4

BH2

BH4*

2

AADC deficiency

Serotonin
3

Melatonin

MAO deficiency

5-OH-indoleacetic acid
(5-HIAA)

Indigo blue
Blue diaper
syndrome

5-OH-tryptophan

COOH

Nicotinic acid

Fig. 105.5 Pathways in the metabolism of tryptophan. BH4* indicates hyperphenylalaninemia caused by tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency (see Fig.
105.1). Enzymes: (1) Tryptophan hydroxylase, (2) aromatic l-­amino acid decarboxylase (AADC), (3) monoamine oxidase (MAO).

105.6 Isoleucine, Leucine, Valine, and
Related Organic Acidemias
Oleg A. Shchelochkov, Irini Manoli, and
Charles P. Venditti
The early steps in the degradation of the branched-­chain amino acids
(BCAAs)—isoleucine, leucine, and valine—are similar (see Fig. 105.4).
Under catabolic conditions, BCAAs in the muscle tissue undergo a
reversible reaction of transamination catalyzed by BCAA transaminase. α-­Ketoacids formed by this reaction then undergo an oxidative
decarboxylation step mediated by a branched-­chain α-­ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex. The deficiency of BCKDH results in
maple syrup urine disease, whereas the deficiency of enzymes mediating more distal reactions results in accumulation of enzyme-­specific
levels of organic acids excreted in the urine, thus giving those inborn
errors of metabolism the eponyms organic acidemias and organic
acidurias. These disorders typically cause metabolic acidosis, which
usually occurs in the first few days of life. Although most of the clinical findings are nonspecific, some manifestations may provide important clues to the nature of the enzyme deficiency. Figure 105.6 presents
an approach to infants suspected of having an organic acidemia. The
diagnosis is usually established by identifying and measuring specific
organic acids in body fluids (blood, urine), amino acid analysis (blood),
and identifying pathogenic variants in the respective gene.
Organic acidemias are not limited to defects in the catabolic pathways of BCAAs. Disorders causing accumulation of other organic acids
include those derived from lysine (see Chapter 105.14), disorders of the
γ-­glutamyl cycle (see Chapter 105.11), those associated with lactic acid
(see Chapter 107), and dicarboxylic acidemias associated with defective fatty acid degradation (see Chapter 106).

MAPLE SYRUP URINE DISEASE

Decarboxylation of leucine, isoleucine, and valine is accomplished
by a complex enzyme system (BCKDH) using thiamine (vitamin B1)
pyrophosphate as a coenzyme. This mitochondrial enzyme consists of
four subunits: E1α, E1β, E2, and E3. The E3 subunit is shared with two
other dehydrogenases: pyruvate dehydrogenase and α-­ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase. Deficiency of any of these subunits causes maple syrup
urine disease (MSUD) (see Fig. 105.4), a disorder named after the
sweet odor of maple syrup discerned from body fluids, especially cerumen, sweat, and urine. Clinical conditions caused by defects in E1α, E1β,
E2 and E3 are designated as MSUD type 1A, type 1B, type 2, and type
3, respectively. This classification, however, is not very helpful clinically
because the severity of clinical manifestations does not correlate with,
or correspond specifically to, any single enzyme subunit. An affected
infant with a type 1A defect can have clinical manifestations ranging

from relatively mild to very severe. A more useful classification, based
on clinical findings and response to thiamine administration, delineates five phenotypes of MSUD.

Classic Maple Syrup Urine Disease

Classic MSUD has the most severe clinical manifestations. The
BCKDH complex activity in this group varies between 0% and 2%
of controls. Patients with uncontrolled or poorly controlled disease
develop signs of acute encephalopathy. The mechanisms underlying
this life-­threatening complication are complex, but leucine and its
derivative, α-­ketoisocaproic acid, appear to be the key factors underlying acute encephalopathy. Elevated leucine competitively inhibits the
uptake of other amino acids by the LNAA transporter. Once taken up
by the brain tissue, leucine is metabolized by BCAA aminotransferase
to α-­ketoisocaproic acid, which disrupts metabolism of neurotransmitters and amino acids (glutamate, γ-­aminobutyric acid [GABA], glutamine, alanine, and aspartate). α-­Ketoisocaproic acid can reversibly
inhibit oxidative phosphorylation and result in cerebral lactic acidosis.
Collectively, these processes are detrimental to the normal function of
neurons and glia, clinically manifesting as encephalopathy and brain
edema, referred to as leucinosis. Affected infants who appear healthy
at birth develop poor feeding and vomiting in the first days of life.
Lethargy and coma may ensue within a few days. Physical examination
reveals hypertonicity and muscular rigidity with severe opisthotonos.
Periods of hypertonicity may alternate with bouts of flaccidity manifested as repetitive movements of the extremities (“boxing” and “bicycling”). Neurologic findings are often mistakenly thought to be caused
by generalized sepsis and meningitis. Cerebral edema may be present; seizures occur in most infants, and hypoglycemia is common. In
contrast to most hypoglycemic states, correction of the blood glucose
concentration does not improve the clinical condition. Aside from the
blood glucose and varying degrees of ketoacidosis, routine laboratory
findings are usually unremarkable. If left untreated, death can occur in
the first few weeks or months of life.
Diagnosis was classically suspected because of the peculiar odor of
maple syrup in urine, sweat, and cerumen. It is usually confirmed by
amino acid analysis showing marked elevations in plasma levels of leucine, isoleucine, valine, and alloisoleucine and a depressed level of alanine. Alloisoleucine is a stereoisomer of isoleucine not normally found
in blood and is the most sensitive and specific diagnostic marker for all
forms of MSUD. Leucine levels are usually higher than those of isoleucine and valine. Urine contains high levels of leucine, isoleucine, and
valine and their respective ketoacids. These ketoacids may be detected
qualitatively by adding a few drops of 2,4-­dinitrophenylhydrazine
reagent (0.1% in 0.1N HCl) to the urine; a yellow precipitate of
2,4-­dinitrophenylhydrazone is formed in a positive test. Neuroimaging during the acute state may show cerebral edema, which is most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

826 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Common features
Refusal to feed
Vomiting
Metabolic acidosis
Dehydration
Pancytopenia
Hypoglycemia

Ketosis

No skin manifestations

No ketosis or mild ketosis

Skin manifestations

Multiple carboxylase
deficiency*

No odor

Characteristic odor

1. Methylmalonic acidemia
2. Propionic acidemia
3. -Ketothiolase deficiency

1. MSUD*
2. Isovaleric acidemia*

1. 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaric
aciduria
2. Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
deficiencies
3. HMG-CoA synthetase
deficiency

Fig. 105.6 Clinical algorithmic approach to infants with organic acidemia. Asterisks indicate disorders in which patients have a characteristic odor
(see text and Table 105.2). MSUD, Maple syrup urine disease.

prominent in the cerebellum, dorsal brainstem, cerebral peduncle, and
internal capsule. After recovery from the acute state and with advancing age, hypomyelination and cerebral atrophy may be seen in neuroimaging of the brain.
Treatment of the acute state is aimed at hydration and rapid removal
of the BCAAs and their metabolites from the tissues and body fluids.
Uptake of leucine by the brain and accumulation of the downstream
metabolite, α-­ketoisocaproic acid, appear to be the key metabolic
events underlying the MSUD encephalopathy. Therefore MSUD management strategies focus on decreasing plasma leucine to control acute
and chronic manifestations of the disease.
Because renal clearance of leucine is low, hydration alone may not
produce a rapid improvement. Hemodialysis is the most effective mode
of therapy in critically ill infants and should be instituted promptly; significant decreases in plasma levels of leucine, isoleucine, and valine are
usually seen within 24 hours. Sufficient calories and nutrients should
be provided intravenously or orally as soon as possible to reverse the
patient’s catabolic state. Cerebral edema, if present, may require treatment with mannitol, diuretics (e.g., furosemide), or hypertonic saline.
Counterintuitively, supplementation with isoleucine and valine is
also needed to achieve adequate control of the plasma leucine level in
MSUD patients and to sustain the net protein synthesis in tissues. Judiciously administered isoleucine and valine will compete with leucine
for the LNAA transporter at the BBB, decrease leucine entry into the
CNS, and help in the prevention and treatment of leucine encephalopathy. Phenylbutyrate, a nitrogen scavenger used to treat hyperammonemia in urea cycle disorders, has been shown to activate the BCKDH
complex and lower BCAA levels, with promising results in a subset of
MSUD patients.
Treatment after recovery from the acute state requires a diet low in
BCAAs. Synthetic formulas devoid of leucine, isoleucine, and valine
are available commercially. Because these amino acids cannot be synthesized endogenously, age-­appropriate amounts of BCAAs should be
provided in the diet in the form of complete protein. To avoid essential
amino acid deficiencies, the amount should be titrated carefully by performing frequent analyses of plasma amino acids, with close attention
to plasma isoleucine, leucine, and valine levels. A clinical condition
resembling acrodermatitis enteropathica (see Chapter 691) occurs
in affected infants whose plasma isoleucine or valine had been over-­
restricted; the addition of isoleucine or valine, respectively, to the diet
will hasten the recovery of the skin rash. Patients with MSUD need to
remain on the diet for life. Liver transplantation is offered to patients

with classic MSUD, allowing some patients to lift protein restrictions
and improve metabolic control during intercurrent illnesses.
The long-­
term prognosis of affected children remains guarded.
Severe ketoacidosis, cerebral edema, and death may occur during any stressful situation such as infection or surgery, especially in
mid-­childhood. Cognitive and other neurologic deficits are common
sequelae.

Intermediate (Mild) Maple Syrup Urine Disease

Children with intermediate MSUD develop milder disease after the
neonatal period. Clinical manifestations are insidious and limited to
the CNS. Patients have mild to moderate intellectual disability with
or without seizures. They have the odor of maple syrup and excrete
moderate amounts of the BCAAs and their ketoacid derivatives in
the urine. Plasma concentrations of leucine, isoleucine, and valine are
moderately increased, whereas those of lactate and pyruvate tend to be
normal. These children are commonly diagnosed during an intercurrent illness, when signs and symptoms of classic MSUD may occur. The
dehydrogenase activity is 3–40% of the reference population. Because
patients with thiamine-­responsive MSUD usually have manifestations
similar to the mild form, a trial of thiamine therapy is recommended.
Diet therapy, similar to that of classic MSUD, is needed.

Intermittent Maple Syrup Urine Disease

In intermittent MSUD, seemingly normal children develop vomiting,
odor of maple syrup, ataxia, lethargy, and coma during any stress or
catabolic state such as infection or surgery. During these attacks, laboratory findings are indistinguishable from those of the classic form,
and death may occur. Treatment of the acute attack of intermittent
MSUD is similar to that of the classic form. After recovery, although a
normal diet can be tolerated, a low-­BCAA diet is recommended. The
BCKDH activity in patients with the intermittent form is higher than
in the classic form and may reach 40% of the control activity.

Thiamine-­Responsive Maple Syrup Urine Disease

Some children with mild or intermediate forms of MSUD who are
treated with high doses of thiamine show dramatic clinical and biochemical improvement. Although some respond to treatment with
thiamine at 10 mg/day, others may require as much as 100 mg/day for
at least 3 weeks before a favorable response is observed. These patients
also require a BCAA-­restricted diet. The enzymatic activity in these
patients can be up to 40% of the reference population.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
Maple Syrup Urine Disease Caused by Deficiency of
E3 Subunit (MSUD Type 3)

Although sometimes referred to as “maple syrup urine disease type 3,”
this very rare disorder leads to clinical and biochemical abnormalities that
encompass a wide range of mitochondrial reactions. The E3 subunit, dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase, is a component of the BCKDH complex,
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, and α-­ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex. Causative biallelic pathogenic variants in DLD that encode the
E3 dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase cause lactic acidosis, elevated pyruvate, and signs and symptoms similar to intermediate MSUD. Progressive neurologic impairment manifested by hypotonia and developmental
delay occurs after 2 months of age. Abnormal movements can progress to
ataxia or Leigh syndrome. Death may occur in early childhood.
Laboratory findings include persistent lactic acidosis with high levels
of plasma pyruvate and alanine. Plasma BCAA concentrations are moderately increased. Patients excrete large amounts of lactate, pyruvate,
α-­ketoglutarate, and the three branched-­chain ketoacids in their urine.
No effective treatment is available. BCAA-­restricted diets and treatment with high doses of thiamine, biotin, and lipoic acid have been
ineffective.

Genetics and the Prevalence of Maple
Syrup Urine Disease

Biallelic pathogenic variants in any of the following genes may result
in the clinical and biochemical manifestations of MSUD: BCKDHA
(encodes subunit E1α), BCKDHB (encodes subunit E1β), DBT (encodes
subunit E2), and DLD (encodes subunit E3). Genotype-­phenotype correlations are difficult to establish and are usually imprecise. The exception is thiamine-­responsive MSUD, shown to be caused by pathogenic
variants in DBT. Most patients are compound heterozygotes inheriting two different pathogenic alleles. Pathogenic variants in BCKDHA
(45%) and BCKDHB (35%) account for approximately 80% of cases.
Pathogenic variants in DBT are responsible for 20% of MSUD cases.
The prevalence is estimated at 1 in 185,000 live births. Classic MSUD
is more prevalent in the Old Order Mennonites in the United States, at
an estimated 1 in 380 live births. Affected patients in this population
are homozygous for a specific pathogenic variant (c.1312T>A) in the
BCKDHA-­encoding E1α subunit.
Early detection of MSUD is possible by universal newborn screening. In many cases, however, especially those with classic MSUD, the
infant may be very ill by the time screening results become available (see Chapter 104). Prenatal diagnosis has been accomplished by
enzyme assay of the cultured amniocytes, cultured chorionic villus tissue, or direct assay of samples of the chorionic villi and by identification of the known pathogenic variants in the affected gene.
Successful pregnancies have occurred in women with different
forms of MSUD. The teratogenic potential of leucine during pregnancy
is unknown. Tight control of isoleucine, leucine, and valine before and
during the pregnancy is important to minimize the risk of metabolic
decompensation and to optimize fetal nutrition. Mothers affected by
MSUD require close monitoring and meticulous management of nutrition, electrolytes, and fluids in the postpartum period.

BRANCHED-­CHAIN α-­KETOACID DEHYDROGENASE
KINASE DEFICIENCY

A defect in the regulation of BCKDH by BCKDH kinase (BCKDK), the
enzyme responsible for phosphorylation-­mediated inactivation of the
BCKDH complex, causes the reverse biochemical phenotype of MSUD.
Pathogenic variants in BCKDK decrease the negative regulation by the
kinase, resulting in uncontrolled degradation and depletion of isoleucine, leucine, and valine in plasma and the brain. Patients with BCKDK
deficiency present with low plasma concentrations of isoleucine, leucine,
and valine associated with autism, intellectual impairment, fine motor
coordination problems, and seizures.

BRANCHED-­CHAIN AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER
DEFICIENCY

Isoleucine, leucine, and valine are transported across the BBB mainly
by the heterodimeric LNAA transporter LAT1 encoded by SLC7A5. A

827

defect in LAT1 caused by pathogenic variants in SLC7A5 results in low
brain concentrations of isoleucine, leucine, and valine. Patients with
this defect may present similarly to BCKDK-­deficient patients, with
autism, microcephaly, gross motor delays, and in some cases, seizures.

ISOVALERIC ACIDEMIA

Isovaleric acidemia (IVA) is an autosomal recessive condition caused
by biallelic pathogenic variants in IVD resulting in the deficient activity
of isovaleryl–coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase (see Fig. 105.4). The
prevalence of IVA is estimated to range between 1 in 62,500 (in parts of
Germany) and 1 in 250,000 live births (in the United States). Decreased
or absent activity of isovaleryl-­CoA dehydrogenase results in impaired
leucine degradation. Accumulating derivatives of isovaleric acid, isovalerylcarnitine, isovalerylglycine, and 3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid can be
detected in body fluids and thus enable the biochemical diagnosis and
screening. Clinically, the course of IVA can be highly variable, ranging from essentially asymptomatic to severe. Introduction of newborn
screening and proactive management of IVA has changed the prognosis and clinical course. Older siblings of symptomatic newborn
infants have been reported with identical genotype and biochemical
abnormalities but without clinical manifestations, suggesting that presymptomatic detection of affected patients on the newborn screen can
improve clinical outcomes.
Patients with severe IVA can present with vomiting, severe acidosis,
hyperammonemia, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and bone marrow
suppression in infancy. Lethargy, convulsions, and coma may ensue,
and death may occur if proper therapy is not initiated. Vomiting may
be severe enough to suggest pyloric stenosis. The characteristic odor
of “sweaty feet” or “rancid cheese” may be present. Infants who survive this acute episode are at risk of developing episodes of metabolic
decompensation later in life. In the mild form without treatment, typical clinical manifestations of severe IVA (vomiting, lethargy, acidosis,
or coma) may not appear until the child is a few months or years old.
Acute episodes of metabolic decompensation may occur during a catabolic state, such as infection, dehydration, surgery, or high-­protein
intake. Acute episodes may be mistaken for diabetic ketoacidosis. Some
patients may experience acute and recurrent episodes of pancreatitis.
Laboratory findings during the acute attacks include ketoacidosis,
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and occasionally pancytopenia. Hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, and moderate to severe hyperammonemia may
be present in some patients. Increases in plasma ammonia may suggest
a defect in the urea cycle (see Chapter 105.12). In urea cycle defects, the
infant usually shows no significant ketoacidosis (see Fig. 105.6).
Diagnosis is established by demonstrating marked elevations of isovaleric acid metabolites (isovalerylglycine, 3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid) in
body fluids, especially urine. The main compound in plasma is isovalerylcarnitine (C5-­carnitine). C5-­carnitine can be measured in dried
blood spots, enabling universal newborn screening using tandem mass
spectrometry. The diagnosis can be confirmed by molecular analysis of
the IVD gene. In some patients with equivocal results, measurement of
the enzyme activity in cultured skin fibroblasts may be necessary.
Treatment of the acute attack is aimed at rehydration, reversal of the
catabolic state (by providing adequate calories orally or intravenously),
correction of metabolic acidosis, and facilitation of the isovaleric acid
excretion. l-­Carnitine (100 mg/kg/day orally) also increases removal
of isovaleric acid by forming isovalerylcarnitine, which is excreted
in the urine. Because isovalerylglycine has a high urinary clearance,
some centers recommend glycine supplementation (250 mg/kg/day) to
enhance the formation of isovalerylglycine. Temporary restriction of
protein intake (<24 hours) may be beneficial in some cases. In patients
with significant hyperammonemia (blood ammonia >200 μmol/L),
measures that reduce blood ammonia should be employed (see Chapter 105.12). Renal replacement therapy may be needed if the previously
described measures fail to produce significant clinical and biochemical improvement. Long-­term management of IVA patients requires
restriction of protein according to age-­appropriate intake (recommended dietary allowance of protein). Patients benefit from carnitine
supplementation with or without glycine. Normal development can be
achieved with early and proper treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

828 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Prenatal diagnosis can be accomplished using IVD gene analysis if causative pathogenic variants are known or, less frequently, by
using an enzyme assay of cultured amniocytes. Successful pregnancies with favorable outcomes have been reported. Universal newborn
screening of IVA is used in the United States and other countries (see
Chapter 104).

MULTIPLE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCIES (DEFECTS
OF THE BIOTIN CYCLE)

Biotin is a water-­soluble vitamin that serves as a cofactor for four
carboxylase enzymes in humans: pyruvate carboxylase, acetyl-­CoA
carboxylase, propionyl-­CoA carboxylase, and 3-­methylcrotonyl-­CoA
carboxylase. The latter two are involved in the catabolic pathways of
leucine, isoleucine, and valine (see Fig. 105.4).
Most dietary biotin is bound to proteins. Free biotin is generated in
the intestine by the action of digestive enzymes, by intestinal bacteria,
and perhaps by biotinidase. Biotinidase, found in serum and most tissues, is also essential for the recycling of biotin in the body by releasing
it from the apoenzymes (carboxylases; see Fig. 105.4). Free biotin must
form a covalent bond with the apocarboxylases to produce the activated enzyme (holocarboxylase). This binding is catalyzed by holocarboxylase synthetase. Deficiencies either in holocarboxylase synthetase
or in biotinidase result in the impaired catalytic activity of carboxylases
and organic acidemias.

Holocarboxylase Synthetase Deficiency

Infants with this rare autosomal recessive disorder become symptomatic in the first few weeks of life. Symptoms may appear as early as a
few hours after birth to as late as 8 years of age. Clinically, shortly after
birth, affected infants develop breathing difficulties (tachypnea and
apnea). Feeding problems, vomiting, and hypotonia are also usually
present. If the condition remains untreated, generalized erythematous
rash with exfoliation and alopecia, failure to thrive, irritability, seizures,
lethargy, and even coma may occur. Developmental delay is common.
Immune deficiency manifests with susceptibility to infection. Urine
may have a peculiar odor, which has been described “tomcat urine.”
The rash, when present, helps to differentiate this condition from other
organic acidemias (see Fig. 105.6).
Laboratory findings include metabolic acidosis, ketosis, hyperammonemia, and the presence of a variety of organic acids and their conjugates (lactic acid, 3-­methylcrotonic acid, 3-­methylcrotonylglycine,
tiglylglycine, 3-­
OH-­
propionic acid, methylcitric acid, and
3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid) in body fluids. Diagnosis is confirmed by
identification of pathogenic variants in HLCS or by the enzyme assay
in lymphocytes or cultured fibroblasts. Most pathogenic variants
cause the enzyme to have an increased Km (Michaelis-­Menten dissociation constant) for biotin; the enzyme activity in such patients can
be restored by the administration of large doses of biotin. Newborn
screening can identify holocarboxylase synthetase–deficient infants by
detecting elevated C5-­OH-­carnitine on tandem mass spectrometry. In
these infants, biotinidase enzymatic assay would be normal.
Treatment with biotin (10-­20 mg/day orally) usually results in an
improvement in clinical manifestations and biochemical abnormalities. Early diagnosis and treatment are critical to prevent irreversible
neurologic damage. In some patients, complete resolution may not be
achieved even with large doses (up to 60 mg/day) of biotin.
Prenatal diagnosis can be accomplished by prenatal molecular
analysis of known pathogenic variants in HLCS or by assaying enzyme
activity in cultured amniotic cells. Pregnant mothers who had previous
offspring with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency have been treated
with biotin late in pregnancy. Affected infants were normal at birth, but
the efficacy of prenatal treatment remains unclear.

Biotinidase Deficiency

Impaired biotinidase activity results in biotin deficiency. Affected
infants may develop clinical manifestations similar to those seen in
infants with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. Unlike the latter, however, symptoms tend to appear later, when the child is several months or years old. The delay in onset of symptoms presumably

results from the availability of free biotin derived from the mother or
the diet. Clinical manifestations are mostly confined to the skin and
the nervous system. Without treatment, atopic or seborrheic dermatitis, candidiasis, alopecia, ataxia, seizures (usually myoclonic), hypotonia, developmental delay, optic nerve atrophy, sensorineural hearing
loss, and immunodeficiency resulting from impaired T-­cell function
may occur. A small number of children with intractable seborrheic dermatitis and partial (15–30% activity) biotinidase deficiency, in whom
the dermatitis resolved with biotin therapy, have been reported; these
children were otherwise asymptomatic. Asymptomatic children and
adults with this enzyme deficiency have been identified in screening
programs. Most of these individuals have been shown to have partial
biotinidase deficiency. With universal newborn screening leading to
early identification and treatment of the affected patients, the clinical
disease should become extinct.
Laboratory findings and the pattern of organic acids in body fluids
resemble those associated with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency.
Diagnosis can be established by measurement of the enzyme activity
in the serum and confirmed by identifying biallelic pathogenic variants in BTD. Treatment with free biotin (5-­20 mg/day) results in a dramatic clinical and biochemical improvement. Treatment with biotin is
also suggested for individuals with partial biotinidase deficiency. The
prevalence of this autosomal recessive disorder is estimated to be 1 in
60,000 live births. Prenatal diagnosis is possible by identification of
known pathogenic variants in BTD or, less frequently, by the measurement of the enzyme activity in the amniotic cells, although in practice,
a prenatal approach is rarely used.

Multiple Carboxylase Deficiency Caused by Acquired
Biotin Deficiency

Acquired deficiency of biotin may occur in infants receiving total parenteral nutrition without added biotin, in patients with prolonged use
of antiepileptic drugs (phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, carbamazepine), and in children with short bowel syndrome or chronic diarrhea who are receiving formulas low in biotin. Excessive ingestion of
raw eggs may also cause biotin deficiency because the protein avidin in
egg white binds biotin, decreasing its absorption. Infants with acquired
biotin deficiency may develop dermatitis, alopecia, and candidal skin
infections. This condition readily responds to treatment with oral
biotin.

3-­METHYLCROTONYL-­COA CARBOXYLASE
DEFICIENCY

This enzyme is one of the four carboxylases requiring biotin as a cofactor (see Fig. 105.4). An isolated deficiency of this enzyme must be differentiated from disorders of biotin metabolism (multiple carboxylase
deficiency), which causes diminished activity of all four carboxylases
(see earlier). 3-­Methylcrotonyl-­CoA carboxylase (3-­MCC) is a heteromeric enzyme consisting of α (biotin containing) and β subunits,
encoded by the genes MCCC1 and MCCC2, respectively. 3-­MCC deficiency can be detected in the newborn period by identifying elevated
3-­hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (C5-­OH) in dried blood spots. Universal
newborn screening using tandem mass spectrometry has identified an
unexpectedly high number of infants with 3-­MCC deficiency, with its
prevalence ranging between 1 in 2,400 and 1 in 68,000.
Clinical manifestations are highly variable, ranging from completely asymptomatic adults (including mothers of affected newborn
infants), to children presenting with developmental delay without episodes of metabolic decompensation, to patients with seizures, hyperammonemia, and metabolic acidosis. Rarely, infants who are affected by
severe 3-­MCC deficiency may appear healthy at birth but later develop
acute episodes of vomiting, hypotonia, lethargy, and convulsions after
a minor infection, in some cases progressing to life-­threatening complications (e.g., Reye syndrome, coma). In patients prone to developing
these symptoms, the onset is usually between 3 weeks and 3 years of
age. Among infants identified through newborn screening, 85–90% of
children remain apparently asymptomatic. The reason for differences
in outcomes is unknown. None of the symptoms reported so far could
be clearly attributed to the degree of enzyme deficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
Laboratory findings during acute episodes include mild to moderate metabolic acidosis, ketosis, hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and elevated serum transaminase levels. Large amounts of
3-­hydroxyisovalerate and 3-­methylcrotonylglycine are found in the
urine. Urinary excretion of 3-­methylcrotonate is usually not detected
in this condition because the accumulated 3-­methylcrotonyl-­CoA is
converted to 3-­hydroxyisovalerate. The plasma acylcarnitine profile
shows elevated 3-­
hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (C5-­
OH). Severe secondary carnitine deficiency is common. 3-­MCC deficiency should
be differentiated biochemically from multiple carboxylase deficiency
(see earlier), in which, in addition to 3-­hydroxyisovalerate, lactate and
metabolites of propionic acid are also present. Diagnosis may be confirmed by molecular analysis of MCCC1 and MCCC2 or by measurement of the enzyme activity in cultured fibroblasts. Documentation of
normal activities of other carboxylases is necessary to rule out multiple
carboxylase deficiency.
Treatment of acute episodes is similar to that of isovaleric acidemia
(see earlier). Hydration and measures to correct both hypoglycemia
and severe metabolic acidosis by infusing glucose and sodium bicarbonate should be instituted promptly. Secondary carnitine deficiency,
seen in up to 50% of patients, can be corrected with l-­carnitine supplementation. For symptomatic patients, some centers recommend
keeping protein intake at the recommended dietary allowance in conjunction with the oral administration of l-­carnitine and the proactive
management of catabolic states. Normal physiologic growth and development are expected in most patients.
3-­MCC deficiency is an autosomal recessive condition. Biallelic
pathogenic variants in either MCCC1 or MCCC2 result in the enzyme
deficiency with overlapping clinical features.

3-­METHYLGLUTACONIC ACIDURIAS

The 3-­methylglutaconic acidurias comprise a heterogeneous group
of metabolic disorders characterized by excessive excretion of
3-­methylglutaconic acid in the urine (Table 105.2). Other metabolites found in 3-­
methylglutaconic aciduria patients may include
3-­methylglutaric acid and 3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid. The current classification distinguishes between primary and secondary forms. Primary
3-­methylglutaconic aciduria is caused by the deficiency of mitochondrial 3-­
methylglutaconyl-­
CoA hydratase (see Fig. 105.4), formerly
3-­
methylglutaconic aciduria type I. Secondary 3-­methylglutaconic
aciduria can be further classified based on the underlying mechanism (e.g., defective phospholipid remodeling versus dysfunction of
mitochondrial membrane) or now the more preferred classification
based on the underlying molecular cause. Known causes of secondary 3-­
methylglutaconic aciduria include the X-­
linked TAZ-­related
syndrome (Barth syndrome), OPA3-­related 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria (Costeff syndrome), SERAC1-­related syndrome (MEGDEL syndrome), TMEM70-­related syndrome, and DNAJC19-­related syndrome
(DCMA syndrome).
Significant and persistent 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria with negative molecular evaluation for known genetic causes represents a heterogeneous group called 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria not otherwise
specified awaiting further molecular characterization. Primary and
secondary 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria should be distinguished from
mild and transient urinary elevations of 3-­methylglutaconic acid seen
in patients affected by other metabolic disorders or liver dysfunction,
such as mitochondrial disorders of diverse etiology.

3-­Methylglutaconyl-­CoA Hydratase Deficiency

Two main clinical presentations have been described for
3-­methylglutaconyl-­CoA hydratase deficiency, an autosomal recessive
disorder (see Fig. 105.4). In the childhood form, nonspecific neurodevelopmental findings such as speech delay or regression, choreoathetoid movements, optic nerve atrophy, and mild psychomotor delay
may be present. Metabolic acidosis may occur during a catabolic state.
In the adulthood form, affected individuals may remain asymptomatic until the second or third decade of life, when a clinical picture of
slowly progressing leukoencephalopathy with optic nerve atrophy, dysarthria, ataxia, spasticity, and dementia occurs. Brain MRI typically

829

shows white matter abnormalities, which may precede the appearance of clinical symptoms by years. Asymptomatic pediatric and adult
patients have also been reported. Patients excrete large amounts of
3-­methylglutaconic acid and moderate amounts of 3-­hydroxyisovaleric
and 3-­methylglutaric acids in urine. Treatment with l-­carnitine may
help some patients. The effectiveness of a low-­leucine diet has not been
established. The condition is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in
AUH and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.

Barth Syndrome (Tafazzin-­Related Disorder)

This X-­linked condition is caused by a deficiency of tafazzin, a mitochondrial protein, encoded by the TAFAZZIN gene. This enzyme is
necessary for remodeling of immature cardiolipin into its mature form.
Cardiolipin, a mitochondrial phospholipid, is critical for the integrity
of the inner mitochondrial membrane. Clinical manifestations of
Barth syndrome usually begin in the first year of life in a male infant
and include cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, growth restriction, hypoglycemia, and mild to severe neutropenia. The onset of clinical manifestations may be as late as adulthood, but most affected individuals
become symptomatic by adolescence. If patients survive infancy, relative improvement may occur with advancing age. Cognitive development is usually normal, although delayed motor function and learning
disabilities occur.
Laboratory findings include mild to moderate increases in
urinary excretion of 3-­
methylglutaconic, 3-­
methylglutaric, and
2-­ethylhydracrylic acids. Unlike primary 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria
(type I), urinary excretion of 3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid is not elevated.
The activity of the enzyme 3-­methylglutaconyl-­CoA hydratase is normal. Neutropenia is a common finding. Lactic acidosis, hypoglycemia,
low serum cholesterol, low prealbumin, and abnormal mitochondrial
ultrastructure are also common. Total cardiolipin and subclasses of
cardiolipin are very low in skin fibroblast cultures from these patients.
The monolysocardiolipin/cardiolipin ratio in cultured fibroblast is useful for establishing the diagnosis in patients with negative or equivocal
molecular results. Because of its nonspecific presentation, the condition is likely underdiagnosed and underreported.
The condition is inherited in an X-­linked recessive manner. The
gene (TAFAZZIN) has been mapped to chromosome Xq28. The modest 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria seen in Barth syndrome is thought to
be related to the defect in the mitochondrial membrane, causing the
leakage of this organic acid. Gene-­specific treatment is not available.
Patients with an unsatisfactory response to medical management of
cardiomyopathy may benefit from cardiac transplantation. Daily aspirin to reduce the risk of strokes has been described. Regular use of
granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-­CSF) can help limit recurrent
infections in patients with neutropenia.

OPA3-­Related 3-­Methylglutaconic Aciduria
(Costeff Syndrome)

Clinical manifestations in patients with Costeff syndrome include
early-­onset optic nerve atrophy and later development of choreoathetoid movements, spasticity, ataxia, dysarthria, and cognitive impairment. Patients excrete moderate amounts of 3-­methylglutaconic and
3-­methylglutaric acids. Activity of the enzyme 3-­methylglutaconyl-­CoA
hydratase is normal. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Pathogenic variants in OPA3 are thought to cause electron
transport chain dysfunction. Treatment is supportive.

Disorders Formerly Described as 3-­Methylglutaconic
Aciduria Type IV

3-­Methylglutaconic aciduria type IV represents a group of disorders
with a diverse genetic etiology. Two disorders in this group have been
linked to specific molecular etiology, whereas other conditions are still
awaiting the discovery of underlying molecular defects.
MEGDEL syndrome (3-­methylglutaconic aciduria with deafness,
encephalopathy, and Leigh-­like) is an autosomal recessive disorder
caused by pathogenic variants in SERAC1. Affected patients experience
optic nerve atrophy, progressive deafness, dystonia, feeding difficulty
with dysphagia, spasticity, and basal ganglia injury similar to patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

830 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 105.2  Primary and Select Secondary 3-­Methylglutaconic Acidurias
GROUP

DISORDER

GENE
(CHROMOSOME)

PREVIOUS
CLASSIFICATION

DISEASE
MECHANISM

CLINICAL DESCRIPTION

Primary
3-­methylglutaconic
aciduria

3-­Methylglutaconyl-­CoA
hydratase deficiency

AUH (9q22.31)

Type I

Enzyme deficiency
in the leucine
degradation
pathway

Depending on age,
variable presentation
is seen ranging from
younger asymptomatic
patients to older
patients with progressive
leukoencephalopathy

Secondary
3-­methylglutaconic
acidurias

Barth syndrome

TAZ (Xq28)

Type II

Defective
phospholipid
remodeling

X-­linked inheritance,
cardiomyopathy,
endocardial fibroelastosis,
proximal myopathy, failure
to thrive, neutropenia,
dysmorphic findings

Costeff syndrome

OPA3 (19q13.32)

Type III

Mitochondrial
membrane
dysfunction

Progressive optic nerve
atrophy, chorea, spastic
paraparesis, cognitive
impairment

MEGDEL syndrome

SERAC1 (6q25.3)

Type IV

Defective
phospholipid
remodeling

Progressive deafness,
dystonia, spasticity, basal
ganglia changes

TMEM70-­related disorder

TMEM70 (8q21.11)

Type IV

Mitochondrial
membrane
dysfunction

Developmental delay,
failure to thrive, metabolic
decompensations,
microcephaly,
cardiomyopathy,
dysmorphic findings

3-­Methylglutaconic
aciduria, not otherwise
specified

Unknown

Type IV

Unknown

Variable presentation

DCMA syndrome

DNAJC19
(3q26.33)

Type V

Mitochondrial
membrane
dysfunction

Cardiomyopathy, ataxia,
optic nerve atrophy,
failure to thrive

DCMA, Dilated cardiomyopathy ataxia syndrome; MEGDEL, 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria deafness, encephalopathy, Leigh-­like syndrome.

with Leigh syndrome. Laboratory evaluation reveals elevated urinary
3-­methylglutaconic, high plasma lactate and alanine. Treatment is
symptomatic.
TMEM70-­related disorder is also inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. Biallelic pathogenic variants in TMEM70 result in a mitochondrial complex V deficiency, although the exact molecular mechanism of
disease is unknown. Clinical manifestations include developmental delay,
developmental regression, Reye syndrome–like episodes, intellectual disability, failure to thrive, microcephaly, cardiomyopathy, and dysmorphic
findings. Patients are prone to metabolic decompensation, characterized
by hyperammonemia (up to 900 μmol/L) and lactic acidosis, which are
more common in the first year of life. Acute hyperammonemic episodes
are treated with intravenous glucose, lipid emulsion, ammonia-­scavenging
drugs, and occasionally hemodialysis. Long-­term therapy that has been
described includes l-­carnitine, coenzyme Q10, and bicarbonate substitution (e.g., citric acid/sodium citrate). Patients require interval echocardiographic and electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring to enable early
diagnosis and management of cardiomyopathy.

DCMA Syndrome (DNAJC19-­Related Syndrome,
3-­Methylglutaconic Aciduria Type V)

DCMA syndrome (dilated cardiomyopathy with ataxia) is an autosomal
recessive disorder identified in patients of Canadian Dariusleut Hutterite
ancestry in the Great Plains of North America. As the disorder’s abbreviated name suggests, affected individuals present with dilated cardiomyopathy, long QTc interval, and CNS involvement. Neurologic symptoms
include intellectual disability, cerebellar involvement, and optic atrophy.
Growth is affected in all patients. Intrauterine growth restriction is seen
in up to 50% of patients. Cryptorchidism and hypospadias are frequent

findings in affected boys. Urine organic acid assay reveals increased
3-­methylglutaconic acid and 3-­methylglutaric acid. Biallelic pathogenic
variants in DNAJC19 are the underlying cause of DCMA syndrome. Treatment is symptomatic. Interval echocardiography and ECG can prospectively identify patients requiring treatment for cardiomyopathy and long
QTc interval.

β-­KETOTHIOLASE (3-­OXOTHIOLASE) DEFICIENCY
(MITOCHONDRIAL ACETOACETYL-­COA THIOLASE
[T2] DEFICIENCY)

The bidirectional reaction catalyzed by mitochondrial β-­ketothiolase is
involved in the final steps of both isoleucine catabolism and ketolysis. In the
isoleucine catabolic pathway, the enzyme cleaves 2-­methylacetoacetyl-­CoA
into propionyl-­CoA and acetyl-­CoA (see Fig. 105.4). In the fatty acid oxidation pathway, the enzyme generates two moles of acetyl-­CoA from one
mole of acetoacetyl-­CoA (Fig. 105.7). The same enzyme can synthesize
2-­methylacetoacetate-­CoA and acetoacetyl-­CoA in the reverse direction.
The hallmark of this disorder is ketoacidosis, often triggered by infections,
prolonged fasting, and large protein load. The mechanism of ketosis in this
condition is incompletely understood, because in this enzyme deficiency
one would expect impaired ketone formation (see Fig. 105.7). It is postulated that excess acetoacetyl-­CoA produced from other sources can be used
as a substrate for 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­CoA synthesis in the liver.
Clinical manifestations are quite variable, ranging from mild cases
showing normal development to severe episodes of acidosis starting
in the first year of life causing severe cognitive impairment. Unless
identified on the newborn screening, affected children present with
intermittent episodes of unexplained ketoacidosis. These episodes
usually occur after an intercurrent infection and respond promptly to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

Ketogenic
Amino acids

Fatty acids

831

Glucose
3-Hydroxybutyrate
8

Cytosolic
thiolase
deficiency

1

4

CoASH
Acetoacetyl-CoA
Acetyl-CoA

5
Mevalonic acid

3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA
(HMG-CoA)
3-HMG aciduria

Acetoacetate

β-Ketothiolase
deficiency

CoASH
Acetoacetyl-CoA
3-HMG-CoA synthase
Acetyl-CoA
deficiency
2

3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA
(HMG-CoA)

6

Acetyl CoA  Acetyl CoA

Succinyl-CoA
SCOT
deficiency

CoASH

Acetyl-CoA  Acetyl-CoA

CoA
Krebs cycle

8

5-Phosphomevalonic acid

Acetone

Succinate

1

3
Acetoacetate

Mevalonate
kinase deficiency

7

Acetoacetyl-CoA
Blood

Acetyl-CoA  Acetyl-CoA

via citrate

3-Hydroxybutyrate

CO2

H2O

Mitochondrial membrane
Cytosol

Cholesterol

Peripheral tissue

Mitochondrial membrane
Kidneys

Cytosol
Liver

Urine
Lungs
Air

Fig. 105.7 Formation (liver) and metabolism (peripheral tissues) of ketone bodies and cholesterol synthesis. Enzymes: (1) Mitochondrial acetoa-

cetyl CoA thiolase, (2) HMG-­CoA synthase, (3) HMG-­CoA lyase, (4) cytosolic acetoacetyl-­CoA thiolase, (5) HMG-­CoA reductase, (6) mevalonic kinase,
(7) succinyl CoA:3-­ketoacid CoA transferase (SCOT), (8) 3-­hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase.

intravenous fluids and bicarbonate therapy. Mild to moderate hyperammonemia may also be present during attacks. Both hypoglycemia
and hyperglycemia have been reported in isolated cases. The child may
be completely asymptomatic between episodes and may tolerate a normal protein diet. Cognitive development is normal in most children.
The episodes may be misdiagnosed as salicylate poisoning because of
the similarity of the clinical findings and the interference of elevated
blood levels of acetoacetate with the colorimetric assay for salicylate.
Laboratory findings during the acute attack include ketoacidosis
and hyperammonemia. Findings of ketones in the urine and hyperglycemia may be interpreted as diabetic ketoacidosis, and a high index of
suspicion is needed to suspect this metabolic disorder. Urine organic
acid assay can provide clues leading to a correct diagnosis. Urine contains large amounts of 2-­methylacetoacetate and its decarboxylated
products butanone, 2-­
methyl-­
3-­
hydroxybutyrate, and tiglylglycine.
Lower concentrations of urinary metabolites can be seen when patients
are stable. Mild hyperglycinemia may also be present. The plasma
acylcarnitine profile shows elevations of C5:1 and C5-­OH carnitines,
although these metabolites can normalize between catabolic episodes.
Absent or minimal elevations of C5:1 and C5-­OH carnitines can result
in false-­negative results on the newborn screening of affected infants
who were clinically well at the time of blood collection. The clinical
and biochemical findings should be differentiated from those seen with
propionic and methylmalonic acidemias (see later).
Treatment of acute episodes includes hydration. Recalcitrant metabolic acidosis can be severe enough to require infusion of bicarbonate. A 10% glucose solution with the appropriate electrolytes is used to
suppress protein catabolism, lipolysis, and ketogenesis. Restriction of
protein intake to age-­appropriate physiologic requirements is recommended for long-­term therapy. Oral l-­carnitine (50-­100 mg/kg/day) is
also recommended to prevent possible secondary carnitine deficiency.
The long-­term prognosis for achieving a normal quality of life seems

very favorable. Successful pregnancy with a normal outcome has been
reported.
β-­Ketothiolase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner and may be more prevalent than appreciated. Diagnosis may
be confirmed by molecular analysis of the ACAT1 gene or using an
enzyme assay of leukocytes or cultured fibroblasts.

CYTOSOLIC ACETOACETYL-­COA THIOLASE
DEFICIENCY

This enzyme catalyzes the cytosolic production of acetoacetyl-­CoA
from two moles of acetyl-­CoA (see Fig. 105.7). Cytosolic acetoacetyl-­
CoA is the precursor of hepatic cholesterol synthesis. Cytosolic
acetoacetyl-­CoA thiolase (encoded by ACAT2) should be differentiated from the mitochondrial thiolase (see earlier and Fig. 105.4). Clinical manifestations in patients with this very rare enzyme deficiency
have been incompletely characterized. Patients may present with
severe progressive developmental delay, hypotonia, and choreoathetoid movements in the first few months of life. Laboratory findings
are nonspecific; elevated levels of lactate, pyruvate, acetoacetate, and
3-­hydroxybutyrate may be found in blood and urine. One patient had
normal levels of acetoacetate and 3-­hydroxybutyrate. Diagnosis can
be aided by demonstrating a deficiency in cytosolic thiolase activity in
liver biopsy or in cultured fibroblasts or by DNA analysis of ACAT2. No
effective treatment has been described, although a low-­fat diet helped
to diminish ketosis in one patient.

MITOCHONDRIAL 3-­HYDROXY-­
3-­METHYLGLUTARYL-­COA SYNTHASE DEFICIENCY

3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl (HMG)-­CoA synthase (mitochondrial
or type 2) catalyzes synthesis of 3-­HMG-­CoA from acetoacetyl-­CoA
and acetyl-­CoA in the mitochondria. This is a critical step in ketone
body synthesis in the liver (see Fig. 105.7). Only a few patients with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

832 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
deficiency of this enzyme have been reported. The principal clinical
syndrome is hypoketotic hypoglycemia triggered by physiologic stress,
such as infections or fasting. Age at presentation has ranged from
infancy to 6 years. Children tend to be asymptomatic before these
episodes and with appropriate management can remain stable after
the recovery (except for mild hepatomegaly with fatty infiltration).
Future episodes can be prevented by avoiding prolonged fasting during ensuing intercurrent illnesses. Hepatomegaly is the most consistent physical finding in these patients. Laboratory findings include
hypoglycemia, acidosis with mild or no ketosis, elevated levels in liver
function tests, and massive dicarboxylic aciduria. The clinical and laboratory findings may be confused with fatty acid metabolism defects
(see Chapter 104). In contrast to the latter, in patients with HMG-­CoA
synthase deficiency, the blood concentrations of acylcarnitine conjugates are negative for acylcarnitine findings characteristic of fatty acid
oxidation disorders. Treatment of the secondary carnitine deficiency
with l-­carnitine supplementation can result in elevated plasma acetylcarnitine (C2-­carnitine), likely reflecting intracellular accumulation
of acetyl-­CoA.
Treatment consists of provision of adequate calories and avoidance
of prolonged periods of fasting. No dietary protein restriction was
needed.
The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and
is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in HMGCS2. The condition
should be considered in any child with fasting hypoketotic hypoglycemia and may be more common than appreciated.

3-­HYDROXY-­3-­METHYLGLUTARYL-­COA LYASE
DEFICIENCY (3-­HYDROXY-­3-­METHYLGLUTARIC
ACIDURIA)

3-­HMG-­CoA lyase (encoded by HMGCL) catalyzes the cleavage of
3-­HMG-­CoA to acetoacetate, a rate-­limiting enzyme for ketogenesis
(see Fig. 105.4 and Fig. 105.7). The deficiency of this enzyme is a rare
disorder seen with increased frequency in Saudi Arabia, the Iberian
Peninsula, and in Brazil in patients of Portuguese ancestry. Clinically,
approximately 30% develop symptoms in the first few days of life, and
>60% of patients become symptomatic between 3 and 11 months of
age. Infrequently, patients may remain asymptomatic until adolescence. With the addition of 3-­HMG-­CoA lyase deficiency to the newborn screening using C5-­OH-­carnitine, many infants are identified
presymptomatically in the newborn period. Similar to 3-­HMG-­CoA
synthase deficiency, patients affected by 3-­HMG-­CoA lyase deficiency
may present with acute hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Episodes of vomiting, severe hypoglycemia, hypotonia, acidosis with mild or no ketosis,
and dehydration may rapidly lead to lethargy, ataxia, and coma. These
episodes often occur during a catabolic state such as prolonged fasting
or an intercurrent infection. Hepatomegaly is common. These manifestations may be mistaken for Reye syndrome or fatty acid oxidation
defects such as medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
Long-­term complications can include dilated cardiomyopathy, hepatic
steatosis, and pancreatitis. Development can be normal, but intellectual
disability and seizures with abnormalities in the white matter seen on
brain MRI have been observed in patients after prolonged episodes of
hypoglycemia.
Laboratory findings include hypoglycemia, moderate to severe
hyperammonemia, and acidosis. There is mild or no ketosis (see
Fig. 105.7). Urinary excretion of 3-­
hydroxy-­
3-­
methylglutaric
acid and other proximal intermediate metabolites of leucine
catabolism (3-­
methylglutaric acid, 3-­
methylglutaconic acid, and
3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid) is markedly increased, causing the urine to
smell like “cat’s urine.” Glutaric and dicarboxylic acids may also be
increased in urine during acute attacks. Secondary carnitine deficiency
is common. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 3-­HMG-­CoA lyase is encoded by the gene HMGCL. Diagnosis
may be confirmed by molecular analysis of HMGCL or by enzyme
assay in cultured fibroblasts, leukocytes, or liver specimens. Prenatal
diagnosis is possible by molecular DNA analysis if the familial pathogenic variants are known or by enzymatic assay of the cultured amniocytes or a chorionic villi biopsy.

Treatment of acute episodes includes hydration, infusion of glucose
to control hypoglycemia, provision of adequate calories, and administration of bicarbonate to correct acidosis. Hyperammonemia should
be treated promptly (see Chapter 105.12). Dialysis may be required in
patients with severe recalcitrant hyperammonemia. Restriction of protein and fat intake can be considered for long-­term management. Oral
administration of l-­carnitine (50-­100 mg/kg/day) prevents secondary
carnitine deficiency. Prolonged fasting should be avoided.

SUCCINYL-­COA:3-­OXOACID-­COA TRANSFERASE
DEFICIENCY

Succinyl-­CoA:3-­oxoacid-­CoA transferase (SCOT) deficiency and β-­
ketothiolase deficiency collectively are referred to as ketone utilization disorders. SCOT participates in the conversion of ketone bodies
(acetoacetate and 3-­hydroxybutyrate) generated in liver mitochondria
into acetoacetyl-­CoA in the nonhepatic tissues (see Fig. 105.7). A deficiency of this enzyme results in the accumulation of ketone bodies,
ketoacidosis, increased use of glucose, and hypoglycemia. During fasting, patients tend to have a proportional elevation of plasma free fatty
acids. The condition may be more common than recognized because
many cases tend to be mild and remain undiagnosed. SCOT deficiency
can be distinguished from β-­ketothiolase deficiency by the absence of
2-­methylacetoacetate, 2-­methyl-­3-­hydroxybutyrate, and tiglylglycine,
characteristic of the latter disorder. Plasma acylcarnitine profile tends
to show no specific abnormalities.
A common clinical presentation is an acute episode of severe ketoacidosis in an infant who had been growing and developing normally.
About half the patients become symptomatic in the first weeks of life,
and practically all become symptomatic before 2 years of age. The acute
episode is often precipitated by a catabolic state triggered by an infection or prolonged fasting. Without treatment, the ketoacidotic episode
can result in death. A chronic subclinical ketosis may persist between
the attacks. Development is usually normal, although severe and
recurrent episodes of ketoacidosis and hypoglycemia can predispose
patients to neurocognitive impairment.
Laboratory findings during the acute episode are nonspecific and
include metabolic acidosis and ketonuria with high levels of acetoacetate and 3-­hydroxybutyrate in blood and urine. No other organic acids
are found in the blood or in the urine. Blood glucose levels are usually
normal, but hypoglycemia has been reported in some affected newborn
infants with severe ketoacidosis. Plasma amino acids and the plasma
acylcarnitine profile are usually normal. Severe SCOT deficiency can
be accompanied by ketosis even when patients are clinically stable. This
condition should be considered in any infant with unexplained bouts
of ketoacidosis. SCOT deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder.
Diagnosis can be established by molecular analysis of OXCT1 or by
demonstrating a deficiency of enzyme activity in cultured fibroblasts.
Treatment of acute episodes consists of rehydration with solutions
containing dextrose, correction of acidosis, and the provision of a diet
adequate in calories. Long-­term treatment should include a high-­
carbohydrate diet and avoidance of prolonged fasting and administration of dextrose before anticipated or during established catabolic
states.

MEVALONATE KINASE DEFICIENCY

Mevalonic acid, an intermediate metabolite of cholesterol synthesis, is
converted to 5-­phosphomevalonic acid by the action of the enzyme
mevalonate kinase (MVK) (see Fig. 105.7). MVK deficiency presents
with a range of symptoms. Mevalonic aciduria occupies the more severe
end of the spectrum, whereas hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome
represents the milder form of the underlying enzyme defect. Both disorders are accompanied by recurrent fever, gastrointestinal symptoms,
mucocutaneous manifestations, and lymphadenopathy. Patients with
mevalonic aciduria also show growth retardation and nervous system
involvement.

Mevalonic Aciduria

Clinical manifestations include failure to thrive, growth restriction,
intellectual disability, hypotonia, ataxia, myopathy, hepatosplenomegaly,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
cataracts, and facial dysmorphisms (dolichocephaly, frontal bossing,
low-­set ears, downward slanting of eyes, long eyelashes). Most patients
experience recurrent crises characterized by fever, vomiting, diarrhea,
hepatosplenomegaly, arthralgia, lymphadenopathy, edema, and morbilliform rash. These episodes typically last 2-­7 days and recur up to 25
times a year. Death may occur during these crises.
Laboratory findings include marked elevation of mevalonic acid
in urine; the concentration of urinary mevalonic acid ranges between
500 and 56,000 mmol/mol of creatinine (normal: <0.3 mmol/mol of
creatinine). Plasma levels of mevalonic acid are also greatly increased
(as high as 540 μmol/L; normal: <0.04 μmol/L). Mevalonic acid levels
tend to correlate with the severity of the condition and increase during
crises. Serum cholesterol concentration is normal or mildly decreased.
Serum concentration of creatine kinase can be greatly increased.
Inflammatory markers are elevated during the crises. Brain MRI may
reveal progressive atrophy of the cerebellum.
Diagnosis may be confirmed by molecular analysis of MVK or by
assaying the MVK activity in lymphocytes or cultured fibroblasts. The
enzyme activity in this form of the condition is below the detection
level. Treatment with high doses of prednisone helps in the acute
crises, but because of side effects, it is not routinely used long term.
TNF-­α inhibitors and interleukin-­1 receptor antagonists have shown
to be effective in bringing significant clinical improvement, especially
in patients with chronic inflammation and frequent attacks. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Prenatal diagnosis
is possible by identifying known familial pathogenic variants in MVK,
by measurement of mevalonic acid in the amniotic fluid, or by assaying
the enzyme activity in cultured amniocytes or chorionic villi samples.

Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D Syndrome
(Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and Periodic
Fever Syndrome)

Some pathogenic variants of the MVK gene cause milder enzyme deficiency and produce the clinical picture of periodic fever with hyperimmunoglobulinemia D. These patients have periodic bouts of fever
associated with abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, arthralgia, arthritis, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and morbilliform rash
(even petechiae and purpura), which usually start before 1 year of age.
The attacks can be triggered by vaccination, minor trauma, or stress and
can occur every 1-­2 months, lasting 2-­7 days. Patients are free of symptoms between acute attacks. The diagnostic laboratory finding is elevation of serum immunoglobulin D (IgD). IgA is also elevated in 80%
of patients. During acute attacks, leukocytosis, increased C-­reactive
protein, and mild mevalonic aciduria may be present. High concentrations of serum IgD help differentiate this condition from familial
Mediterranean fever. See Chapter 204 for treatment recommendations.

PROPIONIC ACIDEMIA (PROPIONYL-­COA
CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY)

Propionic acid is an intermediate metabolite of isoleucine, valine, threonine, methionine, odd-­chain fatty acids, and side chains of cholesterol.
Normally, propionic acid in the form of propionyl-­CoA undergoes carboxylation to d-­methylmalonyl-­CoA, catalyzed by the mitochondrial
enzyme propionyl-­CoA carboxylase. This enzyme requires biotin as a
cofactor; thus the disorders of biotin metabolism, among other findings,
can also result in elevation of propionic acid metabolites (see Fig. 105.4).
Propionyl-­CoA carboxylase is a multimeric enzyme composed of two
nonidentical subunits, α and β, encoded by two genes, PCCA and PCCB,
respectively. Biallelic pathogenic variants in propionyl-­CoA carboxylase
result in an autosomal recessive disorder called propionic acidemia.
Clinical findings of propionic acidemia are not specific to this disorder only. In the severe form, patients develop symptoms in the first
few days of life. Poor feeding, vomiting, hypotonia, lethargy, dehydration, a sepsis-­like picture, and clinical signs of severe ketoacidosis
progress rapidly to coma and death. Seizures occur in approximately
30% of affected infants. If an infant survives the first attack, similar
episodes of metabolic decompensation may occur during an intercurrent infection, trauma, surgery, prolonged fasting, severe constipation,
or after ingestion of a high-­protein diet. Moderate to severe intellectual

833

disability and neurologic manifestations reflective of extrapyramidal
(dystonia, choreoathetosis, tremor) and pyramidal (paraplegia) dysfunction are common sequelae in survivors. Neuroimaging shows that
these abnormalities, which often occur after an episode of metabolic
decompensation, are the result of damage to the basal ganglia, especially to the globus pallidus. This phenomenon has been referred to as
metabolic stroke. This is the main cause of neurologic sequelae seen
in the surviving affected children. Additional long-­term complications
include failure to thrive, optic nerve atrophy, pancreatitis, cardiomyopathy, and osteopenia.
In the milder form, episodes of metabolic decompensation are less
frequent, but these children are still at risk of developing intellectual
disability, seizures, long QTc interval, and severe cardiomyopathy. Universal newborn screening can identify propionic acidemia by detecting
elevated propionylcarnitine (C3-­carnitine) with an abnormal C3/C2
ratio in dried blood spots. However, in patients with the mild form of
propionic acidemia, propionylcarnitine may remain below the cutoff
value set by the screening laboratory, resulting in a false-­negative result.
Therefore physicians should maintain a high index of suspicion for this
disorder and follow up with a biochemical evaluation of infants and
children presenting with unexplained ketosis or metabolic acidosis.
Laboratory findings during the acute attack include various degrees
of metabolic acidosis, often with a large anion gap, ketosis, ketonuria,
hypoglycemia, anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. Moderate
to severe hyperammonemia is common; plasma ammonia concentrations usually correlate with the severity of the disease. In contrast to
other causes of hyperammonemia, plasma concentration of glutamine
tends to be within normal limits or decreased. The presence of severe
metabolic acidosis and normal to reduced plasma glutamine help differentiate propionic academia from hyperammonemia caused by urea
cycle defects. Measurement of plasma ammonia is especially helpful
in planning therapeutic strategies during episodes of exacerbation in
a patient whose diagnosis has been established. Mechanisms of hyperammonemia in propionic acidemia are not well understood but are
likely related to the perturbed biochemical and pH environment of
the mitochondrial matrix, where the proximal part of the urea cycle
resides.
Glycine concentration can be elevated in all body fluids (blood,
urine, CSF) and possibly is the result of the inhibited glycine cleavage system in the hepatic mitochondria (Fig. 105.8). Glycine elevation has also been observed in patients with methylmalonic acidemia.
These disorders were collectively referred to as ketotic hyperglycinemia in the past before the specific enzyme deficiencies were elucidated. Mild to moderate increase in blood lactate and lysine may also
be present in these patients. Concentrations of propionylcarnitine,
3-­hydroxypropionic acid, and methylcitric acid (presumably formed
through condensation of propionyl-­CoA with oxaloacetic acid) are
greatly elevated in the plasma and urine of infants with propionic acidemia. Propionylglycine and other intermediate metabolites of BCAA
catabolism, such as tiglylglycine, can also be found in urine. Moderate
elevations in blood levels of glycine and previously mentioned organic
acids can persist between the acute attacks. Brain imaging may reveal
cerebral atrophy, delayed myelination, and abnormalities in the globus
pallidus and other parts of the basal ganglia.
The diagnosis of propionic acidemia should be differentiated from
multiple carboxylase deficiencies (see earlier and Fig. 105.6). In addition to propionic acid metabolites, infants with the latter condition
excrete large amounts of lactic acid, 3-­methylcrotonylglycine, and
3-­hydroxyisovaleric acid. The presence of hyperammonemia may suggest a genetic defect in the urea cycle enzymes. Infants with defects in
the urea cycle are usually not acidotic (see Fig. 105.1) and have elevated
levels of plasma glutamine. The definitive diagnosis of propionic acidemia can be established through molecular analysis of PCCA and
PCCB or by measuring the enzyme activity in leukocytes or cultured
fibroblasts.
Treatment of acute episodes of metabolic decompensation includes
hydration with solutions containing glucose, correction of acidosis,
and amelioration of the catabolic state by provision of adequate calories
through enteral or parenteral hyperalimentation. A brief restriction of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

834 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
See Fig. 103.9
Proline

Choline

Trimethylamine

Betaine

Trimethylamine

See Fig. 103.9

Hydroxyproline
Trimethylaminuria

6
-Pyrroline3-Hydroxy5-Carboxylic acid

Mitochondria

Sarcosine

Trimethylamine oxide

4-Hydroxy-glutamate

Urine

Sarcosinemia

9

4-Hydroxy-2-oxoglutarate (HOG)
Glycine

Vitamin C

NE
Pyruvate

Glyoxylate

Glyoxylate
NE

3

NKH
CO2 + NH3

3

Glycine
Glycolate

1

8
Oxalate

Oxaluria
Type 2

NE
Glycolate

Cytosol

4

Oxaluria Type 3

NE

Oxaluria Type 1
2
See Fig. 103.10

Glycine

See Fig. 103.10

Glycine

Glyoxylate
7
Glycolate

Serine

Ethylene
glycol

Vegetables, plants

Enteric
oxaluria

Peroxisome
L-glyceric acid

Hydroxypyruvate
8
3

Fructose

D-glyceric acid
D-Glyceric
aciduria

Glucose

Serine: HOCH2CHNH2COOH
Glycine: NH2CH2COOH
Glycolate: HOCH2COO–
5

2-Phospho-D-glyceric acid

Glyoxylate: OCHCOO–
Oxalate: –OOCCOO–

Pyruvate

Fig. 105.8 Pathways in the metabolism of glycine and glyoxylic acid. Enzymes: (1) Glycine cleavage system, (2) alanine:glyoxylate aminotrans-

ferase, (3) glyoxylic reductase/hydroxypyruvate reductase (GR/HRP), (4) hydroxyoxoglutarate aldolase one (HOGA1), (5) glycerate kinase, (6) trimethylamine oxidase, (7) glycolate oxidase (d-­amino acid oxidase), (8) lactate dehydrogenase, (9) sarcosine dehydrogenase. NE, Nonenzymatic; NKH,
nonketotic hyperglycinemia.

protein intake, no more than 24 hours, is often necessary. Depending on the clinical status, gradual reintroduction of protein is recommended. If enteral feedings cannot be tolerated after 48 hours of protein
restriction, parenteral nutrition should be instituted to achieve the
age-­specific recommended protein intake. Patients unable to tolerate
the recommended dietary allowance of protein can receive specialized
medical foods free of isoleucine, valine, threonine, and methionine.
The composition and amount of protein typically vary among patients.
The metabolic diet composition can be adjusted by monitoring growth
and plasma amino acids drawn 3-­4 hours after the typical feeding.
Some patients may benefit from the suppression of propionogenic
gut microflora. This can be achieved by oral antibiotics such as oral
neomycin or metronidazole. Prolonged use of metronidazole should
be avoided because it has been associated with reversible peripheral
neuropathy and increased QTc interval. The risk of QTc prolongation
can be problematic in propionic acidemia patients, who are at risk for
cardiomyopathy and long QT interval. Baseline and interval ECGs are
recommended before and after initiation of metronidazole therapy.
Patients may benefit from management of constipation.
Patients with propionic acidemia often develop secondary carnitine
deficiency, presumably as a result of the urinary loss of propionylcarnitine. Administration of l-­carnitine (50-­
100 mg/kg/day orally or
intravenously) helps restore free carnitine in blood. In patients with
concomitant hyperammonemia, measures to reduce blood ammonia
should be employed (see Chapter 105.12). Very ill patients with severe

acidosis and hyperammonemia require hemodialysis to remove ammonia and other toxic compounds rapidly and efficiently. Carglumic acid
and nitrogen scavengers (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate,
sodium phenylbutyrate) can aid in the treatment of acute hyperammonemia. Although no infant with propionic acidemia has been found
to be responsive to biotin, this compound should be administered (10
mg/day orally) to all infants during the first attack and until the diagnosis is established and multiple carboxylase deficiency ruled out.
Long-­term treatment consists of a low-­protein diet meeting age-­
specific recommended dietary allowance and administration of l-­
carnitine (50-­100 mg/kg/day orally). Some centers manage mild cases
of propionic acidemia without medical foods, opting for only restricting the protein intake to the recommended dietary allowance. Patients
unable to tolerate the recommended dietary intake of protein may
require medical foods free of propionate precursors (isoleucine, valine,
methionine, and threonine). Excessive use of medical foods while
restricting natural-­source protein may cause a deficiency of the essential amino acids, especially isoleucine and valine, which may cause a
condition resembling acrodermatitis enteropathica (see Chapter 712).
Over-­restriction of methionine, especially in the first years of life, may
contribute to the reduced brain growth and microcephaly. To avoid
this problem, natural proteins should comprise most of the dietary
protein. Some patients may require bicarbonate substitution (e.g.,
citric acid/sodium citrate) to correct chronic acidosis. The concentration of plasma ammonia usually normalizes between attacks, although

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
some patients may experience mild chronic hyperammonemia. Acute
attacks triggered by infections, fasting, trauma, stress, constipation,
or dietary indiscretions should be treated promptly and aggressively.
Close monitoring of plasma ammonia, plasma amino acids obtained
3-­4 hours after the last typical meal (especially isoleucine, leucine,
valine, threonine, and methionine), and growth parameters is necessary to ensure the diet is appropriate. Orthotopic liver transplantation
is used in clinically unstable patients experiencing recurrent hyperammonemia, frequent metabolic decompensations, and poor growth.
Liver transplantation does not cure propionic acidemia, and lifelong
dietary management and proactive management during periods of significant metabolic stress are recommended.
The long-­term prognosis is poor. Death may occur during an acute
attack. Normal psychomotor development is possible in a mild form
identified through newborn screening. Children identified clinically
may manifest some degree of permanent neurodevelopmental deficit, such as tremor, dystonia, chorea, and spasticity despite adequate
therapy. These neurologic findings may be the sequelae of a metabolic
stroke occurring during an acute decompensation. A long QTc interval
and cardiomyopathy with potential progression to heart failure, fatal
arrhythmias, and death may develop in older affected children despite
adequate metabolic control. Acute pancreatitis is a common and severe
complication in propionic acidemia. Osteoporosis can predispose to
fractures, which can occur with minimal mechanical stress.
Prenatal diagnosis can be achieved by identification of known
familial pathogenic variants in PCCA or PCCB or by measuring the
enzyme activity in cultured amniotic cells or in samples of uncultured
chorionic villi.
Propionic acidemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. It
has a worldwide prevalence of 1 in 105,000 to 1 in 250,000 live births. It
is more prevalent in Greenlandic Inuits (1 in 1,000) and in some Saudi
Arabian tribes (1 in 2,000 to 1 in 5,000 live births). Biallelic pathogenic variants in either gene result in similar clinical and biochemical manifestations. Although pregnancies with normal outcomes have
been reported, the perinatal period poses special risks to females with
propionic acidemia because of hyperemesis gravidarum, worsening
cardiomyopathy, changing protein requirements, and risk of metabolic
decompensation.

ISOLATED METHYLMALONIC ACIDEMIAS

Methylmalonic acidemias are a group of metabolic disorders of diverse
etiology characterized by impaired conversion of methylmalonyl-­CoA
into succinyl-­CoA. Propionyl-­CoA derived from catabolism of isoleucine, valine, threonine, methionine, side chain of cholesterol, and odd-­
chain fatty acids is catalyzed by propionyl-­CoA carboxylase to form
d-­methylmalonyl-­CoA. Methylmalonyl-­CoA epimerase then converts
d-­
methylmalonyl-­
CoA to its enantiomer l-­methylmalonyl-­CoA.
Methylmalonyl-­CoA epimerase deficiency is a rare disorder associated with persistent elevations of propionate-­related metabolites and
methylmalonic acid. It may present with metabolic acidosis, ketosis,
but patients appear more clinically stable than those with severe forms
of methylmalonic acidemia.
In the next biochemical step, l-­methylmalonyl-­CoA is converted
to succinyl-­CoA by methylmalonyl-­CoA mutase (see Fig. 105.4). The
latter enzyme requires 5-­deoxyadenosylcobalamin, a metabolite of
vitamin B12, as a coenzyme. Deficiency of either the mutase or its coenzyme results in the accumulation of methylmalonic acid and its precursors in body fluids. Two biochemical forms of methylmalonyl-­CoA
mutase deficiencies have been identified. These are designated mut0,
referring to no detectable enzyme activity, and mut−, indicating residual, although insufficient, mutase activity. Patients with methylmalonic
acidemia due to deficiency of the mutase apoenzyme (mut0) are not
responsive to hydroxocobalamin therapy.
In the remaining methylmalonic acidemia patients, the defect resides
in the formation of adenosylcobalamin from dietary vitamin B12.
The absorption of dietary vitamin B12 in the terminal ileum requires
intrinsic factor, a glycoprotein secreted by the gastric parietal cells. It
is transported in the blood by haptocorrin and transcobalamin II. The
transcobalamin II–cobalamin complex (TCII-­Cbl) is recognized by

835

a specific receptor on the cell membrane (a transcobalamin receptor
encoded by CD320) and enters the cell by endocytosis. In the lysosome,
TCII-­Cbl is hydrolyzed, and, with the participation of LMBRD1 (cblF)
and ABCD4 (cblJ), free cobalamin is released into the cytosol (see Fig.
105.4). Biallelic pathogenic variants in either LMBRD1 or ABCD4
genes result in impaired release of cobalamin from lysosomes. In the
cytoplasm, cobalamin binds to the MMACHC protein (see cblC later),
which removes a moiety attached to cobalt in the cobalamin molecule
and reduces the cobalt from oxidation state +3 (cob[III]alamin) to
+2 (cob[II]alamin). It then enters the mitochondria, where it is catalyzed by MMAB (cblB) and MMAA (cblA) to form adenosylcobalamin, a coenzyme for methylmalonyl-­CoA mutase. The other arm of
the pathway directs cytosolic cobalamin toward methionine synthase
reductase (cblE), which forms methylcobalamin, acting as a coenzyme
for methionine synthase (cblG, see Fig. 105.3). The MMADHC protein
(see cblD) appears to play a role in determining whether cobalamin
enters the mitochondria or remains in the cytoplasm.
The uptake of TCII-­Cbl by cells is impaired in individuals with
pathogenic variants affecting the transcobalamin receptor (CD320),
which is located on the cell surface. Individuals homozygous for
pathogenic variants in the CD320 gene encoding the transcobalamin
receptor may have mild elevations of methylmalonic acid in the blood
and urine. These patients can be identified by the newborn screen
based on the elevated propionylcarnitine (C3-­carnitine). In transcobalamin receptor deficiency, methylmalonic acid levels and plasma
propionylcarnitine tend to normalize in the first year of life. It is not
clear whether a long-­term clinical phenotype is associated with this
defect.
Nine different defects in the intracellular metabolism of cobalamin
have been identified. These are designated cblA through cblG, cblJ, and
cblX, where cbl stands for a defect in any step of cobalamin metabolism. The cblA, cblB, and cblD-­MMA defects cause methylmalonic
acidemia alone. In patients with cblC, cblD-­combined methylmalonic
acidemia and homocystinuria, cblF, cblJ, and cblX defects, synthesis of
both adenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin is impaired, resulting
in combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria. The cblD-­
homocystinuria, cblE, and cblG defects affect only the synthesis of
methylcobalamin, resulting in homocystinuria without methylmalonic
aciduria (see Chapter 105.3).
Biochemical manifestations of patients with isolated methylmalonic
acidemia caused by mut0, mut−, cblA, cblB, and cblD-­MMA overlap.
The wide variations in the severity of the clinical course range from
very sick newborn infants to apparently asymptomatic adults. In
severe forms, lethargy, feeding problems, vomiting, a sepsis-­like picture, tachypnea (from metabolic ketoacidosis), and hypotonia may
develop in the first few days of life and may progress to hyperammonemic encephalopathy, coma, and death if left untreated. Infants who
survive the first attack may go on to develop similar acute metabolic
episodes during a catabolic state such as infection or prolonged fasting or after ingestion of a high-­protein diet. In certain situations, such
acute events can cause a sudden injury of the basal ganglia, a metabolic stroke, resulting in a debilitating movement disorder. Between
the acute attacks, the patient usually continues to exhibit hypotonia
and feeding problems with failure to thrive, while other complications
of the disease occur with age, including recurrent episodes of pancreatitis, bone marrow suppression, osteopenia, and optic nerve atrophy.
Chronic renal failure and tubulointerstitial nephritis necessitating
renal transplant have been reported in older patients. Renal complications are more severe in patients with the mut0 and severe cblB forms of
methylmalonic acidemia. In milder forms, patients may present later in
life with hypotonia, failure to thrive, and developmental delay. Neurocognitive development of patients with mild methylmalonic acidemia
may remain within the normal range.
The episodic nature of the condition and its biochemical abnormalities in some patients may be confused with those of ethylene glycol
(antifreeze) ingestion. Furthermore, the peak of propionate in a blood
sample from an infant with methylmalonic acidemia has been mistaken for ethylene glycol when the sample was assayed by gas chromatography without mass spectrometry.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

836 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Laboratory findings include ketosis, metabolic acidosis, hyperglycinemia, hyperammonemia, hypoglycemia, anemia, neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia, and the presence of large quantities of methylmalonic acid in body fluids (see Fig. 105.6). Metabolites of propionic acid
(3-­hydroxypropionate and methylcitrate) are also found in the urine.
The plasma acylcarnitine profile reveals elevated propionylcarnitine
(C3-­carnitine) and methylmalonylcarnitine (C4DC-­carnitine). Hyperammonemia in methylmalonic acidemia may be confused with a urea
cycle disorder. However, patients with defects in urea cycle enzymes
are typically not acidotic and tend to have high plasma glutamine (see
Fig. 105.12). The reason for hyperammonemia is not well understood,
but it is likely related to the inhibition of the proximal urea cycle in the
mitochondrial matrix.
The diagnosis can be confirmed by identifying pathogenic variants in the causal gene, by measuring propionate incorporation with
complementation analysis in cultured fibroblasts, and by measuring
the specific activity of the mutase enzyme in biopsies or cell extracts.
Treatment of acute attacks is similar to propionic acidemia. Long-­
term treatment consists of administration of a low-­protein diet limited
to the recommended dietary allowance and l-­carnitine (50-­100 mg/
kg/day orally). Patients with severe forms of methylmalonic acidemia
may require protein diet modifications similar to those prescribed for
patients with propionic acidemia. Patients with isolated methylmalonic acidemia caused by defects in the intracellular metabolism of
cobalamin (cblA, cblD-­MMA, and some patients with cblB) respond
to parenteral hydroxocobalamin. Chronic bicarbonate replacement
therapy is usually required to correct chronic acidosis. Carglumic acid
is used to improve ureagenic function by stimulating its first step catalyzed by the carbamoyl-­phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) and to facilitate
ammonia detoxification during acute hyperammonemia. Ammonia
scavengers (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate, sodium phenylbutyrate) should be used cautiously. Plasma ammonia tends to normalize between attacks, and chronic treatment of hyperammonemia is
rarely needed. Stressful situations that may trigger acute attacks (infection, prolonged fasting, trauma, surgeries, high-­protein meals) should
be treated promptly.
Inadequate oral intake secondary to poor appetite, protein over-­
restriction, or essential amino acid deficiencies is a common complication in the long-­term management of these patients. Consequently,
enteral feeding through gastrostomy is often recommended early in the
course of treatment. Close monitoring of blood pH, essential amino
acid levels, blood and urinary concentrations of methylmalonate, and
growth parameters is required to ensure that the nutritional prescription
meets the patient’s metabolic demands. In addition, frequent monitoring of kidney function, vision, hearing, and bone mineral density are
necessary for early recognition and management of chronic complications. Glutathione deficiency responsive to treatment with ascorbate
has been described.
Liver, kidney, and combined liver-­kidney transplantations have been
attempted in an increasing number of affected patients. Liver and liver-­
kidney transplantation can alleviate, but not eliminate, the metabolic
abnormalities. Furthermore, liver and liver-­
kidney transplants do
not provide complete protection against the occurrence of metabolic
stroke. Kidney transplantation alone can restore the renal function but
results in only minor improvement of the clinical stability of patients.
Prognosis depends on the severity of symptoms and the occurrence of complications. In general, patients with complete deficiency of
mutase apoenzyme (mut0) and severe forms of cblB deficiency have the
least favorable prognosis, and those with mut− and cblA defects have a
better outcome.
Methylmalonic acidemia can be identified on the universal newborn
screening by measuring propionylcarnitine (C3) using tandem mass
spectrometry. The prevalence of all forms of methylmalonic aciduria is
estimated at 1 in 50,000 to 1 in 100,000 live births. All defects causing
isolated methylmalonic acidemia are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Pathogenic variants in the genes for cblA (MMAA), cblB
(MMAB), and all forms of cblD (MMADHC) have been identified in
affected patients. The previously described cblH group is identical to
the cblD-­MMA defect.

COMBINED METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA AND
HOMOCYSTINURIA (cblC, epi-­cblC, cblD, cblF,
cblJ, AND cblX DEFECTS)

Combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria caused by
cblC deficiency is the most common type of intracellular cobalamin
(vitamin B12) biosynthesis defect. Deficiency of cblC is as common
as methylmalonyl-­CoA mutase deficiency. The other disorders (cblD,
cblF, cblJ, cblX) are much rarer (see Figs. 105.3 and 105.4). Neurologic
findings are prominent in patients with cblC, epi-­cblC, cblD-­combined,
and cblX defects. Most patients with the cblC defect present in the
first month of life because of failure to thrive, lethargy, poor feeding,
developmental delay, nystagmus, and seizures. Hyperammonemia may
be seen infrequently, whereas hyperglycinemia is not present, unlike
in isolated mut-­type methylmalonic acidemia. Intrauterine growth
restriction and microcephaly suggest that cblC can manifest prenatally in some affected infants. Late-­onset patients with sudden development of dementia and myelopathy have been reported, even with
presentation in adulthood. Megaloblastic anemia is a common finding
in patients with cblC defect. Mild to moderate increases in concentrations of methylmalonic acid and significant elevations in total plasma
homocysteine are found in blood. Unlike classic homocystinuria, in
untreated cblC, patients’ plasma methionine is low to normal. Retinal
abnormalities (e.g., bull’s eye maculopathy) resulting in severe progressive vision loss are common and can be seen as early as 3 months of age,
even in prospectively identified and well-­treated patients. Thrombotic
microangiopathy can present as hemolytic uremic syndrome, pulmonary hypertension, and cor pulmonale. Hydrocephalus and noncompaction cardiomyopathy have been reported as complications in
patients with cblC defect.
Similar to cblC patients, males with cblX have elevations of both total
plasma homocysteine and methylmalonic acid, but they tend to have
milder elevations of these metabolites. Unlike cblC-­deficient patients,
who tend to respond to treatment, cblX-­deficient patients experience
failure to thrive, severe developmental delay, and intractable epilepsy
despite aggressive treatment.
Clinical findings in cblF deficiency are quite variable. Patients
may present with poor feeding, growth and developmental delay, and
persistent stomatitis manifesting in the first months of life. Delay in
diagnosis and treatment can be accompanied by hyperpigmentation
of skin, developmental delay, intellectual disability, and short stature.
Vitamin B12 malabsorption and low plasma vitamin B12 has been noted
in patients with cblF defect. Clinical manifestations of cblJ defect show
significant overlap with those of the cblF deficiency. Dysmorphic features and congenital heart disease have been reported in some patients
with cblF and cblJ defects.
Experience with treatment of patients with cblC, cblD, cblF, cblJ, and
cblX defects is limited. Large doses of hydroxocobalamin (up to 0.3
mg/kg/day) in conjunction with betaine (up to 250 mg/kg/day) produce biochemical improvement with variable clinical effect. Patients
with cblF and cblJ deficiency typically show a favorable biochemical
and clinical response to smaller hydroxocobalamin doses (1 mg once
weekly to 1 mg daily parenterally). Folic or folinic acid supplementation
is recommended. Dietary methionine deficiency should be avoided.
The cblC disorder is caused by pathogenic variants in the MMACHC
gene. A frameshift variant (c.271dupA) is seen in up to 40% of MMACHC
alleles and is associated with a less favorable clinical outcome. Epi-­
cblC, with a similar phenotype, is caused by compound heterozygous
variants in MMACHC and PRDX1, a neighboring gene. Pathogenic
variants in PRDX1 cause hypermethylation and silencing of the promoter/exon 1 of MMACHC, resulting in repressed gene expression.
The cblD disorder is caused by pathogenic variants in the MMADHC
gene. Pathogenic variants resulting in cblD-­homocystinuria affect the
C-­terminal domain of the gene product; those resulting in cblD-­MMA
(e.g., causing only methylmalonic aciduria) affect the N-­terminus.
Patients with classic cblD, with both homocystinuria and methylmalonic acidemia, have pathogenic variants resulting in decreased protein expression. The cblF disorder is caused by pathogenic variants
in the LMBRD1 gene encoding a lysosomal membrane protein. The
cblJ disorder is associated with pathogenic variants in the ABCD4

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

837

gene, encoding an adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette protein
localized to the lysosomal membrane. The cblX disorder is caused by
pathogenic variants in the HCFC1 gene on the X chromosome (Xq28),
which encodes a transcription factor that appears to be essential for
expression of the MMACHC gene. This is the only X-­linked disorder
in the B12 intracellular metabolism pathway. Rare defects resulting in a
phenotype overlapping with cblX deficiency have been associated with
biallelic pathogenic variants in the genes THAP11 or ZNF143.

because of the coexistence of acidosis and ketosis. The pathogenesis of
hyperglycinemia in these disorders is not understood. Inhibition of the
glycine cleavage enzyme system by the various organic acids and post-­
translational modification has been shown to occur in some of these
biochemical disorders. The term nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH)
is reserved for the clinical condition caused by the genetic deficiency of
the glycine cleavage enzyme system (GCS, see Fig. 105.8). In this condition, hyperglycinemia is present without ketosis.

ISOLATED HOMOCYSTINURIA

NONKETOTIC HYPERGLYCINEMIA (GLYCINE
ENCEPHALOPATHY)

Patients with cblD variant one, cblE, and cblG deficiency present with
isolated homocystinuria without methylmalonic acidemia (see Chapter 105.3).

COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC
ACIDURIA (ACSF3-­RELATED DISORDER)

Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria (CMAMMA) is a
rare autosomal recessive disorder resulting from pathogenic variants
in ACSF3. ACSF3 is a putative acyl-­CoA synthetase required for the
conversion of malonic and methylmalonic acids to their CoA derivatives in the mitochondrial matrix. The disorder can be suspected based
on the presence of elevated malonic and methylmalonic acids in urine
and plasma. It is distinguished from malonyl-­
CoA decarboxylase
because methylmalonic acid is about fivefold greater than malonic acid
in the urine. Plasma propionylcarnitine (C3-­carnitine) in CMAMMA
patients is normal, so universal newborn screening programs using
C3-­carnitine in blood spots to screen for methylmalonic acidemia
would not detect this condition. The clinical phenotype is incompletely
understood. Young patients identified prospectively in infancy through
urine-­based newborn screening were reported to be asymptomatic, but
the long-­term outcome in this cohort awaits further characterization.
Older patients ascertained clinically have highly variable presentations,
including metabolic crises, failure to thrive, seizures, memory problems, optic nerve or spinal cord atrophy, and progressive neurodegeneration. Treatment of CMAMMA is supportive and includes avoidance
of an excessively high-­protein diet. Vitamin B12 supplementation does
not appear to lower malonic and methylmalonic metabolites in body
fluids.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.7 Glycine
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Glycine is a nonessential amino acid synthesized by multiple endogenous sources, including serine, choline, and threonine. Structurally,
it is the simplest amino acid. Glycine is involved in many reactions
in the body, especially in the nervous system, where it functions as a
neurotransmitter (excitatory in the cortex, inhibitory in the brainstem
and the spinal cord; see Chapter 105.11). Its main catabolic pathway
requires the glycine cleavage system, a pyridoxal phosphate–dependent,
mitochondrial enzyme complex that converts glycine to carbon dioxide and ammonia and transfers α-­carbon to tetrahydrofolate (see Fig.
105.8). The glycine cleavage system is composed of four proteins: P
protein (glycine decarboxylase), H protein, T protein, and L protein,
which are encoded by four different genes.

HYPOGLYCINEMIA

Defects in the biosynthetic pathway of serine (see Chapter 105.8) cause
a deficiency of glycine in addition to that of serine in body fluids, especially in the CSF. Isolated primary deficiency of glycine has not been
reported.

HYPERGLYCINEMIA

Elevated levels of glycine in body fluids occur in propionic acidemia,
methylmalonic acidemia, isovaleric acidemia, and β-­ketothiolase deficiency, which are collectively referred to as ketotic hyperglycinemia

Four forms of NKH have been identified: neonatal, infantile, late onset,
and transient. NKH is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in either of three genes, GLDC (encodes P
protein), AMT (encodes T protein), and GCSH (encodes H protein).
The L-­protein gene (DLD) encodes dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase,
the E3 component of α-­ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes, and is discussed in Chapter 105.6. Birth prevalence of NKH is ∼1:75,000, but a
high frequency of the disorder has been noted in Northern Finland
(1:12,000 live births), suggesting that this disorder is likely underdiagnosed in some regions of the world.
NKH should be differentiated from the GCS cofactor deficiency
caused by the deficiency of lipoate resulting from biallelic pathogenic
variants in genes involved in lipoate synthesis (LIAS, LIPT2, BOLA3,
GLRX5, IBA57, and NFU1).

Neonatal Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia

This is the most common form of NKH. Clinical manifestations become
apparent in the first few days of life (between 6 hours and 8 days after
birth). Poor feeding, failure to suck, lethargy, and profound hypotonia
may progress rapidly to a deep coma, apnea, and death. Convulsions,
especially myoclonic seizures, and hiccups are common.
Laboratory findings reveal moderate to severe hyperglycinemia (as
high as eight times the upper reference range) and hyperglycinuria. The
unequivocal elevation of glycine concentration in CSF (15-­30 times
the upper reference range) and the high ratio of glycine concentration in CSF to that in plasma (a value >0.08, reference value <0.02)
are diagnostic of NKH. Affected patients’ blood pH is usually normal.
The plasma acylcarnitine profile and urine organic acid assay reveal no
abnormalities. CSF serine levels can be low.
Approximately 30% of NKH infants die despite supportive therapy.
Those who survive develop profound intellectual disability and intractable seizure disorders (myoclonic and/or grand mal seizures). Hydrocephalus, requiring shunting, and pulmonary hypertension have been
noted in survivors. Transient hyperglycemia may prompt evaluation
for biochemical phenocopies of NKH (e.g., organic acidemias), brain
imaging studies to evaluate for intracerebral hemorrhage or hypoxic-­
ischemic injury, and ultimately may require molecular studies of AMT,
GLDC, and GCSH.

Transient Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia

Most clinical and laboratory manifestations of transient NKH are
indistinguishable from those of the neonatal form. By 2-­8 weeks of
age, however, a complete clinical recovery may occur, and the elevated glycine levels in plasma and CSF normalize after the patient
stops a glycine-­lowering medication. Some of these patients develop
normally with no neurologic sequelae, but intellectual disability has
been noted in others. The etiology of this condition is not known, but
it is thought to be a consequence of immaturity of the enzyme system;
genetic testing is normal. Transient hyperglycemia should prompt
consideration of additional biochemical studies; brain imaging; and
molecular studies to evaluate for pathogenic variants in AMT, GLDC,
and GCSH.

Infantile Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia

In infantile NKH, previously healthy-­appearing infants develop signs
and symptoms of neonatal NKH after 6 months of age. Seizures and
hypotonia are common presenting signs. Infantile NKH appears to be a
milder form of neonatal NKH; infants usually survive, and intellectual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

838 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
disability is not as profound as in the neonatal form. Laboratory findings in patients with infantile NKH are identical to those seen in neonatal NKH.

Late-­Onset Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia

Clinical manifestations of this atypical form of NKH include progressive spastic diplegia, optic nerve atrophy, and choreoathetotic movements. Age of onset has been between 2 and 33 years. Symptoms of
delirium, chorea, and vertical gaze palsy may occur episodically in
some patients during an intercurrent infection. Mental development is
usually normal, but mild cognitive impairment and infrequent seizures
have been reported in some patients.
Laboratory findings in late-­onset NKH are similar but not as pronounced as in neonatal NKH.
All forms of NKH should be differentiated from ketotic hyperglycinemia, pyridox(am)ine phosphate oxidase (PNPO) deficiency, ingestion
of valproic acid, and transient glycine encephalopathy. Valproic acid
can moderately increase blood, CSF, and urinary concentrations of glycine. Repeat assays after discontinuation of the drug will help establish
the diagnosis.

Diagnosis and Treatment

A diagnosis of NKH can be suspected based on the findings of elevated
glycine in plasma or CSF and the abnormal CSF/plasma ratio of glycine. The diagnosis is confirmed using molecular analysis of the NKH-­
related genes (AMT, GLDC, and GCSH). Rarely, enzymatic assay on
liver specimens is necessary to establish the diagnosis. Enzyme activity
in the neonatal form is close to zero, whereas in the other forms, some
residual activity is present. In most patients with neonatal NKH, the
enzyme defect resides in the P protein (75%). Defects in the T protein
account for approximately 20% of cases, whereas <1% are caused by
pathogenic variants in the H protein.
Prenatal diagnosis can be accomplished by identifying known
familial pathogenic variants in the affected gene or by performing an
assay of the enzyme activity in chorionic villus biopsy specimens.
No effective treatment is currently available. Exchange transfusion,
dietary restriction of glycine, and administration of sodium benzoate
or folate have not altered the neurologic outcome in severe forms of
NKH. Patients with attenuated NKH may experience clinical improvement from enteral sodium benzoate. Drugs that counteract the effect
of glycine on neuronal cells, such as dextromethorphan and felbamate,
have shown some beneficial effects in patients with the mild forms of
the condition.

SARCOSINEMIA

Increased concentrations of sarcosine (N-­methylglycine) are observed
in both blood and urine of probands affected by sarcosine dehydrogenase complex deficiency. This autosomal recessive metabolic condition
is caused by a defect in sarcosine dehydrogenase, the enzyme that converts sarcosine to glycine (see Fig. 105.8) and is encoded by SARDH.
No consistent clinical picture has been attributed to sarcosinemia.

PRIMARY TRIMETHYLAMINURIA

Trimethylamine is normally produced by intestinal bacteria from the
breakdown of dietary choline and trimethylamine oxide by bacteria.
Egg yolk and liver are the main sources of choline, and fish is the major
source of trimethylamine oxide. Trimethylamine is absorbed and
oxidized in the liver by trimethylamine oxidase (a flavin-­containing
monooxygenase encoded by FMO3) to trimethylamine oxide, which
is odorless and excreted in the urine (see Fig. 105.8). Deficiency of
this enzyme results in massive excretion of trimethylamine in urine.
There is a body odor that resembles that of rotting fish, which may
have significant psychosocial ramifications. Transient symptomatic
trimethylaminuria can occur in normal individuals after ingestion of
large quantities of the previously mentioned foods.
Treatment with oral activated charcoal and short courses of oral
metronidazole, neomycin, or lactulose cause temporary reduction in
body odor. Restriction of fish, eggs, liver, and other sources of choline
(e.g., nuts, grains) in the diet significantly reduces the odor. Topical use
of acidic soaps (pH 5.5) can also help control the odor.

HYPEROXALURIA AND OXALOSIS

Normally, oxalic acid is derived mostly from oxidation of glyoxylic acid
and, to a lesser degree, from oxidation of ascorbic acid (see Fig. 105.8).
Glyoxylic acid is formed from oxidation of glycolic acid and glycine
in the peroxisomes and catabolism of hydroxyproline in the mitochondria mediated by 4-­hydroxy-­2-­oxoglutarate aldolase 1 (encoded
by HOGA1), the underlying cause of primary hyperoxaluria type 3
(Fig. 105.9). Vegetables and foods containing oxalic acid, such as spinach, rhubarb, and almond milk, are the main exogenous sources of glycolic and oxalic acids; most of glyoxylic and oxalic acids are produced
endogenously. Normally, a major portion of glyoxylate produced in
the body is shuttled to peroxisomes, where it is converted to glycine
by the action of the enzyme alanine:glyoxylate transaminase (AGT
encoded by AGXT). Deficiency of this enzyme causes primary hyperoxaluria type 1. Most of the remaining glyoxylate in the cytosol is
reduced to glycolate by the action of the enzyme glyoxylate reductase/

Iminodipeptides
6
Ornithine

Prolidase
deficiency

Prolinemia II

Prolinemia I
1

Glycine,
other
amino acids

N

COOH
5

Proline

2
'-Pyrroline5-carboxylate
(P5C)

Glutamate
4

Arginine
8
Ornithine
3
Hydroxyproline
Hydroxyprolinemia

'-Pyrroline3-hydroxy-5carboxylate

4-Hydroxyglutamate

4-Hydroxy-2-oxoglutarate (HOG)
7
Glyoxylate

Oxaluria Type 3
Pyruvate

See Fig. 105.8

Fig. 105.9 Pathways in the metabolism of proline. Enzymes: (1) Proline oxidase (dehydrogenase), (2) Δ1-­pyrroline-­5-­carboxylic acid (P5C) dehydro-

genase, (3) hydroxyproline oxidase, (4) Δ1-­pyrroline-­5-­carboxylic acid (P5C) synthase, (5) Δ1-­pyrroline-­5-­carboxylic acid (P5C) reductase, (6) prolidase,
(7) 4-­hydroxyoxoglutarate aldolase one (HOGA1), (8) ornithine aminotransferase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
hydroxypyruvate reductase (GR/HPR encoded by GRHPR). Deficiency
of this enzyme causes primary hyperoxaluria type 2. These pathways
protect the body from excessive production of oxalic acid (see Fig.
105.8). Any glyoxylate that cannot be disposed of through these pathways is readily converted to oxalic acid by the action of the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Oxalic acid cannot be further metabolized
in humans and is excreted in the urine as oxalates. Calcium oxalate
is relatively insoluble in water and precipitates in tissues (kidneys and
joints) if its concentration increases in the body.
Secondary hyperoxaluria has been observed in pyridoxine deficiency (cofactor for alanine:glyoxylate transaminase), in patients with
IBD, extensive resection of the small bowel or jejunoileal bypass (enteric
hyperoxaluria), after ingestion of ethylene glycol or high doses of vitamin C, and after administration of the anesthetic agent methoxyflurane (which can be catabolized to oxalic acid as one of its by-­products).
Acute, fatal hyperoxaluria may develop after ingestion of plants with
high oxalic acid content (e.g., sorrel) or intentional ingestion of oxalic
acid. Precipitation of calcium oxalate in tissues causes hypocalcemia,
liver necrosis, renal failure, cardiac arrhythmia, and death. The lethal
dose of oxalic acid is estimated at 5-­30 g.
Primary hyperoxaluria is a group of disorders in which large
amounts of oxalates accumulate in the body. Three types of primary
hyperoxaluria have been identified to date. The term oxalosis refers to
deposition of calcium oxalate in parenchymal tissues.

Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1

This rare autosomal recessive condition (prevalence of 1 in 120,000 live
births in Europe) is the most common form of primary hyperoxaluria
and can be seen in in ∼1% of children diagnosed with end-­stage renal
disease. Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 is caused by deficiency of the
peroxisomal enzyme alanine:glyoxylate transaminase (AGXT), which
is expressed almost exclusively in the liver peroxisomes and requires
pyridoxine (vitamin B6) as a cofactor. In the absence of this enzyme,
glyoxylic acid cannot be converted to glycine and is transferred to the
cytosol, where it is oxidized to oxalic acid (see earlier and Fig. 105.8).
The age of presentation varies widely, from the neonatal period to
late adulthood. The majority of patients become symptomatic in late
childhood or early adolescence. In about 20% of cases, symptoms
develop before the infant’s first birthday. The initial clinical manifestations are related to renal stones and nephrocalcinosis. Renal colic
and asymptomatic hematuria lead to a gradual deterioration of renal
function, manifested by growth retardation and uremia. If the disorder
is left untreated, most patients die before 20 years of age from renal
failure. Other frequent manifestations of the disease include failure to
thrive, short stature, arterial calcifications, arrhythmia, heart failure,
hypothyroidism, and skin nodules. Acute arthritis is a rare manifestation and can be misdiagnosed as gout because uric acid is often elevated
in patients with type 1 hyperoxaluria, driven in part by the worsening
renal function. Crystalline retinopathy and optic neuropathy causing
visual loss have been reported.
A marked increase in urinary excretion of oxalate (typical excretion:
10-­50 mg/day) is the most important laboratory finding. The presence
of oxalate crystals in urinary sediment is rarely helpful for diagnosis
because such crystals can also be seen in otherwise healthy individuals. Urinary excretion of glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid is increased in
most, but not all, patients. Diagnosis can be confirmed by identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in the AGXT gene or by performing
an enzymatic assay in liver specimens.
The diagnosis of primary hyperoxaluria type 1 can be suspected in
patients presenting with recurrent renal stones, nephrocalcinosis, and
oxalate crystals in the urine after ruling out possible secondary causes
(e.g., gastrointestinal disorders or dietary causes). Laboratory studies
will reveal elevated urinary oxalate excretion, high urinary glycolate,
and elevated plasma oxalate. Confirmatory testing of AGXT as a single
gene or part of a multigene panel will secure the ultimate diagnosis.
The most common pathogenic variant in patients with high residual
enzyme activity (c.508G>A, p.Gly170Arg) results in mislocalization
of the enzyme to mitochondria instead of peroxisomes, thus leading
to the loss of in vivo function. Prenatal diagnosis has been achieved

839

by DNA analysis of chorionic villus samples when biallelic pathogenic
variants are known.
Treatment focuses on the reduction of oxalic acid production and
on improving calcium oxalate disposal. Patients with primary hyperoxaluria type 1 should receive a 3-­month trial of pyridoxine treatment to establish pyridoxine responsiveness. In up to 30% of patients
(e.g., those homozygous for the AGXT pathogenic variant c.508G>A),
administration of large doses of pyridoxine can reduce the plasma level
and urinary excretion of oxalate. To increase calcium oxalate disposal
and prevent nephrolithiasis, high oral fluid intake (2-­3 L/m2/day while
controlling for fluid balance), urine alkalinization, phosphate supplementation, monitoring of vitamin C and vitamin D intake, and avoidance of drugs that can increase urinary calcium excretion (e.g., loop
diuretics) are recommended. Urinary stones should be managed by
experienced urologists, as excessive surgical trauma may contribute to
renal dysfunction. Renal function replacement strategies (e.g., hemodialysis) are used in some patients (e.g., to bridge patients to transplant
or when transplant is not a viable option).
Organ transplantation has emerged as the most definitive treatment. The decision to undergo kidney, liver, or liver-­kidney transplant
is complex, and referral rates may vary from one medical center to
another. Except for older patients with the pyridoxine-­responsive form
of disease, renal transplantation alone in patients with renal failure
may not improve the outcome, because oxalosis can recur in the transplanted kidney. Combined liver-­kidney transplants have resulted in a
significant decrease in plasma and urinary oxalate and thus may be the
most effective treatment strategy, particularly in children.

Primary Hyperoxaluria type 2 (l-­Glyceric Aciduria)

This rare autosomal recessive condition is caused by a deficiency of
the glyoxylate reductase–hydroxypyruvate reductase enzyme complex
encoded by GRHPR (see Fig. 105.8). A deficiency in the activity of
this complex results in accumulation of two intermediate metabolites:
hydroxypyruvate (the ketoacid derivative of serine) and glyoxylic acid.
Both these compounds are further metabolized by LDH to l-­glycerate
and oxalate, respectively. A high prevalence of this disorder is reported
in the Saulteaux-­Ojibway Indians of Manitoba.
Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 results in the deposition of calcium
oxalate in the renal parenchyma and urinary tract. Renal stones presenting with renal colic and hematuria may develop before age 2 years.
Renal failure is less common in this condition than in primary hyperoxaluria type 1.
Urinary testing reveals large amounts of l-­glyceric acid in addition
to high levels of oxalate. Urinary l-­glyceric acid is considered a pathognomonic finding in primary hyperoxaluria type 2. Urinary excretion
of glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid is not increased. The presence of l-­
glyceric acid without increased levels of glycolic and glyoxylic acids in
urine differentiates this type from type 1 hyperoxaluria. The diagnosis
can be confirmed by molecular analysis of GRHPR or by the enzyme
assay in liver biopsy.
The principles of therapy are similar to those in primary hyperoxaluria type 1. Renal transplant is used in some patients; experience with
kidney-­liver transplantation is limited at this time.

Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 3

Approximately 10% of patients with primary hyperoxaluria have deficiency of 4-­hydroxy-­2-­oxoglutarate aldolase 1 (HOGA1), the underlying cause of hyperoxaluria type 3. The enzyme is encoded by HOGA1.
This mitochondrial enzyme catalyzes a step in the metabolic pathway of hydroxyproline that generates pyruvate and glyoxylate from
4-­hydroxy-­2-­oxoglutarate (HOG; see Figs. 105.8 and 105.9). In vitro
studies show inhibition of glyoxylate reductase–hydroxypyruvate
reductase enzyme activity by a high concentration of HOG that accumulates in patients with hyperoxaluria type 3. HOGA1 deficiency
results in a biochemical phenotype similar to primary hyperoxaluria
type 2 (see Fig. 105.8).
Patients with primary hyperoxaluria type 3 usually present with
calcium oxalate kidney stones in early childhood, but asymptomatic
older siblings have also been identified. Gradually, renal function may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

840 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Glucose

3-Phosphoglycerate
3-Phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase deficiency

Pyruvate

1

3-Phosphohydroxypyruvate
Sarcosine

Glutamate
HOCH2

Glycine
Arginine:glycine
amidinotransferase deficiency

2

NH2

Glyoxylate

CH

COOH

3-Phosphoserine

L-Serine
3

Arginine

3-Phosphoserine
phosphatase deficiency

4

Ornithine

Guanidinoacetate
S-Adenosylmethionine
5
S-Adenosylhomocysteine

Phosphoserine
2-Ketoglutarate aminotransferase deficiency

Pyruvate

See Fig. 105.8

Guanidinoacetate
methyltransferase deficiency

Creatine

Creatinine

6
Creatinephosphate

Urinary
creatinine

Fig. 105.10 Biosynthesis of serine and creatine. Enzymes: (1) 3-­Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, (2) 3-­phosphoserine aminotransferase, (3)
3-­phosphoserine phosphatase, (4) arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT), (5) guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT), (6) creatine kinase.
decline, infrequently resulting in end-­stage renal disease. Increased levels of HOG in urine, serum, and liver biopsy samples of these patients
are the distinguishing feature of this disorder. Treatment involves high
oral fluid intake, management of oral citrate or phosphate intake to
prevent calcium oxalate renal stone formation, and avoidance of dehydration to prevent acute kidney injury. In severe forms of this disorder,
dialysis and transplantation may be required to address the end-­stage
renal disease.

Creatine Deficiency Disorders

Creatine is synthesized mainly in the liver, pancreas, and kidneys and
to a lesser degree in the brain from arginine and glycine and is transported to muscles and the brain, where there is high activity of the
enzyme creatine kinase (Fig. 105.10). Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of creatine in conjunction with adenosine triphosphate
and diphosphate provide high-­energy phosphate transfer reactions in
these organs. Creatine is nonenzymatically metabolized to creatinine
at a relatively constant daily rate and is excreted in the urine. Three
genetic conditions are known to cause creatine deficiency in the brain
and other tissues. Two enzymes, arginine:glycine amidinotransferase
(see Fig. 105.10; AGAT, encoded by GATM) and guanidinoacetate
methyltransferase (GAMT, encoded by GAMT), are involved in the
biosynthesis of creatine. Both conditions may respond to creatine
supplementation, especially when the treatment is started at an early
age. The third condition, an X-­linked inherited defect, is caused by a
deficiency of the creatinine transporter (CRTR, encoded by SLC6A8)
mediating uptake of creatine by the brain and muscle. A CRTR defect
is the most common cause of creatine deficiency, accounting for up to
1–2% of males with intellectual disability of unknown cause.
Clinical manifestations of the three defects overlap, relate to the
brain and muscle, and may appear in the first few weeks or months of
life. Developmental delay, intellectual disability, speech delay, psychiatric symptoms (autism and psychosis), hypotonia, ataxia, and seizures
are common findings. Dystonic movements have been documented in
GAMT and CRTR deficiency.
Laboratory findings include decreased creatine in plasma in patients
with AGAT and GAMT defects. Plasma creatinine level alone is insufficient to diagnose these disorders. Secondary to impaired reabsorption of creatine in kidneys, the urinary ratio of creatine to creatinine is
increased in male patients with a CRTR defect but can also be mildly

elevated in female carriers. Marked elevations of guanidinoacetate
in the blood, urine, and especially in CSF are diagnostic of GAMT
defects. In contrast, low levels of guanidinoacetate can be found in
body fluids in the AGAT defect. Evidence of creatine and creatine
phosphate deficiency (in all three defects) and high levels of guanidinoacetate (in the GAMT defect) in the brain can be demonstrated by
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). Brain MRI may show signal
hyperintensity in the globus pallidus. Diagnosis of AGAT deficiency or
GAMT deficiency may be confirmed by DNA analysis or by measuring enzymatic activity in cultured fibroblasts (GAMT) or lymphoblasts
(AGAT). The diagnosis of CRTR deficiency can be confirmed by DNA
analysis or a creatine uptake assay in fibroblasts.
The outcomes of treatment are age-­dependent, and the best outcomes are seen when treatment is started in the neonatal period or
presymptomatically. In AGAT-­deficient patients, oral creatine monohydrate (up to 400-­800 mg/kg/day) can improve muscle weakness,
seizures, and neurocognitive outcomes in some patients. In GAMT-­
deficient patients, supplementation with oral creatine monohydrate
(up to 400-­800 mg/kg/day), ornithine (up to 400-­800 mg/kg/day), and
dietary arginine restriction may result in improved muscle tone and
neurocognitive development and may alleviate seizures. In CRTR-­
deficient patients, administration of creatine monohydrate and its
precursors (arginine and glycine) may improve seizures and neurocognitive outcomes in some patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.8 Serine Deficiency Disorders (Serine
Biosynthesis and Transport Defects)
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Serine is a nonessential amino acid supplied through dietary sources
and through endogenous synthesis, mainly from glucose and glycine.
The endogenous production of serine comprises an important portion
of the daily requirement of this amino acid, especially in the synaptic junctions, where it contributes to phospholipid metabolism of
d-­serine and glycine, both of which are involved in neurotransmission
(see Chapter 105.11). Consequently, deficiency of any of the enzymes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
involved in the biosynthesis of serine or its transport causes neurologic
manifestations. The clinical spectrum of serine deficiency disorders
ranges widely and varies from Neu-­Laxova syndrome on the severe
end of spectrum to epilepsy and developmental delay on the milder
end. Affected patients respond favorably to oral supplementation with
serine and glycine when treatment is initiated very early in life. Figures
105.8 and 105.10 show the metabolic pathway for the synthesis and
catabolism of serine.

3-­PHOSPHOGLYCERATE DEHYDROGENASE
DEFICIENCY

3-­Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH encoded by PHGDH)
deficiency has a broad range of symptoms and ages of presentation.
Neu-­Laxova syndrome type 1, an autosomal recessive condition, is
on the most severe end of the spectrum, presenting prenatally with
intrauterine growth restriction and congenital anomalies, including
dysmorphic facial features, microcephaly, CNS malformations, limb
deformities, and ichthyosis. Most patients with this form are stillborn
or have early neonatal mortality. The infantile form of PHGDH deficiency can present with feeding problems, failure to thrive, vomiting,
irritability, seizures, severe developmental delay, and hypertonia progressing to spastic quadriplegia. Nystagmus, cataracts, hypogonadism, and megaloblastic anemia have been observed in some affected
infants. Patients with a milder form of this disorder experience cognitive impairment, behavioral problems, sensorineural polyneuropathy,
and childhood-­onset seizures.
Laboratory findings include low fasting levels of serine and glycine
in plasma and very low levels of serine and glycine in CSF. No abnormal
organic acid metabolite is found in the urine. MRI of the brain shows
cerebral atrophy with enlarged ventricles, significant attenuation of
white matter, and impaired myelination. Diagnosis can be confirmed
by DNA analysis or by measurement of the enzyme activity in cultured
fibroblasts. Treatment with high doses of serine (200-­700 mg/kg/day
orally) and glycine (200-­300 mg/kg/day) normalizes the serine levels
in the blood and CSF. When started postnatally, this treatment may
improve seizures, spasticity, and brain myelination. One case report
suggests that developmental delay may be prevented if the treatment
commences in the first days of life or prenatally.
If familial pathogenic variants are known, molecular prenatal diagnosis is possible. Administration of serine to a mother carrying an
affected fetus was associated with stabilization of the fetal head circumference, as evidenced by ultrasound. Treatment with supplemental
serine continued postnatally, and the patient remained normal neurologically at 4 years of age. The favorable response of this condition to a
relatively straightforward treatment makes this diagnosis an important
consideration in any child with microcephaly and neurologic defects
such as psychomotor delay or a seizure disorder. Measurements of
serine and glycine in the CSF are critical for diagnosis because mild
decreases of these amino acids in the plasma can be easily overlooked.

PHOSPHOSERINE AMINOTRANSFERASE
DEFICIENCY

Phosphoserine aminotransferase 1 (PSAT1 encoded by PSAT1) catalyzes conversion of 3-­phosphohydroxypyruvate to 3-­phosphoserine
(see Fig. 105.10). Deficiency of this enzyme, an autosomal recessive
disorder, may present in the neonatal period with poor feeding, cyanotic episodes, and irritability and may progress to intractable, multifocal seizures and microcephaly. Brain imaging may reveal generalized
cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Laboratory studies done on postprandial plasma samples may reveal normal or mildly decreased levels of
serine and glycine. Serine and glycine levels are usually more depressed
on the CSF amino acid analysis. Treatment with serine and glycine as
outlined earlier may result in clinical improvement.

3-­PHOSPHOSERINE PHOSPHATASE DEFICIENCY

3-­Phosphoserine phosphatase catalyzes the final step in the l-­serine
synthesis, converting 3-­phosphoserine to l-­serine. Deficiency of this
enzyme results in an autosomal recessive disorder with clinical and
biochemical findings indistinguishable from the PHGDH and PSAT1

841

deficiencies. The disorder is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in
PSPH.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.9 Proline
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Proline is a nonessential amino acid synthesized endogenously from
glutamic acid, ornithine, and arginine (see Fig. 105.9). Proline and
hydroxyproline are found in high concentrations in collagen. Normally, neither of these amino acids is found in large quantities in urine.
Excretion of proline and hydroxyproline as iminopeptides (dipeptides
and tripeptides containing proline or hydroxyproline) is increased in
disorders of accelerated collagen turnover, such as rickets or hyperparathyroidism. Proline is also found in synapses, where it can interact with
glycine and glutamate receptors (see Chapter 105.11). The catabolic
pathway of proline and hydroxyproline produces glyoxylic acid, which
can be further metabolized to glycine or oxalic acid (see Fig. 105.8).
Accumulation of proline in tissues is associated with disorders of
hyperprolinemia type 1 and hyperprolinemia type 2. Two types of
primary hyperprolinemia have been described. Reduced de novo synthesis of proline may manifest with cutis laxa (see Fig. 700.8) with
progeroid features or spastic paraplegia.

HYPERPROLINEMIA TYPE I

This rare autosomal recessive condition is caused by a deficiency of
proline oxidase (proline dehydrogenase; see Fig. 105.9). Most patients
with hyperprolinemia type 1 appear asymptomatic, although some may
present with intellectual disability, seizures, and behavioral problems.
Hyperprolinemia may also be a risk factor for autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia. The nature of such a wide phenotypic range
in this biochemical condition is incompletely understood. The gene
encoding proline oxidase (PRODH) is mapped to 22q11.2 within the
critical region for velocardiofacial syndrome. Laboratory studies reveal
high concentrations of proline in plasma, urine, and CSF. Increased
urinary excretion of hydroxyproline and glycine is also present, which
could be related to saturation of the shared tubular reabsorption mechanism due to massive prolinuria.
No effective treatment has yet emerged. Restriction of dietary proline
causes a modest improvement in plasma proline but with no proven
clinical benefit.

HYPERPROLINEMIA TYPE II

This is a rare autosomal recessive condition caused by the deficiency of
Δ1-­pyrroline-­5-­carboxylate dehydrogenase (aldehyde dehydrogenase
4, ALDH4A1; see Fig. 105.9). Intellectual disability and seizures (usually precipitated by an intercurrent infection) have been reported in
affected children, but asymptomatic patients have also been described.
The cause for such disparate clinical outcomes is incompletely
understood.
Laboratory studies reveal increased concentrations of proline and
Δ1-­pyrroline-­5-­carboxylate (P5C) in blood, urine, and CSF. The presence of P5C differentiates this condition from hyperprolinemia type
I. An increased level of P5C in body fluids, especially in the CNS,
appears to antagonize vitamin B6 and leads to vitamin B6 dependency
(see Chapter 105.14). Vitamin B6 dependency may be the main cause of
seizures and neurologic findings in this condition and can explain the
variability in clinical manifestations in different patients. Treatment
with high doses of vitamin B6 is recommended.

PROLIDASE DEFICIENCY

During collagen degradation, imidodipeptides are formed and are normally cleaved by tissue prolidase. Prolidase deficiency, an autosomal
recessive condition caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in PEPD,
results in the accumulation of imidodipeptides in body fluids. The age
at onset varies from 6 months to the third decade of life.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

842 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Clinical manifestations vary and include recurrent, severe, and
painful skin ulcers typically found on the hands and legs. Other skin
lesions may precede ulcers by several years and may include a scaly
erythematous maculopapular rash, purpura, and telangiectasia. Most
ulcers become infected. Healing of the ulcers may take months. Other
findings include developmental delays, intellectual disability, organomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and immune dysfunction resulting in increased susceptibility to infections (recurrent otitis media,
sinusitis, respiratory infection, splenomegaly). Some patients have craniofacial abnormalities such as ptosis, ocular proptosis, hypertelorism,
small beaked nose, and prominent cranial sutures. Asymptomatic cases
have also been reported. Increased incidence of systemic lupus erythematosus has been noted in children. High levels of urinary excretion of
imidodipeptides are diagnostic. The diagnosis can be confirmed using
DNA analysis. Enzyme assay may be performed in erythrocytes or cultured skin fibroblasts.
Treatment of prolidase deficiency is supportive. Infectious complications can be fatal and warrant close and proactive antibiotic
management. Oral supplementation with proline, ascorbic acid, and
manganese and topical proline and glycine have not been found to be
consistently effective in all patients.

DISORDERS OF DE NOVO PROLINE SYNTHESIS

De novo synthesis of proline and ornithine from glutamate appears to
be critical in the normal biology of connective tissue and to maintain
the urea cycle in a repleted state. Correspondingly, clinical manifestations of these disorders encompass connective tissue abnormalities,
nervous system abnormalities, and variable biochemical abnormalities
reflecting urea cycle dysfunction. Clinical and laboratory findings associated with the deficient function of Δ1-­P5C synthase (see Fig. 105.9),
encoded by ALDH18A1, and P5C, reductase encoded by PYCR1, are
discussed.
Deficient activity of P5C synthase has been associated with several
phenotypes, including de Barsy syndrome, characterized by cataracts,
growth restriction, intellectual disability, a prematurely aged appearance (progeroid features), and cutis laxa. Some patients may show
pyramidal signs. Skin biopsy may reveal decreased size of elastic fibers
and collagen abnormalities. Brain imaging studies show cortical atrophy, ventriculomegaly, and reduced creatine. Laboratory findings
include reduced levels of proline, ornithine, citrulline, and arginine as
well as mild fasting hyperammonemia. Patients may show only intermittent abnormalities on the plasma amino acid profile, likely related
to the time of blood sampling in relation to the last meal. Interestingly,
both autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant forms of inheritance have been described. The diagnosis can be suspected in a patient
presenting with cutis laxa, developmental delay, mild hyperammonemia, and characteristic amino acid abnormalities. The diagnosis can be
confirmed using molecular DNA analysis or the glutamine loading test
on skin fibroblasts. Treatment is supportive, although supplementation
with citrulline or arginine to address hyperammonemia and cerebral
creatine depletion have been proposed.
Biallelic pathogenic variants in PYCR1 result in the abnormal function of the mitochondrial Δ1-­pyrroline-­5-­carboxylate reductase, which
catalyzes the last step in the synthesis of proline from P5C. The most
consistent finding in patients carrying proven pathogenic variants in
PYCR1 include triangular facies, cutis laxa (de Barsy–like syndrome),
joint hypermobility, wrinkled skin, gerodermia osteodysplastica, and
progeroid features. Skin biopsy reveals reduction of the elastic fibers
and infiltration with inflammatory cells. Some patients may have epilepsy, developmental delays, intellectual disability, cataracts, osteopenia, and failure to thrive. However, many of the affected families are
consanguineous, thus complicating interpretation of the phenotype. Of
note, plasma amino acid analysis reveals no specific abnormalities. The
diagnosis depends on the recognition of the skin findings and can be
confirmed using molecular DNA analysis. Available pedigrees of families affected by PYCR1-­related disorder supports the autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.10 Glutamic Acid
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Glutamic acid and its amide derivative glutamine have a wide range
of functions in the body. Glutamate plays numerous biologic roles,
functioning as a neurotransmitter, an intermediate compound in
many fundamental biochemical reactions, and a precursor of an
inhibitory neurotransmitter, γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) (see Chapter 105.11). Another major product of glutamate is glutathione (γ-­
glutamylcysteinylglycine). This ubiquitous tripeptide, with its function as
the major antioxidant in the body, is synthesized and degraded through
a complex cycle called the γ-­glutamyl cycle (Fig. 105.11). Because of its
free sulfhydryl (−SH) group and its abundance in the cell, glutathione
protects other sulfhydryl-­containing compounds (e.g., enzymes, coenzyme A) from oxidation. It is also involved in the detoxification of peroxides, including hydrogen peroxide, and in keeping the intracellular
milieu in a reduced state. In addition, glutathione participates in amino
acid transport across the cell membrane through the γ-­glutamyl cycle.
One of the biochemical manifestations of γ-­glutamyl cycle deficiency
is increased urinary excretion of 5-­oxoproline, which could be the
result of both genetic and nongenetic causes. 5-­Oxoprolinemia should
be routinely considered in the differential diagnosis of high–anion gap
metabolic acidosis (HAGMA). Two metabolic disorders can present with massive 5-­oxoprolinuria: glutathione synthetase deficiency
and 5-­oxoprolinase deficiency (see Fig. 105.11). However, a more
common clinical scenario is a transient and mild urinary elevation of
5-­oxoproline that can be seen in a variety of metabolic and acquired
conditions, such as exposure to acetaminophen and some hydrolyzed-­
protein formulas, severe burns, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, homocystinuria, urea cycle defects, and tyrosinemia type I.

GLUTATHIONE SYNTHETASE DEFICIENCY

Three forms of this rare autosomal recessive condition have been
reported. In the mild form, glutathione synthetase deficiency causes
glutathione deficiency in erythrocytes. These patients present with
hemolytic anemia without chronic metabolic acidosis and demonstrate high residual activity of glutathione synthetase on enzymatic
testing. A moderate form has also been observed in which the
hemolytic anemia is associated with variable degrees of metabolic
acidosis and 5-­oxoprolinuria. Its severe form is distinguished by the
presence of hemolytic anemia accompanied by severe acidosis, massive
5-­oxoprolinuria, and neurologic manifestations.

Glutathione Synthetase Deficiency, Moderate and
Severe Forms

Affected newborn infants with severe and moderate forms of glutathione synthetase deficiency usually develop acute symptoms of metabolic acidosis, jaundice, and mild to moderate hemolytic anemia in the
first days of life. Chronic acidosis continues after recovery. Similar episodes of life-­threatening acidosis may occur during an infection (e.g.,
gastroenteritis) or after a surgical procedure. Progressive neurologic
damage develops with age, manifested by intellectual disability, spastic
tetraparesis, ataxia, tremor, dysarthria, and seizures. Susceptibility to
infections, presumably because of granulocyte dysfunction, is observed
in some patients. Patients with the moderate form of glutathione synthetase deficiency have milder acidosis and less 5-­oxoprolinuria than is
seen in the severe form, with few neurologic manifestations.
Laboratory findings include metabolic acidosis, mild to moderate
degrees of hemolytic anemia, and 5-­oxoprolinuria. High concentrations of 5-­oxoproline are also found in the blood. The urinary and blood
levels of 5-­oxoproline are less pronounced in patients with the moderate form of the condition. The glutathione content of erythrocytes is
markedly decreased. Increased synthesis of 5-­oxoproline in this disorder is thought to be the result of the conversion of γ-­glutamylcysteine
to 5-­oxoproline by the enzyme γ-­glutamyl cyclotransferase (see Fig.
105.11). γ-­Glutamylcysteine production increases greatly because the
normal inhibitory effect of glutathione on the γ-­glutamylcysteine synthetase enzyme is removed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
Amino acid
outside
the cell

Glutathione (GSH)
(J-Glutamylcysteinylglycine)

Glutathione synthetase
deficiency

843

5
J-Glutamyl Transpeptidase
Deficiency

Glycine
1

J-Glutamylcysteine
10
4

GCS deficiency

Cysteinylglycine

J-Glutamyl-amino acid

Glutamine
Cysteine
GS deficiency

Amino acid
inside
the cell

9

Lysine
Histidine
Proline
Ornithine
α-Ketoglutarate

Glutamate

2

3
5-Oxoproline
(pyroglutamic acid)

Oxoprolinuria

6
GABA
transaminase
deficiency

CO2
GABA

7

J-Hydroxybutyric
aciduria
Succinate
semialdehyde

Succinate
8

Histidine
Homocarnosine

J-Hydroxybutyric acid (GBH)

Fig. 105.11 The γ-­glutamyl cycle and related pathways. Defects of the glutathione (GSH) synthesis and degradation are noted. Enzymes: (1) γ-­
Glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), (2) γ-­glutamyl cyclotransferase, (3) 5-­oxoprolinase, (4) γ-­glutamyl-­cysteine synthetase, (5) glutathione synthetase, (6)
glutamate decarboxylase, (7) γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA) transaminase, (8) succinate-­semialdehyde dehydrogenase, (9) glutamine synthetase, (10)
dipeptidase.

Treatment of acute attack includes hydration, correction of acidosis
(by infusion of sodium bicarbonate), and measures to correct anemia
and hyperbilirubinemia. Chronic administration of alkali is usually
needed indefinitely. Supplementation with vitamin C, vitamin E, and
selenium is recommended. Drugs and oxidants known to cause hemolysis and stressful catabolic states should be avoided. Oral administration of glutathione analogs has been tried with variable success.
Prenatal diagnosis can be achieved by the measurement of
5-­oxoproline in amniotic fluid, by enzyme analysis in cultured amniocytes or chronic villus samples, or by GSS gene analysis. Successful
pregnancy in an affected female (moderate form) has been reported,
with favorable outcomes for both mother and infant.

Glutathione Synthetase Deficiency, Mild Form

The mild form has been reported in only a few patients. Mild to moderate hemolytic anemia has been the only clinical finding. Splenomegaly
has been reported in some patients. Cognitive development is normal.
Chronic metabolic acidosis typically is not seen. Some patients can have
increased concentrations of 5-­oxoproline in the urine. Biallelic pathogenic variants in GSS, the gene encoding the enzyme, appear to decrease
the half-­life of the enzyme, causing an increased rate of protein turnover
without affecting its catalytic function. The expedited rate of enzyme
turnover caused by these pathogenic variants is of little or no consequence for tissues with protein synthetic capability. However, inability
of mature erythrocytes to synthesize protein results in glutathione deficiency in the erythrocytes. Treatment is that of hemolytic anemia and
avoidance of drugs and oxidants that can trigger the hemolytic process.

All forms of glutathione synthetase deficiency are inherited as an
autosomal recessive trait. Diagnosis can be confirmed by GSS gene
analysis or enzyme activity in erythrocytes or skin fibroblasts.

5-­Oxoprolinase Deficiency

More than 20 patients with 5-­
oxoprolinuria (4-­
10 g/day) caused
by 5-­oxoprolinase (see Fig. 105.11) deficiency (OPLAH) have been
described. No specific clinical picture has yet emerged; completely
asymptomatic affected individuals have also been identified. It is therefore not clear whether 5-­oxoprolinase deficiency is of any clinical consequence. No treatment is currently recommended.

γ-­Glutamylcysteine Synthetase Deficiency
(Glutamate-­Cysteine Ligase Deficiency)

γ-­Glutamylcysteine synthetase deficiency is an autosomal recessive
disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in GCLC. Only a few
patients with this enzyme deficiency have been reported. The most
consistent clinical manifestation has been mild chronic hemolytic
anemia. Acute attacks of hemolysis have occurred after exposure
to sulfonamides. Peripheral neuropathy and progressive spinocerebellar degeneration have been noted in two siblings in adulthood.
Laboratory findings of chronic hemolytic anemia were present in
all patients. Generalized aminoaciduria is also found because the γ-­
glutamyl cycle is involved in amino acid transport in cells (see Fig.
105.11). Treatment focuses on the management of hemolytic anemia
and avoidance of drugs and oxidants that may trigger the hemolytic
process.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

844 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
γ-­GLUTAMYL TRANSPEPTIDASE DEFICIENCY
(GLUTATHIONEMIA)

GENETIC DISORDERS OF METABOLISM OF γ-­
AMINOBUTYRIC ACID

In the severe form of tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency (infantile parkinsonism, infantile encephalopathy, or type B), the clinical manifestations occur at birth or shortly thereafter and include microcephaly,
developmental delay, involuntary movements of the limbs with spasticity, dystonia, ptosis, expressionless face, oculogyric crises (upward
eye-­
rolling movements), and autonomic dysfunction (temperature
instability, excessive sweating, hypoglycemia, salivation, tremor, gastrointestinal reflux, constipation). Brisk reflexes, myoclonus, athetosis,
and distal chorea may be present. The patient with the severe form usually shows incomplete response to treatment with l-­dopa and is prone
to developing l-­dopa–induced dyskinesia as a side effect.
Laboratory findings include reduced levels of dopamine and its
metabolite homovanillic acid (HVA) and normal concentrations of
tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), neopterin, and 5-­hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(5-­HIAA, a metabolite of serotonin) in the CSF. Serum prolactin levels
are usually elevated. These findings are not diagnostic of the condition;
diagnosis should be established by molecular gene analysis.
Treatment with l-­
dopa/carbidopa results in significant clinical
improvement in most patients, but the severe forms are invariably
associated with l-­dopa–induced dyskinesias. To minimize the side
effects of therapy, treatment should be started with a low dose and, if
needed, increased very slowly. Other therapeutic interventions include
anticholinergics, serotonergic agents, and monoamine oxidase (MAO)
B inhibitors, including amantadine, biperiden, and selegiline. Bilateral
subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation has shown clinical efficacy
in one case. Tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Molecular testing for pathogenic variants in the TH
gene is available clinically.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

AROMATIC l-­AMINO ACID DECARBOXYLASE
DEFICIENCY

γ-­Glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) is expressed in any cell that has
secretory or absorptive functions. It is especially abundant in the kidneys, pancreas, intestines, and liver. The enzyme is also present in the
bile. Measurement of GGT in the blood is frequently performed to
evaluate for liver and bile duct diseases.
GGT deficiency causes elevation in glutathione concentrations in
body fluids, but the cellular levels remain normal (see Fig. 105.11).
Because only a few patients with GGT deficiency have been reported,
the scope of clinical manifestations has not yet been defined. Mild to
moderate intellectual disability and severe behavioral problems were
observed in three patients. However, one of two sisters with this condition had normal intelligence as an adult, and the other had Prader-­
Willi syndrome.
Laboratory findings include marked elevations in urinary glutathione (up to 1 g/day), γ-­glutamylcysteine, and cysteine. None of the
reported patients have had generalized aminoaciduria, a finding that
would have been expected to occur in this enzyme deficiency (see
Fig. 105.11).
Diagnosis can be confirmed by measurement of the enzyme activity in leukocytes or cultured skin fibroblasts. No effective treatment has
been proposed. The condition is inherited as an apparent autosomal
recessive trait. The γ-­glutamyl transpeptidases represent a large family
of enzymes encoded by at least seven genes.

See Chapter 105.11.

105.11 Disorders of Neurotransmitter
Metabolism
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Neurotransmitters are chemical substances released from the axonal
end of excited neurons at the synaptic junctions; they mediate initiation, amplification, or inhibition of neural impulses. Several amino
acids and their metabolites act as neurotransmitters in the central and
peripheral nervous system. Pathogenic variants in genes responsible for
the synthesis, transport, or degradation of these substances may cause
conditions that manifest neurologic and/or psychiatric abnormalities
(Table 105.3). Previously, children affected by disorders of neurotransmitters have been given syndromic diagnoses such as cerebral palsy,
epilepsy, parkinsonism, dystonia, or autism. Diagnosis, in most cases,
requires specialized laboratory studies of the CSF, because some of the
neurotransmitters generated in the CNS, dopamine and serotonin, do
not cross the BBB, and their abnormal concentrations are not detected
in the serum or urine.

TYROSINE HYDROXYLASE DEFICIENCY (INFANTILE
PARKINSONISM, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE DOPA-­
RESPONSIVE DYSTONIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SEGAWA SYNDROME)

Tyrosine hydroxylase catalyzes the formation of l-­dopa from tyrosine.
Deficiency of this enzyme results in deficiencies of dopamine and norepinephrine (see Fig. 105.2 and Fig. 105.12). The differential diagnosis includes a wide range of inherited dystonias, including autosomal
dominant dystonia caused by GTP cyclohydrolase 1 deficiency.
Clinical manifestations range from mild to very severe. In general, two phenotypes have been recognized. In the mild form (dopa-­
responsive dystonia, or type A), symptoms of unilateral limb dystonia
causing gait incoordination and postural tremor occur in childhood
and worsen with age when the condition remains untreated. Diurnal
variation of symptoms (worse at the end of the day) may be present.
Cognitive development is usually normal.

Aromatic l-­amino acid decarboxylase (AADC encoded by DDC) is
a vitamin B6–dependent enzyme that catalyzes the decarboxylation
of both 5-­hydroxytryptophan to form serotonin (see Fig. 105.5 and
Fig. 105.12) and l-­dopa to generate dopamine (see Fig. 105.2 and Fig.
105.12). Clinical manifestations of this autosomal recessive disorder
reflect the reduced availability of dopamine and serotonin. Poor feeding, lethargy, hypotension, hypothermia, oculogyric crises, and ptosis
have been observed in affected neonates. Clinical findings in infants
and older children include developmental delay, truncal hypotonia
with hypertonia of limbs, oculogyric crises, extrapyramidal movements
(choreoathetosis, dystonia, myoclonus), and autonomic abnormalities
(sweating, salivation, irritability, temperature instability, hypotension).
Symptoms may have a diurnal variation, becoming worse by the end
of the day.
Laboratory findings include decreased concentrations of dopamine and serotonin and their metabolites (HVA, 5-­HIAA, norepinephrine, vanillylmandelic acid [VMA]) and increased levels of
5-­hydroxytryptophan, l-­dopa, and its metabolite (3-­O-­methyldopa)
in body fluids, especially in CSF. Elevated serum concentrations of
prolactin (the result of dopamine deficiency) have also been observed.
Brain MRI reveals cerebral atrophy with degenerative changes in the
white matter. A urine screening program, focused on 3-­O-­methyl-­dopa
and VMA, has demonstrated diagnostic promise in high-­
disease-­
prevalence populations.
Treatment with neurotransmitter precursors has produced limited
clinical improvement. Dopamine and serotonin have no therapeutic
value because of their inability to cross the BBB. Nonergot dopamine
agonists, MAO inhibitors (tranylcypromine), serotonergic agents, and
high doses of pyridoxine/pyridoxal phosphate, a cofactor for the AADC
enzyme, are preferred. The demonstration of putamen-­directed gene
therapy with an adeno-­associated viral vector has shown some benefit
in patients. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis after in vitro fertilization
has been achieved in the high-­prevalence Taiwanese population.

TETRAHYDROBIOPTERIN DEFICIENCY

See Chapter 105.1.
Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) is the enzymatic cofactor for phenylalanine hydroxylase (see Fig. 105.1 and Fig. 105.12), tyrosine hydroxylase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

845

Table 105.3  Neurotransmitter Disorders Affecting Biogenic Amines and GABA Metabolism and Transport: Biomarker
Assessment in Biologic Fluids
CSF MARKER

DISEASE OMIMA/GENE

BIOCHEMICAL PATTERN

Biogenic amines

TH deficiency
191290/TH
AADC deficiency
107930/DDC
MAOA deficiency
309850/MAO-­A
DBH deficiency
609312/DBH
DAT1 deficiency
126455/SLC6A3
VMAT2 deficiency
193001/SLC18A2

CSF: ↓ HVA, MHPG, and HVA/5-­HIAA ratio

Dominant GTPCH-­I deficiency
600225/GCH
SR deficiency
182125/SRD

CSF: ↓ NP, BP, BH4, HVA, and 5-­HIAA

SSADH deficiency
610045/ALDH5A1

CSF: ↑ GABA
Plasma and urine: ↑↑ GHB

Pterins

GABA

CSF: ↓↓ HVA and 5-­HIAA; ↑↑ 3OMD and 5HTP
Urine: ↑ vanillactate; blood: ↑ 3OMD
CSF: ↓↓ 5-­HIAA and HVA
Plasma/urine: ↑ catecholamines and serotonin
CSF: ↑ HVA, HVA/5-­HIAA ratio, ↓ MHPGa
Urine/plasma: ↓↓ norepinephrine and epinephrine; ↑ dopamine and DOPAC
CSF: ↑ HVA and HVA/5-­HIAA ratio
Urine: ↑ HVA and 5-­HIAA
↓ Norepinephrine and dopamine

CSF: ↑ BP and SP; normal NP; ↓ BH4, HVA, and 5-­HIAA
Urine: ↑ SP

aExpected values.

↑: Increased values compared with reference aged values; ↓: decreased values compared with reference aged values.
5-­HIAA, 5-­Hydroxyindoleacetic acid; AADC, aromatic l-­amino acid decarboxylase; BP, biopterin; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DBH, dopamine β-­hydroxylase; DOPAC, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; GHB, γ-­hydroxybutyrate; GTPCH-­I, guanosine triphosphate cyclohydrolase-­I; HVA, homovanillic acid; MAOA, monoamine oxidase A; MHPG, 3-­methoxy-­4-­hydroxyphe
nylethyleneglycol; NP, neopterin; SP, sepiapterin; SR, sepiapterin reductase; SSADH, succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase; TH, tyrosine hydroxylase.
From García-­Cazorla À, Artuch R. Neurotransmitter disorders. In Rosenberg RN, Pascual JM, eds. Rosenberg’s Molecular and Genetic Basis of Neurological and Psychiatric Disease,
6th ed. Vol. 1. London: Elsevier; 2020: Table. 67.1.

GTP
GTPCH

Neopterin

7,8-H2Neopterin
PTPS
6- Pyruvoil-H4Pterin
SR
BH4
qBH2

Biopterin

Tyrosine

Tryptophan

TH

TPH

L-Dopa

MAO
COMT
HVA

MHPG

5-HTP
MAO
COMT

PLP

Dopamine
MAO
COMT

AADC

Serotonin

5-HIAA

DBH
Norepinephrine

MAO
COMT
VMA

Epinephrine

Fig. 105.12 Metabolic pathways of monoamines. The first step in their formation is catalyzed by amino acid–specific hydroxylases, which require

tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) as a cofactor. The synthesis of BH4 comes from GTP, and it is initiated by the enzyme GTPCH-­I, which forms dihydroneopterin triphosphate. Levodopa and 5-­HTP are metabolized by a common B6-­dependent AADC into dopamine and serotonin. MAOA catabolizes
adrenaline and noradrenaline to VMA and MHPG. This enzyme is also involved in the catabolism of both dopamine into HVA and serotonin into 5-­
HIAA. 5-­HIAA, 5-­Hydroxyindoleacetic acid; 5-­HTP, 5-­hydroxytryptophan; AADC, aromatic l-­amino acid decarboxylase; GTP, guanosine triphosphate;
GTPCH-­I, GTP cyclohydrolase-­1; HVA, homovanillic acid; MAOA, monoamine oxidase A; MHPG, 3-­methoxy-­4-­hydroxyphenylethyleneglycol; VMA,
vanillylmandelic acid. (From García-­Cazorla À, Artuch R. Neurotransmitter disorders. In: Rosenberg RN, Pascual JM, eds. Rosenberg’s Molecular and
Genetic Basis of Neurological and Psychiatric Disease, 6th ed. Vol. 1. London: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 67.1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

846 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
(see Fig. 105.2 and 105.12), tryptophan hydroxylase (see Fig. 105.5 and
105.12), and nitric oxide synthase. It is synthesized from GTP in many
tissues (see Fig. 105.1). Deficiencies of enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of BH4 result in inadequate production of this cofactor, which
causes deficiencies of monoamine neurotransmitters with or without
concomitant hyperphenylalaninemia.

Tetrahydrobiopterin Deficiency with
Hyperphenylalaninemia
See Chapter 105.1.

Tetrahydrobiopterin Deficiency Without
Hyperphenylalaninemia
GTP Cyclohydrolase 1 Deficiency (Hereditary Progressive Dystonia, Autosomal Dominant Dopa-­Responsive
Dystonia, Autosomal Dominant Segawa Syndrome)

Guanosine triphosphate (GTP) cyclohydrolase 1 catalyzes the first and
rate-­limiting step in the biopterin biosynthesis pathway (see Fig. 105.1).
This form of dystonia, caused by GTP cyclohydrolase 1 deficiency
(GCH1), has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance and is more
common in females than in males (4:1 ratio) (see Chapter 637.4). Clinical
manifestations usually start in early childhood with tremor and dystonia
of the lower limbs (toe gait), which may spread to all extremities within
a few years. Torticollis, dystonia of the arms, and poor coordination may
precede dystonia of the lower limbs. Early development is generally normal. Symptoms have an impressive diurnal variation, becoming worse
by the end of the day and improving with sleep. Autonomic instability is
common. Parkinsonism may also be present or develop with advancing
age. Late presentation in adult life has also been reported, associated with
action dystonia (“writer’s cramp”), torticollis, or generalized rigid hypertonia with tremor but without postural dystonia. Additionally, limited
data on adults suggest symptoms related to serotonin deficiency (sleep
disturbance, cognitive impairment, impulsivity).
Laboratory findings show reduced levels of BH4 and neopterin in
the CSF without hyperphenylalaninemia (not to be confused with the
autosomal recessive form of BH4-­deficient hyperphenylalaninemia,
see Chapter 105.1). Dopamine and its metabolite (HVA) may also
be reduced in CSF. The serotonergic pathway is less affected by this
enzyme deficiency; thus concentrations of serotonin and its metabolites are usually normal. Plasma phenylalanine is normal, but an oral
phenylalanine loading test (100 mg/kg) produces an abnormally high
plasma phenylalanine level with an elevated phenylalanine/tyrosine
ratio. The ratio, obtained 2-­3 hours after the load, in combination with
urine neopterin level, has optimal diagnostic specificity and sensitivity.
The existence of asymptomatic carriers indicates that other factors or
genes may play a role in pathogenesis. Asymptomatic carriers may be
identified using molecular testing or by the phenylalanine loading test.
Diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating reduced levels of BH4 and
neopterin in CSF, measurement of the enzyme activity, and molecular
genetic analysis of GCH1 (see Chapter 105.1). Clinically, the condition
should be differentiated from other causes of dystonias and childhood
parkinsonism, especially tyrosine hydroxylase, sepiapterin reductase,
and aromatic amino acid decarboxylase deficiencies.
Treatment with l-­dopa/carbidopa usually produces dramatic clinical improvement. Oral administration of BH4 is also effective but is
rarely used.

Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency

Sepiapterin reductase (encoded by SPR) is involved in the conversion of
6-­pyruvoyl-­tetrahydropterin to BH4. It also participates in the salvage
pathway of BH4 synthesis (see Fig. 105.1 and Fig. 105.12). Sepiapterin
reductase deficiency, an autosomal recessive condition, results in accumulation of 6-­lactoyl-­tetrahydropterin, which can be converted to
sepiapterin nonenzymatically. The majority of sepiapterin is metabolized to BH4 through the salvage pathway in peripheral tissues (see Fig.
105.1 and Fig. 105.12), but because of the low activity of dihydrofolate reductase in the brain, the amount of BH4 remains insufficient for
proper synthesis of dopamine and serotonin. This explains the absence
of hyperphenylalaninemia and the often-­delayed diagnosis.

Clinical manifestations in severely affected patients usually appear
within a few months of life. Cardinal manifestations include paroxysmal stiffening, oculogyric crises, and hypotonia. Additional findings
include motor and language delays, weakness, limb hypertonia, dystonia, hyperreflexia, and early-­onset parkinsonism. The symptoms
usually have a diurnal variation. Misdiagnosis as cerebral palsy is common, and a wide variability of symptoms has been reported. Diagnosis
is established by measurement of CSF neurotransmitters and pterin
metabolites, which reveal decreased dopamine, HVA, norepinephrine,
and 5-­HIAA and marked elevations of sepiapterin and dihydrobiopterin. The serum concentration of prolactin may be elevated. The
phenylalanine loading test may have diagnostic utility, but it is being
replaced by molecular genetic analysis, which can confirm the diagnosis. Treatment with slowly increasing doses of L-­dopa/carbidopa and
5-­hydroxytryptophan usually produces dramatic clinical improvement.

DOPAMINE β-­HYDROXYLASE DEFICIENCY

Dopamine β-­hydroxylase catalyzes the conversion of dopamine to
norepinephrine (see Fig. 105.2 and Fig. 105.12). The deficiency of
this enzyme results in reduced or absent synthesis of norepinephrine,
leading to dysregulation of the sympathetic function. Infants and children may present with difficulty opening the eyes, ptosis, hypotension, hypothermia, hypoglycemia, and nasal stuffiness. Adult patients
may present with profound deficits of autonomic regulation, resulting
in severe orthostatic hypotension, and sexual dysfunction in males.
Presyncopal symptomatology includes dizziness, blurred vision, dyspnea, nuchal discomfort, and chest pain; olfactory function remains
relatively intact. The diagnosis can be aided by performing autonomic
function testing (measurement of the sinus arrhythmia ratio, blood
pressure studies during controlled hyperventilation, Valsalva maneuver, cold pressor, handgrip exercise). Laboratory findings include
decreased or absent norepinephrine and epinephrine and their metabolites, with elevated levels of dopamine and its metabolite (HVA), in
plasma, CSF, and urine. Elevated plasma dopamine may be pathognomonic for this disease. MRI of the brain shows decreased brain volume,
consistent with the neurotrophic role of norepinephrine. Treatment
with l-­dihydroxyphenylserine, which is converted to norepinephrine
directly in vivo by the action of AADC, leads to significant improvement in orthostatic hypotension and normalizes noradrenaline and its
metabolites. The condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Dopamine β-­hydroxylase is encoded by DBH.

MONOAMINE OXIDASE A DEFICIENCY

The human genome encodes two MAO isoenzymes: MAO A and MAO
B. Both enzymes catalyze oxidative deamination of most biogenic
amines in the body, including serotonin (see Fig. 105.5 and Fig. 105.12),
norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine (see Fig. 105.2 and Fig.
105.12). The genes for both isoenzymes are on the X chromosome
(Xp11.3). A deletion of both genes can also encompass a neighboring
gene, NDP, resulting in a contiguous deletion syndrome, which can
present as an atypical Norrie disease (see Chapter 640). Male patients
with MAO A deficiency manifest borderline intellectual deficiency
and impaired impulse control. The consequences of the isolated MAO
B deficiency are incompletely understood. Combined MAO A and B
deficiency causes severe intellectual disability and behavioral problems
and can be associated with pronounced laboratory abnormalities (e.g.,
fourfold to sixfold serotonin elevation in physiologic fluids, elevated
O-­methylated amine metabolites, and reduced deamination products
[VMA, HVA]). Dietary intervention (low tyramine, phenylethylamine,
and l-­dopa/dopamine intake) did not improve patients’ blood serotonin levels. Inheritance of MAO deficiency is X-­linked. Treatment of
MAO A deficiency is supportive.

DISORDERS OF GABA METABOLISM

GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter synthesized in the synapses through decarboxylation of glutamic acid by glutamate decarboxylase (GAD). The same pathway is responsible for production of
GABA in other organs, especially the kidneys and the β cells of the pancreas. The GAD enzyme requires pyridoxine (vitamin B6) as a cofactor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

847

Two GAD enzymes, GAD1 (GAD67) and GAD2 (GAD65), have been
identified. GAD1 is the main enzyme in the brain, and GAD2 is the
major enzyme in the β cells. Antibodies against GAD65 and GAD67
have been implicated in the development of type 1 diabetes and stiff-­
person syndrome, respectively. GABA is catabolized to succinic acid
by two enzymes: GABA transaminase and succinic semialdehyde
dehydrogenase (SSADH) (see Figs. 105.11 and 105.12).

through exocytosis. As expected, pathogenic variants in transporter
proteins interfere with the proper reuptake and storage of neurotransmitters and may result in clinical manifestations similar to those seen in
deficiencies of neurotransmitter metabolism. Several conditions caused
by pathogenic variants of neurotransmitter protein transporters have
been described, including dopamine transporter protein deficiency and
dopamine-­serotonin vesicular transporter disease.

GABA Transaminase Deficiency

SLC6A3-­Related Dopamine Transporter Protein
Deficiency

Clinical manifestations in the two index infant siblings included severe
developmental delay and intellectual disability, hypotonia, hyperreflexia, lethargy, refractory seizures, and increased linear growth likely
related to GABA-­mediated increased secretion of growth hormone.
Increased concentrations of GABA and β-­alanine were found in the
CSF (see Fig. 105.11 and Fig. 105.12). Evidence of leukodystrophy was
noted in the postmortem examination of the brain. A third patient
showed severe psychomotor retardation, recurrent episodic lethargy,
and intractable seizures with comparable CSF metabolite abnormalities
to those of the index probands. GABA transaminase deficiency is demonstrated in the brain and lymphocytes. Treatment is symptomatic.
Intervention with vitamin B6, the cofactor for the enzyme, was without
therapeutic benefit. The condition is inherited in the autosomal recessive manner and caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in ABAT.

Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency
(β-­Hydroxybutyric Aciduria)

Clinical manifestations of SSADH deficiency, an autosomal recessive
disorder, usually begin in infancy with developmental delays with a
disproportionate deficit in expressive language, hypotonia, and ataxia;
seizures occur in approximately 50% of patients (see Fig. 105.11 and
Fig. 105.12). Many patients also carry the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Neuropsychiatric comorbidity (especially oppositional
defiance, obsession-­compulsion, and hyperactivity) can be disabling,
particularly in adolescents and adults. Abnormal EEG findings include
background slowing and generalized spike-­wave paroxysms, with variable lateralization in hemispheric onset and voltage predominance.
Photosensitivity and electrographic status epilepticus of sleep have
been reported in combination with difficulties in sleep maintenance
and excessive daytime somnolence. Brain MRI shows an increased T2-­
weighted hyperintensity involving the globus pallidi, cerebellar dentate nuclei, and subthalamic nuclei, usually in a bilaterally symmetric
distribution.
The biochemical hallmark, γ-­hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), is elevated
in physiologic fluids (CSF, plasma, urine) in all patients. Increased concentrations of GABA are also found in the CSF. Heightened diagnostic
suspicion evolves through documentation of elevated urinary GHB,
and confirmation is achieved by molecular genetic testing.
Effective treatment is lacking. Vigabatrin (a GABA-­transaminase
inhibitor) has been employed empirically, with mixed outcomes, and
there is concern with its use, as it further elevates CNS GABA in an
already hyper-­GABAergic disorder. Additionally, vigabatrin can cause
constriction of the visual field, and long-­term use is contraindicated.
SSADH is encoded by ALDH5A1, and inheritance follows an autosomal recessive pattern. Prenatal diagnosis has been achieved by measurement of GHB in the amniotic fluid, assay of the enzyme activity in
the amniocytes, chorionic villus sampling, or DNA analysis.

DEFECTS IN NEUROTRANSMITTER TRANSPORTER
PROTEINS

More than 20 different proteins are involved in transporting neurotransmitters across the neuronal membranes. The main function of most of
these transporters is to remove excess neurotransmitters from the synaptic junction into the presynaptic neurons (reuptake). This recycling
process not only regulates the precise effect of neurotransmitters at the
synaptic junction but also resupplies the presynaptic neurons with neurotransmitters for future use. A few transporter proteins are involved
in shuttling neurotransmitters from the neuronal cytoplasm across the
membrane of synaptic vesicles for storage (vesicular transporters). On
neuronal stimulation, these vesicles release a bolus of neurotransmitters

This transporter protein is involved in the reuptake of dopamine by the
presynaptic neurons, and its deficiency causes depletion of dopamine
and thus a dopamine-­deficient state. The dopamine transporter protein (DAT) is encoded by SLC6A3. Children with biallelic pathogenic
variants in SLC6A3 present with symptoms of infantile parkinsonism-­
dystonia syndrome. Irritability and feeding difficulties start shortly
after birth and progress to hypotonia, lack of head control, parkinsonism, dystonia, and global developmental delay by early infancy. Brain
MRI usually shows no abnormalities.
CSF examination reveals elevation of HVA and a normal level of
5-­HIAAs. The urinary level of HVA and serum concentration of prolactin are increased. Diagnosis can be established by demonstrating
loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the SLC6A3 gene.

Dopamine-­Serotonin Vesicular Transporter Disease
(Vesicular Monoamine Transporter Deficiency)

This autosomal recessive condition is caused by pathogenic variants in
the SLC18A2 gene. This gene encodes the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) involved in transporting dopamine and serotonin
from the cytoplasm into the synaptic storage vesicles located in the
axonal terminals of the presynaptic neurons. Most affected children
presented in the first year of life with symptoms consistent with deficiencies of dopamine (hypotonia progressing into dystonia, parkinsonism, oculogyric crises), serotonin (sleep and psychiatric disturbances),
and norepinephrine-­epinephrine (excessive sweating, tremors, temperature instability, postural hypotension, ptosis). Neurocognitive
delays become apparent in the first year of life. No diurnal variation
of the symptoms was noted. Brain imaging studies were within normal limits. Changes in the levels of CNS neurotransmitters and their
metabolites have been inconsistent.
The phenotype resembles that seen in AADC and BH4 deficiencies.
Diagnosis requires demonstration of biallelic pathogenic variants in
SLC18A2. Treatment with l-­dopa/carbidopa caused exacerbation of
symptoms, whereas pramipexole, a dopamine receptor agonist, has
resulted in a promising clinical response.

HISTIDINE DECARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY

Decarboxylation of histidine by histidine decarboxylase produces histamine, which functions as a neurotransmitter in the brain. Deficiency
of this enzyme (expressed mainly in the posterior hypothalamus)
results in deficiency of histamine in the CNS and in one family has
been reported as an autosomal dominant form of Tourette syndrome
(see Chapter 105.13).

HYPERPROLINEMIA

Intellectual disability and seizures are common findings in most
patients with hyperprolinemia types I and II. Patients with type I
hyperprolinemia typically show a benign clinical course but could have
an increased risk of developing schizophrenia. The contribution of
increased concentrations of proline to the mechanisms of schizophrenia, however, remains unclear. The neurologic abnormalities observed
in hyperprolinemia type II are mainly caused by development of vitamin B6 dependency in this condition (see Chapter 105.9). Dietary
intervention in hyperprolinemia type I and II is neither feasible nor
recommended.

3-­PHOSPHOGLYCERATE DEHYDROGENASE
DEFICIENCY
See Chapter 105.8.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

848 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
PHOSPHOSERINE AMINOTRANSFERASE
DEFICIENCY

GENETIC CAUSES OF HYPERAMMONEMIA

Hyperammonemia, sometimes severe, occurs in inborn errors of
metabolism other than the urea cycle defects (Table 105.5; see also
Table 104.5). The mechanisms of hyperammonemia in some of these
conditions are diverse and include accumulation of toxic metabolites
(e.g., organic acids), impaired transport of urea cycle intermediates
(e.g., HHH syndrome), or depletion of urea cycle intermediates (e.g.,
lysinuric protein intolerance), leading to compromised function of the
urea cycle.

See Chapter 105.8.

NONKETOTIC HYPERGLYCINEMIA
See Chapter 105.7.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF
HYPERAMMONEMIA

105.12 Urea Cycle and Hyperammonemia
(Arginine, Citrulline, Ornithine)

In the neonatal period, symptoms and signs are mostly related
to brain dysfunction and are similar regardless of the cause of the
hyperammonemia. The affected infant appears healthy at birth but
becomes symptomatic in the first days of life, often following the
introduction of dietary protein. Refusal to eat, vomiting, tachypnea,
and lethargy can quickly progress to a deep coma. Seizures are common. Physical examination may reveal hepatomegaly in addition to
obtundation. Hyperammonemia can trigger increased intracranial
pressure that may be manifested by a bulging fontanelle and dilated
pupils.
In infants and older children, acute hyperammonemia is manifested by vomiting and neurologic abnormalities such as ataxia, confusion, agitation, irritability, combativeness, and psychosis. These
manifestations may alternate with periods of lethargy and somnolence
that may progress to coma.

Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Catabolism of amino acids results in the production of free ammonia,
which in high concentrations is toxic to the CNS. Mammals detoxify
ammonia to urea through a series of reactions known as the urea cycle
(Fig. 105.13). It is composed of five enzymes: carbamoyl phosphate
synthetase 1 (CPS1), ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS), argininosuccinate lyase (ASL), and arginase 1 (ARG1). A sixth enzyme, N-­acetylglutamate (NAG) synthetase
(NAGS), catalyzes synthesis of NAG, an obligatory activator (effector)
of the CPS1 enzyme. Individual deficiencies of these enzymes have
been observed and, with an overall estimated prevalence of 1 in 35,000
live births, they are the most common genetic causes of hyperammonemia in infants (Table 105.4).

Benzoate
Glycine + Benzoyl-CoA

Hippurate

NH4 + Glutamate

Glutamine
+
Phenylacetate

NAG
synthetase
deficiency

NH4 + CO2 + ATP

CPS1 deficiency

N-acetylglutamate (NAG)
1

7

Urine

Phenylacetyl
glutamine

Urine

Carbamoyl phosphate

Proline

Aspartate

Acetyl-CoA
+
Glutamate

Gyrate atrophy
Glutamate
5-semialdehyde
6

OTC deficiency

Ornithine
2

Citrullinemia
Type II

Citrulline

8

Mitochondrial membrane
9

CO2

HHH syndrome

Putrescine
Urine

Citrulline
Urea

Ornithine

Aspartate
Cytosol

Argininase 1
deficiency

5
3

Arginine
Fumaric
acid

4

Citrullinemia
Type I

Argininosuccinic acid

Argininosuccinic
aciduria

Fig. 105.13 Urea cycle: Pathways for ammonia disposal and ornithine metabolism. Reactions occurring in the mitochondria are depicted in purple.

Reactions shown with interrupted arrows are the alternative pathways for the disposal of ammonia. Enzymes: (1) Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
type 1 (CPS1), (2) ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), (3) argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS), (4) argininosuccinate lyase (ASL), (5) arginase 1, (6) ornithine aminotransferase, (7) N-­acetylglutamate (NAG) synthetase, (8) citrin, (9) ornithine transporter (ORNT1). HHH syndrome, hyperammonemia-­
hyperornithinemia-­homocitrullinemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

849

Table 105.4  The Urea Cycle Disorders
ENZYME OR
TRANSPORTER
DEFICIENCY

GENE
(INHERITANCE)

INCIDENCE

CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS

AMINO ACIDS (PLASMA,
UNLESS OTHERWISE
INDICATED)

URINE ORGANIC
ACIDS

N-­Acetylglutamate
synthetase
MIM 237310

NAGS
(AR)

<1:2,000,000

Acute episodic hyperammonemia
Late-­onset presentations

↓ Citrulline
↓ Arginine
↑ Glutamine

Unremarkable

Carbamyl phosphate
synthetase I
MIM 237300

CPS1
(AR)

1:1,300,000

Acute episodic hyperammonemia
Late-­onset presentations

↓ Citrulline
↓ Arginine
↑ Glutamine

Unremarkable

Ornithine
transcarbamylase
MIM 311250

OTC
(XL)

1:56,500

Acute episodic hyperammonemia
Late-­onset presentations

↓ Citrulline
↓ Arginine
↑ Glutamine

↑↑ Orotic acid

Argininosuccinate
synthetase
MIM 215700

ASS1
(AR)

1:250,000

Acute episodic hyperammonemia
Late-­onset presentations

↑↑ Citrulline
↑ Glutamine
↓ Arginine

N-­to-­↑ orotic acid

Argininosuccinate
lyase
MIM 207900

ASL
(AR)

1:218,750

Acute episodic hyperammonemia
Late-­onset presentations
↑ Neurodevelopmental issues
Chronic liver disease
Trichorrhexis nodosa

↑ Argininosuccinate and
anhydrides
↑ Glutamine
↑ Citrulline
↓ Arginine

N-­to-­↑ orotic acid

Arginase
MIM 207800

ARG1
(AR)

1:950,000

Progressive spasticity (LL > UL)
Usually mild ID
Hyperammonemia (rare)

↑ Arginine

N-­to-­↑ orotic acid

Citrin
MIM 605814, 603471

SLC25A13
(AR)

<1:2,000,000

NICCD
Intrahepatic cholestasis
Poor growth
Spontaneous improvement by 1
yr of age
FTTDCD
Failure to thrive
Dyslipidemia
Chronic liver disease
Citrullinemia type II
Acute episodic hyperammonemia
Neuropsychologic manifestations

↑ Citrulline
↑ Arginine
↑ Methionine
↑ Threonine

Unremarkable

Ornithine
transporter
MIM 238970

SLC25A15
(AR)

<1:2,000,000

Acute episodic hyperammonemia
Liver failure (with or without
hyperammonemia)
Recurrent vomiting
Neurologic presentation (e.g., DD,
spasticity)
Recurrent

↑ Ornithine
↑ Glutamine
↔-­to-­↓ citrulline
↑ Urine homocitrulline

N-­to-­↑ orotic acid

AR, Autosomal recessive; DD, developmental delay; FTTDCD, failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency; IV, intravenous; LL, lower limb; NICCD, neonatal
intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency; UL, upper limb; XL, X-­linked.
From Rossignol F, Ah Mew N, Meltzer MR, Gropman AL. Urea cycle disorders. In: Rosenberg RN, Pascual JM, eds. Rosenberg’s Molecular and Genetic Basis of Neurological and
Psychiatric Disease, 6th ed. Vol. 1. London: Elsevier; 2020: Table 61.1.

Routine laboratory studies show no specific findings when hyperammonemia is caused by defects of the urea cycle enzymes. Blood urea
nitrogen is usually low-­normal or low in these patients. Some patients
may initially present with unexplained elevated serum alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) and even meet the
criteria for acute liver failure. In infants with organic acidemias, hyperammonemia is commonly associated with severe acidosis and ketonuria. Newborn infants with hyperammonemia are often misdiagnosed
as having sepsis; they may succumb without a correct diagnosis. Neuroimaging may reveal cerebral edema. Autopsy may reveal microvesicular steatosis, mild cholestasis, and fibrosis of the liver. Thus because
of the nonspecific presentation or urea cycle disorders, it is imperative to measure plasma ammonia levels in any ill infant with severe
sepsis, unexplained liver dysfunction, recurrent emesis, or progressive
encephalopathy.

DIAGNOSIS

The main criterion for diagnosis is hyperammonemia. Each clinical
laboratory should establish its own normal values for blood ammonia.

Normal newborn values are higher than those of the older child or
adult. Occasionally, levels as high as 100 μmol/L can occur in healthy
term infants. An ill infant usually manifests a blood ammonia level
>150 μmol/L. Figure 105.14 illustrates an approach to the differential
diagnosis of hyperammonemia in the newborn infant. Careful inspection of individual plasma amino acid profiles usually reveals abnormalities that assist in diagnosis. In patients with deficiencies of CPS1, OTC,
or NAGS, frequent findings include elevations in plasma glutamine
and alanine with concurrent decrements in citrulline and arginine.
These disorders cannot be differentiated from one another by plasma
amino acid levels alone. A marked increase in urinary orotic acid in
patients with OTC deficiency helps differentiate this defect from CPS1
deficiency (see Table 105.4). Differentiation between the CPS1 deficiency and the NAGS deficiency may require molecular analysis of
the relevant genes or, infrequently, an assay of the respective enzyme.
Significant clinical improvement occurring after oral administration of carbamylglutamate, however, supports the diagnosis of NAGS
deficiency. Patients with a deficiency of ASS, ASL, or arginase 1 have
marked increases in the plasma levels of citrulline, argininosuccinic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

850 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 105.5  Inborn Errors of Metabolism Causing
Hyperammonemia

Table 105.6  Treatment of Acute Hyperammonemia in an
Infant

DEFICIENCIES OF THE UREA CYCLIC ENZYMES
Carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1
Ornithine transcarbamylase
Argininosuccinate synthetase
Argininosuccinate lyase
Arginase 1
N-­acetylglutamate synthetase

1.	Provide adequate calories, fluid, and electrolytes intravenously
(10% glucose, NaCl* and intravenous lipids 1 g/kg/day). Add minimal
amounts of protein, preferably as a mixture of essential amino
acids (0.25 g/kg/day) during the first 24 hr of therapy.
2.	Give priming doses of the following compounds (to be added to
20 mL/kg of 10% glucose and infused within 1-­2 hr):

ORGANIC ACIDEMIA
Propionic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia
Isovaleric acidemia
β-­Ketothiolase deficiency
Multiple carboxylase deficiencies
Medium-­chain fatty acid acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Glutaric acidemia type I
3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaric aciduria
OTHERS
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Hyperammonemia-­hyperornithinemia-­homocitrullinemia syndrome
Transient hyperammonemia of the newborn
Congenital hyperinsulinism with hyperammonemia
Carbonic anhydrase VA deficiency

acid, or arginine, respectively. The combination of hyperammonemia
and marked hypercitrullinemia or argininosuccinic acidemia is virtually pathognomonic for these disorders. Additional clinical clues may
come from the past medical history. Children with urea cycle defects
often self-­select a low-­protein, high-­carbohydrate diet, especially those
with late-­onset disease or symptomatic females with partial OTC
deficiency.
Because of the nonspecific clinical and laboratory findings, mass
screening of newborn infants has been implemented in many countries,
which can identify patients with ASS, ASL, and arginase 1 deficiencies.

TREATMENT OF ACUTE HYPERAMMONEMIA

The clinical outcome depends mainly on the severity and the duration
of hyperammonemia. Serious neurologic sequelae are likely in newborns with severe elevations in blood ammonia (>300 μmol/L) lasting
more than 12 hours. Thus acute hyperammonemia should be treated
promptly and vigorously. The goal of therapy is to lower the concentration of ammonia. This is accomplished by (1) temporarily restricting dietary sources of ammonia (protein), (2) minimizing endogenous
protein breakdown and favoring endogenous protein synthesis by providing adequate calories and essential amino acids, and (3) removal
of ammonia from the body in a form other than urea (Table 105.6).
Fluid, electrolytes, glucose (10–15%), and lipids (1-­2 g/kg/day) should
be infused intravenously, together with minimal amounts of protein
(0.25 g/kg/day), preferably including essential amino acids. Oral feeding with a low-­protein formula (0.5-­1.0 g/kg/day) through a nasogastric tube should be started as soon as sufficient improvement is seen.
Because the kidneys clear ammonia poorly, its removal from the
body must be expedited by formation of compounds with a high renal
clearance. An important advance in the treatment of hyperammonemia
has been the introduction of nitrogen scavenging therapy by using
an exogenous organic acid that conjugates to endogenous nonessential amino acids (glycine and glutamine) to form nontoxic compounds
with high renal clearance. The main organic acids used for this purpose are sodium salts of benzoic acid and phenylacetic acid. Benzoate
forms hippurate through enzymatic conjugation with endogenous glycine in the liver (see Fig. 105.13). Each mole of benzoate removes one
mole of ammonia as glycine. Phenylacetate enzymatically conjugates
with glutamine to form phenylacetylglutamine readily excreted in the
urine. One mole of phenylacetate can remove two moles of ammonia

• Sodium benzoate 250 mg/kg†
• Sodium phenylacetate 250 mg/kg†
• Arginine hydrochloride 200-­600 mg/kg as a 10% solution

3.	Continue infusion of sodium benzoate† (250-­500 mg/kg/day), sodium
phenylacetate† (250-­500 mg/kg/day), and arginine (200-­600 mg/kg/
day‡) following the above priming doses. These compounds should
be added to the daily intravenous fluid.
4.	Initiate peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis if above treatment fails
to produce an appreciable decrease in plasma ammonia.
*The concentration of sodium chloride should be calculated to be 0.45–0.9%, including
the amount of the sodium in the drugs.
†Sodium from these drugs should be included as part of the daily sodium requirement.
‡The higher dose of the range is recommended in the treatment of patients with
citrullinemia and argininosuccinic aciduria. Arginine is not recommended in patients
with arginase deficiency and in those whose hyperammonemia is secondary to
organic acidemia. Sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate should be used with
caution in patients with organic acidemias.

as glutamine from the body (see Fig. 105.13). Sodium phenylbutyrate, metabolized to phenylacetate, is the primary oral formulation. For
intravenous (IV) use, a combined formulation of benzoate and phenylacetate (Ammonul) is commercially available.
Another valuable therapeutic adjunct is IV infusion of arginine,
which is effective in all patients except those with arginase deficiency.
Arginine administration supplies the urea cycle with ornithine (see
Fig. 105.13). In patients with citrullinemia, one mole of arginine reacts
with one mole of ammonia as carbamoyl phosphate to form citrulline.
In patients with argininosuccinic acidemia, two moles of ammonia
(as carbamoyl phosphate and aspartate) react with arginine to form
argininosuccinic acid. Citrulline and arginosuccinate are less toxic
than ammonia and more readily excreted by the kidneys. In patients
with CPS1 or OTC deficiencies, arginine administration is indicated
because this amino acid is not produced in sufficient amounts to enable
endogenous protein synthesis. For enteral therapy, patients with OTC
deficiency benefit from supplementation with citrulline (200 mg/kg/
day) because one mole of citrulline reacts with one mole of ammonia
(through aspartic acid) to form arginine. Administration of arginine
or citrulline is contraindicated in patients with arginase deficiency, a
rare condition in which the spastic diplegia is a much more common
presenting feature rather than hyperammonemia. Arginine therapy is
of no benefit if hyperammonemia is secondary to an organic acidemia.
In a newborn infant with an initial episode of hyperammonemia, arginine should be used until the diagnosis is established (see Table 105.6).
Benzoate, phenylacetate, and arginine may be administered together
for maximal therapeutic effect. A priming dose of these compounds
is followed by continuous infusion until recovery from the acute state
occurs. Both benzoate and phenylacetate are usually supplied as concentrated solutions and should be properly diluted (1–2% solution)
for IV use. The recommended therapeutic doses of both compounds
deliver a substantial amount of sodium to the patient; this amount
should be included in the calculation of the daily sodium requirement.
Benzoate and phenylacetate (or the combined formulation) should be
used with caution in newborn infants with hyperbilirubinemia because
they may displace bilirubin from albumin; however, there are no documented cases of kernicterus (see Chapter 123.4) reported in neonates
with hyperammonemia who have received such therapies. In infants at
risk, it is advisable to monitor and manage bilirubin levels while considering IV administration of benzoate or phenylacetate.
If the initial ammonia level is <500 μmol/L and if the foregoing therapies fail within 4-­6 hours to produce any appreciable change in the
blood ammonia level, hemodialysis should be considered. For patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

851

presenting with an ammonia level >500 μmol/L, extracorporeal detoxification is the initial method of ammonia removal. Exchange transfusion has little effect on reducing total body ammonia. It should be
used only if dialysis cannot be employed promptly or when the patient
is a newborn infant with significant hyperbilirubinemia (see earlier).
Hemodialysis dramatically lowers blood ammonia within a few hours,
but if it is unavailable or technically unfeasible, peritoneal dialysis may
be used as a temporary solution. When hyperammonemia is caused
by an organic acidemia and hemodialysis is not available, peritoneal
dialysis can be used to remove both the offending organic acid and
ammonia.
Oral administration of neomycin limits the growth of intestinal bacteria that can produce ammonia. However, this modality is of limited
use in urea cycle patients (e.g., affected neonates) in whom reduction
of hyperammonemia is an urgent priority. Oral lactulose acidifies the
intestinal lumen, thereby reducing the diffusion of ammonia across the
intestinal epithelium. This agent is of limited applicability in newborns,
who have a high risk of acidemia and dehydration.
There may be considerable lag between the normalization of ammonia level and an improvement in the patient’s neurologic status. Several
days may be needed before the infant becomes fully alert.
There has been interest in the use of cooling as a therapeutic adjunct
in newborn infants with metabolic encephalopathy such as that caused
by hyperammonemia. Clinical studies are in progress to evaluate the
efficacy of this approach.

of hyperammonemia (refusal to eat, vomiting, lethargy, convulsion,
coma). Increased intracranial pressure is frequent. Late forms (as late
as the fourth decade of life) may present as an acute bout of hyperammonemia (lethargy, headache, seizures, psychosis) in a seemingly
healthy individual. Coma and death may occur during these episodes.
Diagnostic confusion with migraine is common. Intermediate forms
with intellectual disability and chronic subclinical hyperammonemia
interspersed with bouts of acute hyperammonemia have also been
observed.
Laboratory findings include hyperammonemia. The plasma amino
acid analysis typically shows a marked increase of glutamine and alanine with relatively low levels of citrulline and arginine. These are nondiagnostic changes that occur in hyperammonemia of diverse causes.
Urinary orotic acid is usually low or may be absent (see Fig. 105.14).
Treatment of acute hyperammonemic attacks and the long-­term
therapy of the condition are outlined earlier (see Table 105.6). Treatment with oral carbamylglutamate of patients with NAGS deficiency
can produce successful rescue of biochemical findings and symptoms.
It is therefore important to differentiate between CPS1 and NAGS deficiencies by gene analysis of CPS1 and NAGS, respectively.
CPS1 and NAGS deficiencies are both autosomal recessive conditions; the CPS1 enzyme is normally present in the liver and intestine.
Neither of these conditions can be reliably identified by the mass
screening of the newborn infants using current approaches.

Long-­Term Therapy

In this X-­linked disorder, the hemizygous males are more severely
affected than heterozygous females (see Figs. 105.13 and 105.14). The
heterozygous females may have a mild form of the disease, but the
majority (approximately 75%) remain asymptomatic, although investigations indicate subtle neurologic defects even in females without a
discernable history of hyperammonemia. OTC deficiency is the most
common form of all the urea cycle disorders, comprising approximately 40% of cases.
Clinical manifestations in a male newborn are usually those of
severe hyperammonemia (see earlier) occurring in the first few days of
life. Mild forms, such as in some heterozygous females, characteristically have episodic manifestations, which may occur at any age (usually
after infancy). Episodes of hyperammonemia, manifested by vomiting
and neurologic abnormalities (e.g., ataxia, mental confusion, agitation,
combativeness, frank psychosis), are separated by periods of wellness.
These episodes usually occur after ingestion of a high-­protein diet or as
a result of a catabolic state such as infection. Hyperammonemic coma,
cerebral edema, and death may occur during one of these attacks. Cognitive development may proceed normally. Mild to moderate intellectual disability, however, is common. Gallstones have been seen in the
survivors, although the mechanism remains unclear.
The major laboratory finding during the acute attack is hyperammonemia accompanied by marked elevations of plasma concentrations of glutamine and alanine with low levels of citrulline and
arginine. The blood level of urea is usually low. A marked increase in
the urinary excretion of orotic acid differentiates this condition from
CPS1 deficiency (see Fig. 105.14). Orotate may precipitate in urine as
pink-­colored crystals. In the mild form, these laboratory abnormalities may revert to normal between attacks. This form should be differentiated from all the episodic conditions of childhood. Patients with
lysinuric protein intolerance (see Chapter 105.14) may demonstrate
some features of OTC deficiency, but the former can be differentiated
by increased urinary excretion of lysine, ornithine, and arginine and
elevated blood concentrations of citrulline.
The prevalence of OTC deficiency is 1 in 56,000 to 1 in 77,000 live
births. This condition is not identifiable by the mass screening of newborn infants using current approaches. The diagnosis is most conveniently confirmed by OTC gene analysis. Many OTC pathogenic
variants (>300) have been identified. Genotype and degree of enzyme
deficiency determine the severity of the phenotype in most cases.
Mothers of affected infants are expected to be carriers of the mutant
gene unless a de novo pathogenic variant has occurred. A mother who
gave birth to two affected male offspring was found to have a normal

Once the acute hyperammonemic episode is under control, maintenance therapy should be tailored to address the underlying cause of
the hyperammonemia. All patients, regardless of the enzymatic defect,
require protein restriction limited to the age-­adjusted recommended
dietary allowance (RDA). In pediatric patients with urea cycle defects,
chronic administration of sodium benzoate (250 mg/kg/day), sodium
phenylbutyrate (250-­500 mg/kg/day), and arginine (200-­400 mg/kg/
day) or citrulline (in patients with OTC deficiency, 200-­400 mg/kg/
day) is effective in maintaining blood ammonia levels within the normal range (doses above are for patients who weigh <20 kg). Arginine
and citrulline are contraindicated in patients with argininemia. Patients
who have difficulty taking sodium phenylbutyrate can be trialed on
glycerol phenylbutyrate. This compound conceals the offensive odor
of sodium phenylbutyrate and may help with patient adherence. Benzoate and phenylacetate may lower carnitine levels, but clinical signs
of carnitine deficiency or benefit from carnitine supplementation have
not yet been demonstrated. These compounds have been used during
pregnancy without obvious teratogenic effect. However, experience is
still limited, and appropriate caution should be exercised.
Growth parameters, especially head circumference, and nutritional indices (blood albumin, prealbumin, pH, electrolytes, amino
acids, zinc, selenium) should be followed closely. Long-­term care of
these patients is best achieved by a team of experienced professionals (pediatrician, nutritionist, child neurologist, metabolic geneticist).
Skin lesions resembling acrodermatitis enteropathica (see Chapter
691) have been noted in a few patients with different types of urea cycle
defects, presumably resulting from the deficiency of essential amino
acids, caused by overzealous dietary protein restriction. Catabolic
states (infections, fasting) that may trigger hyperammonemia should be
avoided. They must be treated vigorously when they occur. It is important that all children with urea cycle defects avoid valproic acid because
this drug can elevate blood ammonia even in some healthy individuals.
In patients with CPS1, OTC, or ASS deficiency, acute hyperammonemic attacks may be precipitated by valproate administration.

CARBAMOYL PHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE 1 AND
N-­ACETYLGLUTAMATE SYNTHASE DEFICIENCIES

Without treatment, deficiencies of these two enzymes produce similar
clinical and biochemical manifestations (see Figs. 105.13 and 105.14).
There is a wide variation in the severity of symptoms and in the age at
presentation. In near-­complete enzymatic deficiency, symptoms appear
during the first few days or even hours of life with signs and symptoms

ORNITHINE TRANSCARBAMYLASE DEFICIENCY

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

852 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Hyperammonemia

Obtain blood gas
Calculate anion gap
Obtain plasma amino acids
Evaluate urine organic acids
Obtain plasma acylcarnitine profile

No specific amino
acid elevation

Specific amino
acid elevation

Obtain
urine orotic acid

High

Normal or low
Plasma citrulline

Organic
acidemias

Citrullinemia

Arginase 1
deficiency

Argininosuccinic
acidemia

HHH
syndrome

OTC
deficiency

Low

Normal or elevated

CPS1 deficiency
or NAGS deficiency

Consider other
causes of
hyperammonemia

Fig. 105.14 Clinical algorithmic approach to a newborn infant with symptomatic hyperammonemia. CPS1, Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1;

HHH syndrome, hyperornithinemia-­hyperammonemia-­homocitrullinemia; NAGS, N-­acetylglutamate synthetase; OTC, ornithine carbamoyltransferase.

genotype, suggesting that gonadal mosaicism can be seen. As many
as 20% of affected patients demonstrate normal results by Sanger
sequencing, perhaps because the pathogenic variant involves copy
number variants, deep intronic regions, or a promoter sequence. Copy
number variants can be evaluated using a chromosomal microarray,
and if positive, a contiguous gene deletion should be considered. If the
molecular diagnostic approach is negative, a liver biopsy may be indicated. Prenatal diagnosis is feasible by analysis of DNA in amniocytes
or chorionic villus samples. Increase in urinary excretion of orotidine
after an allopurinol loading test can identify female carriers. Mild cerebral dysfunction may be present in asymptomatic female carriers. The
importance of a detailed family history cannot be overemphasized. A
history of migraine or protein aversion is common in maternal female
relatives of the proband. Indeed, careful scrutiny of the family history
may reveal a pattern of unexplained deaths in male newborns in the
maternal lineage.
Treatment of acute hyperammonemic attacks and the long-­term
therapy of the condition are as outlined earlier. For enteral use, citrulline is used in place of arginine for patients with OTC deficiency. Liver
transplantation is a surgical treatment option for patients with severe
OTC deficiency.

CITRULLINEMIA

Two clinically and genetically distinct forms of citrullinemia have
been described. The classic form (type I) is caused by the deficiency
of the ASS enzyme. Citrullinemia type II is caused by the deficiency
of a mitochondrial transport protein called citrin. (See Figs. 105.13
and 105.14.)

Citrullinemia Type I (Argininosuccinate Synthetase
Deficiency, Classic Citrullinemia)

This condition is caused by the deficiency of ASS (see Fig. 105.13) and
has variable clinical manifestations depending on the degree of the
enzyme deficiency. Two major forms of the condition have been identified. The severe or neonatal form, which is most common, appears in
the first few days of life with signs and symptoms of hyperammonemia
(see earlier). In the subacute or mild form, clinical findings such as
failure to thrive, frequent vomiting, developmental delay, and dry, brittle hair appear gradually after 1 year of age. Acute hyperammonemia,
triggered by an intercurrent catabolic state, may bring the diagnosis
to light.
Laboratory findings are similar to those found in patients with
OTC deficiency, except that the plasma citrulline concentration is
greatly elevated (50-­100 times the reference range) (see Fig. 105.14).
Urinary excretion of orotic acid is moderately increased; crystalluria
may also occur as a result of precipitation of orotates. The diagnosis is
confirmed by DNA analysis of ASS1 or, less frequently, by an assay of
enzyme activity in cultured fibroblasts. Prenatal diagnosis is feasible
with an enzyme assay in cultured amniotic cells or by DNA analysis of
cells obtained from chorionic villus biopsy.
Treatment of acute hyperammonemic attacks and long-­term therapy are outlined earlier (see Table 105.6). Plasma concentration of
citrulline remains elevated at all times and may increase further after
administration of arginine. Patients can do well on a protein-­restricted
diet in conjunction with sodium benzoate, phenylbutyrate, and arginine therapy. Mild to moderate cognitive impairment is a common
sequela, even in a well-­treated patient.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
Citrullinemia is an autosomal recessive condition caused by biallelic
pathogenic variants in ASS1. The majority of patients are compound
heterozygotes for two different alleles. The prevalence of the condition
is 1 in 250,000 live births. The recent introduction of neonatal screening for urea cycle defects has shown that some affected patients are
ostensibly asymptomatic even on a regular diet. Long-­term follow-­up
is needed to be certain that these individuals do not sustain neurologic
sequelae.

Citrin Deficiency (Citrullinemia Type II)

Citrin (aspartate-­glutamate carrier protein) is a mitochondrial transporter encoded by SLC25A13. One of this protein’s functions is to
transport aspartate from mitochondria into cytoplasm and replenish the cytosolic aspartate pool required for converting citrulline to
argininosuccinic acid (see Fig. 105.13). If aspartate is unavailable to the
cytoplasmic component of the urea cycle, urea will not be formed at a
normal rate, and citrulline will accumulate. ASS activity is diminished
in the liver of these patients, but no pathogenic variant in the ASS1
gene has been found. It is postulated that citrin deficiency interferes
with translation of the messenger RNA for the ASS enzyme in the liver.
The condition initially was reported in Japan (regional prevalence ∼1
in 20,000), but many non-­Japanese patients have been since identified
(worldwide prevalence between 1 in 100,000 and 1 in 230,000). Biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC25A13 have been associated with three
clinical forms of citrin deficiency.

Neonatal Intrahepatic Cholestasis (Citrullinemia
Type II, Neonatal Form)

Clinical and laboratory manifestations, which usually start before
the infant’s first birthday, include cholestatic jaundice with mild to
moderate direct (conjugated) hyperbilirubinemia, marked hypoproteinemia, and clotting dysfunction (increased prothrombin time and
partial thromboplastin time); increased serum γ-­glutamyltransferase
and alkaline phosphatase activities; and liver transaminases are usually normal. Plasma concentrations of ammonia and citrulline are
usually normal, but moderate elevations have been reported. There
may be increases in plasma concentrations of methionine, tyrosine,
alanine, and threonine. Elevated levels of serum galactose have been
found, even though the enzymes of galactose metabolism are normal.
The reason for hypergalactosemia is not clear. Marked elevation in the
serum level of α-­fetoprotein is also present. These findings resemble
those of tyrosinemia type I, but unlike the latter condition, urinary
excretion of succinylacetone is not elevated (see Chapter 105.2). Liver
biopsy shows fatty infiltration, cholestasis with dilated canaliculi, and
a moderate degree of fibrosis. The condition is usually self-­limiting,
and the majority of infants recover spontaneously by 1 year of age with
supportive and symptomatic treatment. Hepatic failure requiring liver
transplantation has occurred in a few cases. Although the condition
is commonly seen in Japan, the diagnosis should be considered in
any case of unexplained neonatal hepatitis with cholestasis. Data on
the long-­term prognosis and the natural history of the condition are
limited; development into the adult form of the condition after several
years of a seemingly asymptomatic hiatus has been observed.

Failure to Thrive and Dyslipidemia Due to Citrin
Deficiency

Some patients can present between 1 and 10 years of age with peculiar
dietary habits favoring high-­protein and high-­lipid foods. It is accompanied by poor appetite, hypoglycemic episodes, and failure to thrive.
Laboratory evaluation may reveal mild hyperammonemia, hypertriglyceridemia, elevated low-­density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and
low high-­density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels. This presentation of citrin deficiency in children is often considered a prodromal
form of the adult form of citrullinemia type II.

Citrullinemia Type II, Adult Form (Adult-­Onset
Citrullinemia; Citrullinemia Type II, Mild Form)

Without prior molecular diagnosis or family history, individuals affected by this form of citrullinemia type II (CTLN2) are often

853

identified acutely. A previously healthy individual may present with
nonspecific neuropsychiatric symptoms such as disorientation, delirium, delusion, aberrant behavior, tremors, and psychosis. Moderate
degrees of hyperammonemia and hypercitrullinemia are present. The
age at onset is usually between 20 and 40 years but can happen at any
point after age 11 years. Patients who recover from the first episode
may have recurrent attacks. Pancreatitis, hyperlipidemia, and hepatoma are major complications among the survivors. Medical treatment
of CTLN2 has been mostly ineffective to prevent future attacks. A diet
enriched in protein and lipids helps restore cytosolic aspartate and
stimulate ureagenesis. In confirmed citrin deficiency, a low-­protein/
high-­carbohydrate diet should be avoided. Although liver transplantation appears to be effective in preventing future episodes of hyperammonemia, enteral supplementation with pyruvate, arginine, and
medium-­chain triglycerides can be tried first to help prevent hyperammonemic episodes and improve growth.

ARGININOSUCCINATE LYASE DEFICIENCY
(ARGININOSUCCINIC ACIDURIA)

The severity of the clinical and biochemical manifestations varies considerably (see Figs. 105.13 and 105.14). In the severe form of ASL deficiency, severe hyperammonemia (see earlier) can develop in the first
few days of life, and without treatment affected infants can perish. The
clinical course of ASL deficiency in patients who survive the initial acute
episode is often characterized by intellectual disability, failure to thrive,
hypertension, gallstones, liver fibrosis, and hepatomegaly. A common
finding in untreated patients is dry and brittle hair (trichorrhexis
nodosa), although this finding is relatively nonspecific. Acute attacks
of severe hyperammonemia may occur during a catabolic state triggered by infections, trauma, or dietary indiscretion. Laboratory findings include hyperammonemia, moderate elevations in liver enzymes,
nonspecific increases in plasma levels of glutamine and alanine, a moderate increase in plasma levels of citrulline (less than in citrullinemia),
and a marked increase in the concentration of argininosuccinic acid in
plasma, urine, and CSF. The CSF levels are usually higher than those in
plasma. The enzyme is present in erythrocytes, the liver, and cultured
fibroblasts. Prenatal diagnosis is possible by identification of biallelic
pathogenic variants in the ASL gene or, rarely, by measurement of the
enzyme activity in cultured amniotic cells. Argininosuccinic acid is
also elevated in the amniotic fluid of affected fetuses.
Treatment of acute hyperammonemic attacks and the long-­term
therapy of the condition are outlined earlier in this chapter. Intellectual disability, persistent hepatomegaly with mild increases in liver
enzymes, and bleeding tendencies as a result of abnormal clotting
factors are common sequelae. ASL deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder with a prevalence of about 1 in 220,000 live births. Early
detection is achieved through mass screening of newborn infants.

ARGINASE 1 DEFICIENCY (HYPERARGININEMIA)

Arginase 1 deficiency is an autosomal recessive condition caused by
biallelic pathogenic variants in ARG1 (see Figs. 105.13 and 105.14).
Two genetically distinct arginases are present in humans. Arginase 1
(ARG1) is a cytosolic enzyme and is expressed in the liver and can be
found in erythrocytes. Arginase 2 (ARG2) is expressed in renal and
brain mitochondria. The role of ARG2 is not well understood; its activity in patients with argininemia appears to have no protective effect.
Clinical manifestations of arginase 1 deficiency are somewhat different from other urea cycle enzyme defects, although acute neonatal hyperammonemia presenting with intractable seizures, cerebral
edema, and death has also been reported. Outside of the neonatal
period, the onset of arginase 1 deficiency often is insidious. The infant
can remain asymptomatic in the first few months or years of life. A progressive spastic diplegia with scissoring of the lower extremities, choreoathetotic movements, loss of developmental milestones, and failure
to thrive in a previously normal infant may suggest the diagnosis. Some
children were treated for cerebral palsy before arginase 1 deficiency
was confirmed. Intellectual disability is progressive; seizures are common, but episodes of severe hyperammonemia are not as frequent as in
the more proximal urea cycle defects. Hepatomegaly may be present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

854 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Laboratory evaluation reveals marked elevations of arginine in
plasma and CSF (see Fig. 105.14). Urinary orotic acid can be increased.
Determination of amino acids in plasma is a critical step in the diagnosis of argininemia. Guanidino compounds (α-­keto-­guanidinovaleric
acid and α-­keto-­argininic acid) can be markedly increased in urine.
The diagnosis is secured by identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in ARG1 or, rarely, by assaying arginase activity in erythrocytes.
Treatment consists of a low-­protein diet at the age-­appropriate
RDA. The dietary composition and daily intake of protein should be
monitored by frequent plasma amino acid determinations. Supplementation with arginine in ARG1-­deficient patients is contraindicated.
Sodium benzoate or sodium phenylbutyrate is also effective in controlling hyperammonemia and lowering plasma arginine levels. Liver
transplantation has produced promising results, but experience with
long-­term outcome is limited. Early detection is feasible through mass
screening of newborn infants.

TRANSIENT HYPERAMMONEMIA OF THE
NEWBORN

The blood concentration of ammonia in a full-­term infant can be as
high as 100 μmol/L, or two to three times greater than that of the older
child or adult. Blood levels approach the adult normal values after
a few weeks of life (see Fig. 105.14). Plasma ammonia levels greater
than 100 μmol/L should prompt additional diagnostic steps to evaluate
for possible genetic causes of hyperammonemia. Infrequently, severe
transient hyperammonemia can be observed in infants whose diagnostic workup reveals no biochemical abnormalities implicating genes
encoding components of the urea cycle. The majority of affected infants
are premature and have mild respiratory distress syndrome. Hyperammonemic coma can develop within 2-­3 days of life, and the infant may
succumb to the disease if treatment is not started immediately. Laboratory studies reveal marked hyperammonemia (plasma ammonia
as high as 4,000 μmol/L) with moderate increases in plasma levels of
glutamine and alanine. Plasma concentrations of urea cycle intermediate amino acids are usually normal except for citrulline, which may
be moderately elevated. The cause of the disorder is unknown. Urea
cycle enzyme activities are normal. Treatment of hyperammonemia
should be initiated promptly and continued vigorously. Recovery without sequelae has been reported, and hyperammonemia does not recur
even with a normal-­protein diet.

DISORDERS OF ORNITHINE METABOLISM

Ornithine, a key intermediate of the urea cycle, is not incorporated into
natural proteins. Rather, it is generated in the cytosol from arginine and
must be transported into mitochondria, where it becomes a substrate
in reactions catalyzed by OTC forming citrulline. Excess ornithine is
catabolized by two enzymes: ornithine aminotransferase, a mitochondrial enzyme converting ornithine to a proline precursor, and ornithine
decarboxylase, which resides in the cytosol and converts ornithine
to putrescine (see Fig. 105.13). Two genetic disorders feature hyperornithinemia: gyrate atrophy of the retina and hyperammonemia-­
hyperornithinemia-­homocitrullinemia (HHH) syndrome.

Gyrate Atrophy of the Retina and Choroid

This rare, autosomal recessive disorder is caused by biallelic pathogenic
variants in OAT leading to the deficient activity of ornithine aminotransferase (see Fig. 105.13). Approximately 30% of the reported cases
are from Finland. Clinical manifestations may include hyperammonemia in the first months of life in some patients. Findings that define
the phenotype of ornithine aminotransferase deficiency include night
blindness, myopia, loss of peripheral vision, and posterior subcapsular
cataracts. These eye changes start between 5 and 10 years of age and
progress to complete blindness by the fourth decade of life. Atrophic
lesions in the retina resemble cerebral gyri. These patients usually have
normal intelligence. Besides the characteristic 10-­to 20-­fold increase
in plasma levels of ornithine (400-­1,400 μmol/L), plasma levels of

glutamate, glutamine, lysine, creatine, and creatinine can be moderately decreased. Some patients show partial improvement with high
doses of pyridoxine. An arginine-­restricted diet in conjunction with
supplemental lysine, proline, and creatine has been successful in reducing plasma ornithine concentration and has produced some clinical
improvement.

Hyperammonemia-­Hyperornithinemia-­
Homocitrullinemia Syndrome

Biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC25A15 result in an autosomal
recessive disorder, HHH syndrome. This defect of the ornithine
transport system leads to accumulation of ornithine in the cytosol
and a depletion of this amino acid in mitochondria. The former
causes hyperornithinemia, and the latter results in disruption of
the urea cycle and hyperammonemia (see Fig. 105.13). Homocitrulline is presumably formed through condensation of mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate with lysine. Clinical manifestations of
hyperammonemia can develop shortly after birth or may be delayed
until adulthood. Acute episodes of hyperammonemia manifest as
refusal to feed, vomiting, and lethargy; coma may occur during
infancy. Progressive neurologic signs, such as lower limb weakness, increased deep tendon reflexes, spasticity, clonus, seizures,
and varying degrees of psychomotor retardation may develop if
the condition remains undiagnosed. No ocular findings have been
observed in these patients. Laboratory findings reveal marked
increases in plasma levels of ornithine and homocitrulline in addition to hyperammonemia (see Fig. 105.14). Acute episodes of hyperammonemia should be treated promptly (see earlier). Restriction of
protein intake improves hyperammonemia. Oral supplementation
with arginine (or citrulline) has produced clinical improvement in
some patients.

CONGENITAL GLUTAMINE DEFICIENCY

Glutamine is synthesized endogenously from glutamate and ammonia by a ubiquitously expressed enzyme, glutamine synthetase (see
Fig. 105.11). Glutamine is known to be involved in several important
functions, including detoxification of ammonia. Deficiency of this
enzyme, resulting in glutamine deficiency, has been reported in three
infants from three unrelated families. All affected infants manifested
multiorgan involvement, including brain malformations (abnormal
gyrations, hypomyelination), facial abnormalities (broad nasal root,
low-­set ears), hypotonia, and seizures at birth. Two of the patients
died from multiorgan failure (respiratory and heart failure) in the
neonatal period. One child was alive at 3 years of age with severe
developmental delay. Glutamine was absent in plasma, urine, and
CSF, but plasma levels of glutamic acid were normal. Congenital
glutamine deficiency is an autosomal recessive condition caused by
biallelic pathogenic variants in GLUL.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.13 Histidine
Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Histidine is degraded through the urocanic acid pathway to glutamic
acid. Several genetic biochemical aberrations involving the degradative
pathway of histidine have been reported, but the clinical significance of
elevated histidine levels has not been established.
Decarboxylation of histidine by histidine decarboxylase produces
histamine. Deficiency of this enzyme has been implicated in the familial form of Tourette syndrome (see Chapter 105.11).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids

105.14 Lysine

855

Pyridox(am)ine 5′-­Phosphate Oxidase (PNPO)
Deficiency

Oleg A. Shchelochkov and Charles P. Venditti
Lysine is catabolized through two pathways. In the first pathway,
lysine is condensed with α-­ketoglutaric acid to form saccharopine. Saccharopine is then catabolized to α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde and glutamic acid. These first two steps are catalyzed by
α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase, which has two activities:
lysine-­
ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase
(Fig. 105.15). In the second pathway, lysine is first transaminated and
then condensed to its cyclic forms: pipecolic acid and piperideine-­
6-­carboxylic acid (P6C). P6C and its linear form, α-­aminoadipic
semialdehyde, are oxidized to α-­aminoadipic acid by the enzyme
antiquitin. This is the major pathway for d-­lysine in the body and
for l-­lysine in the brain.
Hyperlysinemia-­saccharopinuria, α-­aminoadipic, and α-­
ketoadipic acidemia are biochemical conditions caused by inborn
errors of lysine degradation. Individuals with these conditions are usually asymptomatic.

PYRIDOXINE–DEPENDENT EPILEPSY (PDE)

Pyridoxal 5′-­phosphate (P5P), the active form of pyridoxine (vitamin
B6), is the cofactor for many enzymes, including those involved in the
metabolism of neurotransmitters. Intracellular P5P deficiency in the
brain may result in a seizure disorder that is refractory to common
anticonvulsant agents but is responsive to high doses of pyridoxine.
These pyridoxine-­responsive phenotypes are seen in the following
genetic metabolic conditions.

Antiquitin (α-­Aminoadipic Semialdehyde
Dehydrogenase) Deficiency

This is the most common cause of PDE. A deficiency of antiquitin
(encoded by ALDH7A1) results in accumulation of P6C in brain tissue
(see Fig. 105.15). P6C reacts with P5P and renders it inactive. Large
doses of pyridoxine are therefore needed to overcome this inactivation.
The condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

PNPO deficiency clinically overlaps with antiquitin deficiency.
PNPO-­deficient patients often present with neonatal-­onset seizures,
developmental delays, spastic tetraplegia, and nonspecific findings
on brain imaging (delayed myelination, cerebral atrophy, and abnormal signals in the basal ganglia). Developmental regression, optic
disc pallor, and retinopathy have been reported infrequently. Plasma
and CSF amino acid analysis may reveal elevated glycine, prompting evaluation for NKH (see Chapter 105.7), leading to a delay in
initiating treatment with P5P. A CSF neurotransmitter assay revealed
inconsistent changes in the levels of 3-­O-­methyldopa, homovanillic
acid, and 5-­hydroxyindoleacetic acid. A normal CSF level of P5P was
reported in one patient, suggesting that a therapeutic trial with P5P
and molecular analysis may be a prudent strategy in some patients
irrespective of the CSF studies. The lowest effective dose of P5P
should be used to avoid toxicity. The disorder is caused by biallelic
pathogenic variants in PNPO.

Sulfite Oxidase Deficiency and Molybdenum
Cofactor Deficiency

In this rare condition (see Chapter 105.4), accumulation of sulfites
causes inhibition of enzymatic activity of antiquitin and accumulation of P6C, which in turn causes inactivation of P5P and vitamin B6
dependency.

Hyperprolinemia Type II

In this condition, accumulation of P5C in brain tissue can also cause
inactivation of P5P, leading to pyridoxine dependency (see Chapter
105.9 and Fig. 105.9).

Hypophosphatasia

P5P is the main circulating form of pyridoxine. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is required for dephosphorylation of P5P to generate
free pyridoxine, which is the only form of vitamin B6 that can cross
the BBB and enter the brain cells. Pyridoxine is rephosphorylated

Protein synthesis
α-N-acetyl-lysine

ε-N-acetyl-lysine
NH2

NH2
α-Keto-ε-aminocaproic
acid

(CH2)4

CH

1

COOH

Lysine + 2-Ketoglutaric acid

Saccharopine
Hyperlysinemiasaccharopinuria
Hyperlysinemiasaccharopinuria

2

Piperideine-2carboxylic acid

Homoarginine

Homocitrulline

Glutamic acid
α-Aminoadipic
δ-semialdehyde

NE

Piperideine-6carboxylic acid
(P6C)

Pipecolic
acid

PDE

CO2

6
GlutaconylCoA

Glutaric
aciduria type I

GlutarylCoA

5

α-Ketoadipic
aciduria

3

α-Aminoadipic
acid

3

AcetoacetylCoA

PDE

4
α-Ketoadipic
acid

α-Aminoadipic
aciduria
Tryptophan

Fig. 105.15 Pathways in the metabolism of lysine. Enzymes: (1) Lysine ketoglutarate reductase, (2) saccharopine dehydrogenase, (3) α-­aminoadipic
semialdehyde/piperidine-­6-­carboxylic acid (P6C) dehydrogenase (antiquitin), (4) α-­aminoadipic acid transferase, (5) α-­ketoadipic acid dehydrogenase, (6) glutaryl-­CoA-­dehydrogenase. NE, Nonenzymatic; PDE, pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

856 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
intracellularly to form P5P. In the infantile form of hypophosphatasia, P5P cannot be dephosphorylated to free pyridoxine because
of the marked deficiency of tissue-­nonspecific ALP. This results in
deficiency of pyridoxine in the brain and PDE (see Chapters 611
and 724).
The main clinical manifestation of PDE caused by antiquitin
deficiency is generalized seizures, which usually occur in the first
days of life and are unresponsive to conventional anticonvulsant
therapies. Some mothers of affected fetuses report abnormal intrauterine fluttering movements. The seizures are usually tonic-­clonic
in nature but can be almost any type. Other manifestations such
as dystonia, respiratory distress, and abdominal distention with
vomiting, hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, and hypothermia may be
present. Learning problems and speech delay are common sequelae.
Late-­onset forms of the condition (as late as 5 years of age) have
been reported. Consequently, a trial with vitamin B6 is recommended in any infant with intractable convulsions (see Chapters
611.04 and 611.06).
Laboratory findings show increased concentrations of α-­
aminoadipic semialdehyde and pipecolic acid in the CSF, plasma, and
urine. EEG abnormalities may normalize after treatment. Neuroimaging may be normal, but cerebellar and cerebral atrophy, periventricular hyperintensity, intracerebral hemorrhage, and hydrocephalus have
been reported.
Treatment with vitamin B6 (50-­100 mg/day) usually results in a dramatic improvement of both seizures and the EEG abnormalities. High
doses of pyridoxine can result in peripheral neuropathy, and doses
>500 mg/day should be avoided. The pyridoxine dependency, and thus
the therapy, are lifelong. The therapeutic benefit of a lysine-­restricted,
l-­arginine-­enriched diet is being evaluated.

Glutaric Aciduria Type 1 (Glutaryl-­CoA Dehydrogenase
Deficiency)

Glutaric acid is an intermediate in the degradation of lysine (see Fig.
105.15), hydroxylysine, and tryptophan. Glutaric aciduria type 1, a disorder caused by a deficiency of glutaryl-­CoA dehydrogenase, should
be differentiated from glutaric aciduria type 2, a distinct clinical and
biochemical disorder caused by defects in the mitochondrial electron
transport chain (see Chapter 106.1).
Glutaric aciduria type 1 is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
biallelic loss-­of-­function variants in GCDH. Its prevalence is estimated
at 1 in 100,000 live births worldwide. The condition is more prevalent
in some ethnic populations (e.g., Canadian Oji-­Cree Indians, Irish
Travelers, Black South Africans, Swedes, and the Old Order Amish
population in the United States). A high prevalence of known pathogenic variants in specific ethnic populations can enable a cost-­effective
molecular evaluation and counseling. Prenatal diagnosis can be
accomplished by demonstrating increased concentrations of glutaric
acid in amniotic fluid, by assay of the enzyme activity in amniocytes or
chorionic villus samples, or by identification of the known pathogenic
variants in GCDH.

Clinical Manifestations

Macrocephaly is a common, but nonspecific, finding in patients
with glutaric aciduria type 1. It develops in the first year of life
but can also be present at birth and precede the onset of neurologic manifestations. Some affected infants may also show subtle
neurologic symptoms, such as delayed onset of motor milestones,
irritability, and feeding problems, during this seemingly asymptomatic period. The onset of the condition is usually heralded by acute
encephalopathic findings, such as loss of normal developmental
milestones (head control, rolling over, or sitting), seizures, generalized rigidity, opisthotonos, choreoathetosis, and dystonia caused
by acute striatal injury. These symptoms may occur suddenly in
an apparently normal infant after a minor infection. Brain imaging reveals increased extraaxial (particularly frontal) fluid with

stretched bridging veins, striatal lesions, dilated lateral ventricles,
cortical atrophy (mainly in the frontotemporal region), and fibrosis. Recovery from the first attack usually occurs slowly, and some
residual neurologic abnormalities may persist, especially dystonia
and choreoathetosis. Without treatment, additional acute attacks
resembling the first can occur during subsequent episodes of intercurrent infections or catabolic states. In some patients, these signs
and symptoms may develop gradually in the first few years of life.
Hypotonia and choreoathetosis may gradually progress into rigidity and dystonia (insidious form). Acute episodes of metabolic
decompensation with vomiting, ketosis, seizures, and coma also
occur in this form after infection or other catabolic states. Without
treatment, death may occur in the first decade of life during one of
these episodes. Affected infants are prone to development of subdural hematoma and retinal hemorrhage after minor falls and head
traumas. This can be misdiagnosed as child abuse. The intellectual
abilities usually remain relatively normal in most patients.

Laboratory Findings

During acute episodes, mild to moderate metabolic acidosis and
ketosis may occur. Hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and elevations of serum transaminases are seen in some patients. High concentrations of glutaric acid are usually found in the urine, blood,
and CSF. 3-­Hydroxyglutaric acid may also be present in the body
fluids. The acylcarnitine profile shows elevated glutarylcarnitine
(C5DC) in blood and urine. Plasma concentrations of amino acids
are usually within normal limits. Laboratory findings may be unremarkable between attacks. Glutaric aciduria type 1 can be identified
on the newborn screen by measuring glutarylcarnitine (C5DC) levels in blood spots. The sensitivity of this screening method depends
on the cutoff value used by a newborn screen program, and some
patients may not be detected. For example, a subset of patients with
glutaric aciduria type 1 can present with normal plasma and urinary
levels of glutaric acid and variably elevated plasma glutarylcarnitine.
This type of glutaric aciduria type 1, referred to as a “low-­excretor”
phenotype, carries the same risk of developing brain injury as in a
“high-­excretor” phenotype. In some low-­excreting patients, glutaric
acid is elevated only in the CSF. Urinary glutarylcarnitine appears
to be a more sensitive screening method to identify affected low-­
excreting patients. Molecular analysis of GCDH can aid in identifying patients with a low-­excretor phenotype associated with specific
pathogenic variants (e.g., p.M405V, p.V400M, p.R227P). We recommend performing molecular analysis of GCDH or glutaryl-­C oA
dehydrogenase enzyme activity in any child presenting with unexplained progressive dystonia and dyskinesia.

Treatment

Patients require a lysine-­and tryptophan-­
restricted diet while
meeting physiologic requirements for protein, micronutrients, and
vitamins. Increased dietary arginine may decrease cellular uptake
of lysine and decrease the endogenous formation of glutaryl-­C oA.
Patients should be routinely evaluated for lysine and tryptophan deficiency by monitoring plasma amino acids and growth. l-­Carnitine
supplementation (50-­100 mg/kg/day orally) is recommended in all
cases. Emergency treatment during acute illness, including temporary cessation of protein intake for 24 hours, replacement of lost
calories using carbohydrates or lipids, IV l-­carnitine, IV dextrose,
prompt treatment of infection, and control of fever is critical to
decreasing the risk of striatal injury. All patients should be provided with an emergency letter describing the underlying diagnosis,
recommended evaluation, and treatment. Early diagnosis through
newborn screening with prevention and aggressive treatment of
intercurrent catabolic states (infections) can help minimize striatal
injury and ensure a more favorable prognosis. Patients with movement disorder and spasticity may require treatment with baclofen,
diazepam, trihexyphenidyl, and injectable botulinum toxin A.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 105 u Defects in Metabolism of Amino Acids
LYSINURIC PROTEIN INTOLERANCE (LPI)

This rare autosomal recessive disorder is caused by pathogenic variants in SLC7A7 leading to impaired function of a protein transporting the cationic amino acids lysine, ornithine, and arginine in the
intestine and kidneys. A deficiency of the transporter protein (Y+L
amino acid transporter 1) in this condition causes multisystem
manifestations, which often start with gastrointestinal symptoms.
The transport defect in this condition resides in the basolateral
(antiluminal) membrane of enterocytes and renal tubular epithelia.
This explains the observation that cationic amino acids are unable
to cross these cells even when administered as dipeptides. Lysine in
the form of dipeptide crosses the luminal membrane of the enterocytes but hydrolyzes to free lysine in the cytoplasm. Free lysine,
unable to cross the basolateral membrane of the cells, can diffuse
back into the lumen leading to gastrointestinal symptoms.
Refusal to feed, nausea, aversion to protein, vomiting, and mild
diarrhea, which may result in failure to thrive, wasting, and hypotonia, can be seen shortly after birth. Breastfed infants usually
remain asymptomatic until soon after weaning, possibly because of
the switch to a higher-­protein solid foods. Episodes of hyperammonemia caused by the depletion of ornithine and arginine in the
urea cycle may occur after ingestion of a high-­protein meal. Mild
to moderate hepatosplenomegaly, osteoporosis, sparse brittle hair,
thin extremities with moderate centripetal adiposity, and growth
retardation are common physical findings in patients whose condition has remained undiagnosed. Neurocognitive status is usually
normal, but moderate intellectual disability has been observed in
some patients.
Progressive interstitial pneumonitis with bouts of acute exacerbation often occurs and often progresses to severe alveolar proteinosis.
Clinical manifestations include progressive exertional dyspnea, fatigue,
cough, diminished breath sound, and inspiratory rales; cyanosis may
develop in older patients. Some LPI patients have remained undiagnosed until the appearance of pulmonary manifestations. Radiographic evidence of pulmonary fibrosis has been observed in up to 65%
of patients without clinical manifestations of pulmonary involvement.
Renal involvement is manifested initially by proteinuria, hematuria,
and elevation of serum creatinine, which may progress to end-­stage
renal failure. Renal tubular involvement with laboratory findings of
renal Fanconi syndrome may also be present. Renal biopsy reveals
pathologic findings consistent with glomerulonephritis and tubulointerstitial nephritis. Hematologic findings of anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated ferritin may also be present.
Other organs are frequently involved. A condition resembling hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis/macrophage activation syndrome
has been reported. Immunologic abnormalities (impaired lymphocyte
function, abnormalities in immune globulins, hypocomplementemia)
and acute pancreatitis are frequent features of LPI.
Pregnancies in affected mothers have been complicated by anemia, thrombocytopenia, toxemia, and bleeding, but offspring appear
healthy at birth.
Laboratory findings may reveal hyperammonemia and an elevated
concentration of urinary orotic acid, which develop after high-­protein
feeding. Plasma concentrations of lysine, arginine, and ornithine are usually mildly decreased, but urinary levels of these amino acids, especially
lysine, are greatly increased. The pathogenesis of hyperammonemia is
likely related to the depletion of urea cycle intermediates caused by poor
absorption and the increased renal loss of ornithine and arginine. Plasma
concentrations of alanine, glutamine, serine, glycine, and proline are usually increased. Anemia, increased serum levels of ferritin, LDH, thyroxine-­
binding globulin, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia are
common findings often leading to the workup for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. This condition should be differentiated from hyperammonemia caused by urea cycle defects (see Chapter 105.12), especially in
heterozygous females with OTC deficiency, in whom increased urinary
excretion of lysine, ornithine, and arginine is not seen.

857

Treatment with a low-­protein diet providing the RDA of protein and supplemented with oral citrulline (50-­100 mg/kg/day)
can produce biochemical and clinical improvements. Episodes of
hyperammonemia should be treated promptly (see Chapter 105.12).
Supplementation with lysine (10-­30 mg/kg/day) given in small and
frequent doses helps improve plasma levels. The dose of lysine
should be titrated down if patients develop abdominal pain and
diarrhea. Treatment with high doses of prednisone has been effective in the management of acute pulmonary complications in some
patients. Bronchopulmonary lavage is the treatment of choice for
patients with alveolar proteinosis. The condition is more prevalent
in Finland and Japan, where the prevalence is 1 in 60,000 and 1 in
57,000 live births, respectively.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

105.15 N-­Acetylaspartic Acid (Canavan
Disease)
 

Reuben K. Matalon† and Dena R. Matalon
N-­Acetylaspartic acid (NAA), a derivative of aspartic acid, is synthesized in the brain and is found in a high concentration similar
to glutamic acid. NAA has multiple functions, such as serving as an
acetate reservoir for myelin synthesis, as well as being an organic
osmolyte that helps regulate cerebral osmolality. However, the complete function of NAA is not yet fully understood. Aspartoacylase (ASPA) cleaves the N-­acetyl group from NAA. A deficiency of
aspartoacylase leads to Canavan disease, a severe leukodystrophy
characterized by excessive excretion of NAA and spongy degeneration of the white matter of the brain. Canavan disease is an autosomal recessive disorder and is more prevalent in individuals of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent than in other ethnic groups. The defective gene for Canavan disease (ASPA) can be tested in patients, family members, and at-­risk populations.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY

Deficiency of the enzyme aspartoacylase due to pathogenic variants in
the ASPA gene leads to NAA accumulation in the brain, especially in
the white matter, and massive urinary excretion. Excessive amounts of
NAA are also present in the blood and CSF. Brain biopsies of patients
with Canavan disease show spongy degeneration of the myelin fibers,
astrocytic swelling, and elongated mitochondria. There is striking vacuolization and astrocytic swelling in the white matter. Electron microscopy reveals distorted mitochondria. As the disease progresses, the
ventricles enlarge because of cerebral atrophy.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The severity of Canavan disease covers a wide spectrum. Infants
usually appear normal at birth and may not manifest symptoms of
the disease until 3-­6 months of age, when they develop progressive
macrocephaly, severe hypotonia, persistent head lag, and delayed
milestones. As the disease progresses, there is spasticity, joint stiffness, and contractures. Optic atrophy and seizures subsequently
develop. Feeding difficulties, poor weight gain, and gastroesophageal reflux may occur in the first year of life followed by swallowing
deterioration that may require nasogastric feeding or permanent
gastrostomy. In the past, most individuals died in the first decade
of life, but with the advances in medical technology and improved
supportive care, survival now extends to the second or third decade.

†Deceased

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

858 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Fig. 105.16 Axial T2-­weighted MRI of a 2-­yr-­old patient with Canavan
disease. Extensive thickening of the white matter radiation is seen.

ATYPICAL CANAVAN DISEASE

Juvenile or mild Canavan disease is less common than infantile Canavan disease and is most prevalent in non-­Ashkenazi Jews. Affected
individuals with juvenile Canavan disease usually present with mild
speech and motor delay and may have retinitis pigmentosa. The other
typical features of Canavan disease are usually not present. These children have moderately increased urinary excretion of NAA to suggest
Canavan disease. Brain MRI demonstrates increased signal intensity in
the basal ganglia rather than global white matter disease, sometimes
leading to confusion with mitochondrial disease.

DIAGNOSIS

In a typical individual with Canavan disease, brain MRI shows diffuse
white matter degeneration, primarily in the cerebral hemispheres,
with less involvement of the cerebellum and brainstem (Fig. 105.16).
Repeated evaluations may be required. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) can be done to show the high peak of NAA, which
strongly suggests Canavan disease. The diagnosis can also be established by finding elevated amounts of NAA in the urine or blood.
NAA is found in only trace amounts (24 ± 16 μmol/mmol creatinine)
in the urine of unaffected individuals, whereas its concentration is in
the range of 1,440 ± 873 μmol/mmol creatinine in individuals with
Canavan disease. High levels of NAA can also be detected in plasma,
CSF, and brain tissue. Aspartoacylase enzyme analysis from fibroblasts is often used to confirm the diagnosis but is not necessary. The
activity of aspartoacylase in the fibroblasts of obligate carriers is half
or less the activity found in normal individuals. Molecular analysis

for variants in the ASPA gene is now recommended for all individuals
in which Canavan disease is suspected.
The differential diagnosis of Canavan disease should include Alexander disease, another leukodystrophy associated with macrocephaly.
Alexander disease is caused by a defect in the synthesis of glial fibrillary
acidic protein, and the diagnosis can be ruled out by genetic testing of
variants in the GFAP gene.
There are two predominant pathogenic variants leading to Canavan disease in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. The first is an
amino acid substitution (p.Glu285Ala) in which glutamic acid is
substituted for alanine. This pathogenic variant is the most frequent
and encompasses 83% of mutant alleles in Ashkenazi Jewish individuals with Canavan disease. The second most common pathogenic variant is a change from tyrosine to a nonsense pathogenic
variant, leading to a stop in the coding sequence (p.Tyr231*). This
accounts for 13% of mutant Ashkenazi alleles. In the non-­Jewish
population, more diverse pathogenic variants have been observed,
with the two variants common in the Ashkenazi Jewish population
being rare. A different variant (p.Ala305Glu), the substitution of
alanine for glutamic acid, accounts for 40% of mutant alleles in
non-­Jewish individuals. Over 70 pathogenic variants have been
reported in the non-­Jewish population. With Canavan disease, it
is important to obtain a molecular diagnosis because this will lead
to accurate counseling and prenatal guidance for the family. If the
specific variants are not known, prenatal diagnosis relies on the
NAA level in the amniotic fluid. In Ashkenazi Jewish individuals,
the carrier frequency may be as high as 1:40, nearing that of Tay-­
Sachs disease. Carrier screening for Canavan disease is available.
Genotype-­
phenotype studies and aspartoacylase expression and
enzymatic activity help to prognosticate the severity of disease.
Patients with juvenile or mild forms of Canavan disease have been
compound heterozygotes with a mild pathogenic variant on one
allele and a severe variant on the other allele. Mild variants include
p.Tyr288Cys and p.Arg71His.

TREATMENT AND PREVENTION

Treatment for Canavan disease is supportive. After diagnosis, individuals should be monitored closely in terms of feeding and nutritional
status, development, and risk for seizures. Medical intervention may
be necessary such as antiepileptics, acetazolamide for increased intracranial pressures, and botulinum toxin injections for spasticity. Individuals benefit from early therapy interventions and special education
programs to maximize developmental potential and communication.
Genetic counseling, carrier testing, and prenatal diagnosis are the only
current methods of prevention.
Studies of gene therapy using recombinant adeno-­
associated
viruses (rAAVs) have shown some positive results in knockout mice
models. Gene therapy attempts in children with Canavan disease
have shown a lack of adverse events, some decrease in the brain
elevation of N-­acetylaspartic acid, improved seizure frequency, and
slowing of the progression of brain atrophy. However, there was
no improvement in long-­term clinical status. Novel rAAV serotypes have been shown to better cross the blood-­brain barrier
and improved longevity of Canavan disease knockout mice, giving
promise for further use of gene therapy in individuals with Canavan
disease. Enzyme-­replacement therapy with ASPA and pegylated
ASPA is being studied in mice and has shown a decrease of NAA
in the brain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

Chapter 106

Defects in Metabolism of
Lipids
106.1 Disorders of Mitochondrial Fatty Acid
β-­Oxidation
Jerry Vockley

Mitochondrial β-­
oxidation of fatty acids is an essential energy-­
producing pathway. It is particularly important during prolonged
periods of reduced caloric intake such as fasting or gastrointestinal illness or increased energy expenditure during physiologic stress such as
febrile illness. Under these conditions, the body switches from using
predominantly carbohydrate to predominantly fat as its major fuel.
Fatty acids are also important fuels for exercising skeletal muscle and
are the preferred substrate for normal cardiac metabolism. In these tissues, fatty acids are completely oxidized to carbon dioxide and water.
The end products of hepatic fatty acid oxidation are the ketone bodies 3-­hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate. These compounds cannot be
oxidized by the liver but are exported to serve as important fuels in
peripheral tissues, particularly the brain, where ketone bodies can partially substitute for glucose during periods of fasting.
Genetic defects have been identified in almost all the known steps in
the fatty acid oxidation pathway; all are recessively inherited (Table 106.1).
Clinical manifestations characteristically involve tissues with a high
β-­oxidation flux, including liver, skeletal, and cardiac muscle, and are
age dependent. The most common early presentation is an acute episode of life-­threatening coma, hepatic encephalopathy, and hypoglycemia with or without hyperammonemia induced by a period of fasting
or illness in the first 2-­4 years of life. After about age 6 years, muscle
symptoms predominate in the disorders of long-­chain fatty acid oxidation, including myopathy, fatiguability, and recurrent rhabdomyolysis.
The latter is often brought on by excess activity or exercise. Cardiomyopathy can occur at any age in individuals with long-­chain defects
and may be exacerbated with acute episodes of illness. Patients with
fatty acid oxidation defects are often asymptomatic when well. Acutely
presenting disease may be misdiagnosed as Reye syndrome or, if fatal,
as sudden unexpected infant death. In some circumstances, clinical
manifestations appear to arise from toxic effects of fatty acid metabolites rather than inadequate energy production. These circumstances
include certain long chain fatty acid oxidation disorders (deficiencies
of long chain 3-­hydroxyacyl dehydrogenase [LCHAD], carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­IA [CPT-­IA], or mitochondrial trifunctional protein
[MTP; also known as TFP]) in which the presence of a homozygous
affected fetus increases the risk of a life-­threatening illness in the heterozygote mother, resulting in acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP)
or preeclampsia with HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes,
low platelets) syndrome. The mechanism of these obstetric complications is likely accumulation of toxic intermediates. Malformations of
the brain and kidneys have been described in severe deficiencies of
electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF), ETF dehydrogenase (ETF-­DH),
and carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­II (CPT-­II), which might reflect in
utero toxicity of fatty acid metabolites or a developmental role for these
enzymes. Progressive retinal degeneration, peripheral neuropathy, and
chronic progressive liver disease have been identified in LCHAD and
MTP deficiency.
Fatty acid oxidation disorders are easily overlooked because the
only specific clue to the diagnosis may be the finding of inappropriately low concentrations of plasma or urinary ketones in an infant who
has hypoglycemia unless specialized metabolic testing is performed.
Genetic defects in ketone body utilization may also be overlooked
because ketonemia is an expected finding with fasting hypoglycemia.

859

Newborn screening programs using tandem mass spectrometry detect
characteristic plasma acylcarnitine profiles in most of these disorders,
allowing early and presymptomatic diagnosis. Screening programs
have demonstrated that all the fatty acid oxidation disorders combined
are among the most common inborn errors of metabolism, at least in
predominantly White populations.
Figures 106.1 and 106.2 outline the steps involved in the oxidation
of a typical long chain fatty acid. In the carnitine cycle, long chain fatty
acids are transported across the barrier of the inner mitochondrial
membrane as acylcarnitine esters. Medium-­chain fatty acids, which are
commonly provided as medium-­chain triglyceride supplementation
in infants who are failing to thrive, can bypass the carnitine cycle and
enter the mitochondrial β-­oxidation cycle directly. Within the mitochondria, successive rounds of the four-­step β-­oxidation cycle convert
the coenzyme A (CoA)–activated fatty acids to acetyl-­CoA units. Two
or three different chain-­length-­specific isoenzymes are needed for each
of these β-­oxidation steps to accommodate the different chain-­length
fatty acyl-­CoA species. The electrons generated in the first β-­oxidation
step (acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase) are carried by the electron transfer
pathway to the electron transport chain at the level of coenzyme Q for
adenosine triphosphate production, whereas electrons generated from
the third step (3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydrogenase) enter the electron
transport chain at the level of complex 1. Most of the acetyl-­CoA generated from fatty acid β-­oxidation in the liver flows through the pathway
of ketogenesis to form 3-­hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate, whereas in
muscle and heart, the fatty acids are completely oxidized to CO2 and
water through oxidative phosphorylation. It has been demonstrated
that the enzymes of fatty acid oxidation physically and functionally
interact with each other and those of the mitochondrial electron transport chain.

DEFECTS IN THE β-­OXIDATION CYCLE
Medium-­Chain Acyl-­CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency

Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is the
most common fatty acid oxidation disorder. The disorder shows a
strong founder effect; most patients have a northwestern European
ancestry, and the majority of these patients have at least one copy of
a common MCAD missense pathogenic variant, an A-­G transition at
cDNA position 985 (c.985A>G) that changes a lysine to glutamic acid
at residue 329 (p.Lys329Glu).

Clinical Manifestations

Previously undiagnosed affected patients usually present in the first
3 months to 5 years of life with episodes of acute illness triggered by
prolonged fasting (>12-­16 hours). Signs and symptoms include vomiting and lethargy, which rapidly progress to coma or seizures and cardiorespiratory collapse. Sudden unexpected infant death may occur.
The liver may be slightly enlarged with fat deposition. Episodes are
rare until the infant is beyond the first few months of life, presumably
because of more frequent feedings at a younger age. Affected older
infants are at higher risk of symptoms as they begin to fast through the
night or are exposed to fasting stress during an intercurrent childhood
illness. Presentation in the first days of life with neonatal hypoglycemia
has been reported in newborns who were fasted inadvertently or were
being breastfed exclusively and thus are at higher risk because of early
reduced caloric intake. A diagnosis of MCAD has occasionally been
documented in previously healthy teenage and adult individuals, indicating that even patients who have been asymptomatic in infancy are
still at risk for metabolic decompensation if exposed to sufficient periods
of fasting. An unknown number of patients may remain asymptomatic.
Prior to routine newborn screening testing, as many as 25% of MCAD-­
deficient patients died or suffered severe brain injury from their first episode. Most patients are diagnosed in the newborn period by blood spot
acylcarnitine screening (part of newborn screening), allowing the initiation of early intervention and prevention of most signs and symptoms.

Laboratory Findings

During acute episodes, hypoglycemia is usually present. Plasma and
urinary ketone concentrations are inappropriately low (hypoketotic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

860 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 106.1  Mitochondrial Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders: Clinical and Biochemical Features
ENZYME DEFICIENCY

GENE

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Carnitine transporter

SLC22A5

Cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, liver disease,
sudden death, endocardial fibroelastosis, cardiac
arrhythmia

↓ Total and free carnitine; normal acylcarnitines,
acylglycine, and organic acids; prenatal and
newborn possible diagnosis reported

Long chain fatty acid
transporter

FATP1-­6

Rare, acute liver failure in childhood requiring liver
transplantation

↓ Intracellular C14-­C18 fatty acids; ↓ fatty acid
oxidation; disease-­causing pathogenic variants
have not been identified in patients

Carnitine palmitoyl
transferase-­IA

CPTIA

Liver failure, renal tubulopathy, and sudden death
reported; maternal preeclampsia; HELLP syndrome
association described in a few patients

Normal or ↑ free carnitine; normal acylcarnitines,
acylglycine, and organic acids; newborn
screening diagnosis reported

Carnitine acylcarnitine
translocase

SLC25A20

Chronic progressive liver failure, persistent ↑ NH3,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

Normal or ↓ free carnitine, abnormal
acylcarnitine profile; newborn screening
diagnosis reported

Carnitine palmitoyl
transferase-­II

CPT2

Early and late onset types; liver failure,
encephalopathy, skeletal myopathy,
cardiomyopathy, renal cystic changes; adult form
with acute rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria

Normal or ↓ free carnitine; abnormal
acylcarnitine profile; newborn screening
diagnosis possible

Short chain acyl-­CoA
dehydrogenase

ACADS

Biochemical phenotype only; no consistent clinical
phenotype

Normal or ↓ free carnitine; elevated urine
ethylmalonic acid; inconsistently abnormal
acylcarnitine profile

Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA
dehydrogenase

ACADM

Hypoglycemia, hepatic encephalopathy, sudden death;
maternal preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome association
described rarely, possible long QT interval

Normal or ↓ free carnitine, ↑ urine acylglycine,
plasma C6-­C10 free fatty acids, ↑ C8-­C10
acyl-­carnitine; newborn screening diagnosis
possible

Very long chain acyl-­CoA
dehydrogenase (VLCAD)

ACADVL

Dilated cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, hypoglycemia,
and hepatic steatosis; late-­onset, stress-­induced
rhabdomyolysis, episodic myopathy

Normal or ↓ free carnitine; ↑ plasma C14:1, C14
acylcarnitine; ↑ plasma C10-­C16 free fatty
acids; prenatal and newborn screening
diagnosis possible

ETF dehydrogenase*

ETFDH

Nonketotic fasting hypoglycemia, congenital
anomalies, milder forms of liver disease,
cardiomyopathy, and skeletal myopathy

Normal or ↓ free carnitine; increased ratio
of acyl:free carnitine, ↑ blood acylcarnitines;
characteristic urine organic acids and
acylglycines; newborn screening diagnosis
possible

ETF-­α*

ETFA

Nonketotic fasting hypoglycemia, congenital
anomalies, liver disease, cardiomyopathy; skeletal
myopathy also described

Normal or ↓ free carnitine; increased ratio of
acyl:free carnitine; ↑ acylcarnitines; urine
organic acid and acylglycines; newborn
screening diagnosis possible

ETF-­β*

ETFB

Fasting hypoglycemia, congenital anomalies, liver
disease, cardiomyopathy; skeletal myopathy also
described

Normal or ↓ free carnitine; increased ratio of
acyl:free carnitine, ↑ blood acylcarnitines;
urine organic acid and acylglycines; newborn
screening diagnosis possible

Short chain l-­3-­
hydroxyacyl-­CoA
dehydrogenase (SCHAD)

HAD1

Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, cardiomyopathy,
myopathy

Normal or ↓ free carnitine, elevated free fatty
acids, inconsistently abnormal urine organic
acid, ↑ 3-­OH glutarate, ↑ plasma C4-­OH
acylcarnitine; newborn screening diagnosis
possible

Long chain l-­3-­hydroxyacyl-­
CoA dehydrogenase
(LCHAD)

HADHA

Maternal preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome, and AFLP
association described frequently; see MTP later for
clinical manifestations

Normal or ↓ free carnitine, increased ratio of
acyl:free carnitine, ↑ free fatty acids, ↑ C16-­
OH and C18-­OH carnitines; newborn screening
diagnosis possible

MTP

HADHA,
HADHB

Severe cardiac and skeletal myopathy, hypoglycemia,
acidosis, hyper NH3, sudden death, elevated liver
enzymes, retinopathy; maternal preeclampsia,
HELLP syndrome, and AFLP association described
frequently

Normal or ↓ free carnitine, increased ratio of
acyl:free carnitine, ↑ free fatty acids, ↑ C16-­
OH and C18-­OH carnitines; newborn screening
diagnosis possible

Long chain 3-­ketoacyl-­CoA
thiolase

HADHB

Severe neonatal presentation, hypoglycemia,
acidosis, ↑ creatine kinase, cardiomyopathy,
neuropathy, and early death

Normal or ↓ free carnitine, increased ratio of
acyl:free carnitine, ↑ free fatty acids, ↑ 2-­trans,
4-­cis-­decadienoylcarnitine; newborn screening
diagnosis possible

Short chain 2,3-­enoyl-­CoA
hydratase

ECHS1

Leigh disease, lactic acidosis, seizures, cystic
degeneration of white matter, microcephaly,
metabolic acidosis, extrapyramidal dystonia, dilated
cardiomyopathy

Abnormal organic acids, 2-­methacrylglycine,
2-­methyl-­2,3 dihydroxybutyrate, also S-­(2-­
carboxypropyl)cysteine, S-­(2-­carboxyethyl)
cysteamine; acylcarnitine shows ↑ C4OH
(inconsistently)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

