Chapter 253 u Brucella
in infants and children. Children should undergo frequent tick checks
during and after their time in tick-­infested areas. If ticks are found on
the child, forceps should be used to pull the tick straight out. The skin
should be cleansed before and after this procedure. Children should
also be taught to avoid sick and dead animals. Children should be
encouraged to wear gloves, masks, and eye protection while cleaning
wild game. Further, families should cook wild game thoroughly before
eating.
Prophylactic antimicrobial agents are generally not effective in preventing tularemia and should not be used after exposure, with the
exception of laboratory or bioterrorism exposures. No tularemia vaccine is currently available to the general public (one is available for
high-­risk laboratory workers through the Department of Defense).
Standard precautions are adequate for hospitalized children with tularemia because no cases of person-­to-­person transmission have been
identified.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 253

Brucella
Kevin J. Downes
Human brucellosis is caused by organisms of the genus Brucella
and continues to be a major public health problem worldwide.
Humans are accidental hosts and acquire this zoonosis from direct
contact with an infected animal (cattle, sheep, camels, goats, and
swine) or consumption of products of an infected animal. Although
brucellosis is widely recognized as an occupational risk among
adults working with livestock, much of the brucellosis in children
is food-­borne and is associated with consumption of unpasteurized
dairy products. Brucella spp. are also potential agents of bioterrorism (see Chapter 763).

ETIOLOGY

Brucella abortus (cattle), Brucella melitensis (goats and sheep), Brucella suis (swine), and Brucella canis (dogs) are the most common
organisms responsible for human disease. These organisms are small,
aerobic, non–spore-­forming, nonmotile, gram-­negative coccobacillary bacteria. Brucella spp. are fastidious in their growth but can be
grown on various laboratory media, including blood and chocolate
agars.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Brucellosis is endemic in many parts of the world and is especially
prevalent in the Mediterranean basin, Persian Gulf, Indian subcontinent, and parts of Mexico and Central and South America. There
are approximately 500,000 new cases annually worldwide, although
accurate estimates of the prevalence of disease are lacking because of
underreporting and underdiagnosis. Childhood brucellosis accounts
for 10–30% of cases.
B. melitensis is the most prevalent species causing human brucellosis and is most often carried by sheep, goats, camels, and buffalo. Elk,
caribou, bison, deer, moose, and swine can also be infected. Because of
improved sanitation and animal vaccination, brucellosis has become
rarer in countries with effective public health and domestic animal
health programs, although recreational or occupational exposures
continue to occur. Consumption of raw or unpasteurized dairy
products in a child who has lived in or traveled to an endemic area
is the key risk factor for pediatric brucellosis because most childhood

1807

cases are acquired via ingestion. In the United States in 2010, >50%
of cases occurred in California, Arizona, Florida, and Texas. All age-­
groups can be infected by Brucella, and infections are more common
in males, likely because of more frequent occupational and recreational
exposures.
B. abortus cattle vaccine strain RB51 is a live, attenuated vaccine
that has been used to vaccinate cattle in the United States since 1996.
Very rare cases of human infection with this vaccine strain have been
reported secondary to consumption of unpasteurized milk from vaccinated cows. These strains are resistant to rifampin, a primary agent
used in the treatment of brucellosis, so clinicians should consider RB51
in a patient with the correct exposure history.

PATHOGENESIS

Modes of transmission for these organisms include inoculation
through cuts or abrasions in the skin, inoculation of the conjunctiva, inhalation of infectious aerosols, or ingestion of contaminated
meat or dairy products. Infected livestock are the most common
source of human infection. In children the primary means of infection is through eating or drinking unpasteurized or raw dairy products. Individuals in endemic areas with occupational exposures to
animals, such as farmers, veterinarians, and slaughterhouse workers, are at highest risk; exposure to an infected animal’s abortion
products or feces are notable risk factors in such occupations. Laboratory workers are more often exposed to infected aerosols. The
risk for infection depends on the nutritional and immune status of
the host, the route of inoculation, and the species of Brucella. For
reasons that remain unclear, it has been suggested that B. melitensis
and B. suis are more virulent than B. abortus or B. canis.
The major virulence factor for Brucella spp. appears to be its cell
wall lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Strains containing smooth LPS have
been demonstrated to have greater virulence and are more resistant to killing by polymorphonuclear leukocytes. These organisms
are facultative intracellular pathogens that can survive and replicate within the mononuclear phagocytic cells (monocytes, macrophages) of the reticuloendothelial system. Even though Brucella
spp. are chemotactic for entry of leukocytes into the body, the leukocytes are less efficient at killing these organisms than other bacteria despite the assistance of serum factors such as complement.
Brucella spp. possess multiple strategies to evade immune responses
and establish and maintain chronic infection. Specifically, during chronic stages of infection, organisms persist within the liver,
spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow and result in granuloma
formation.
Antibodies are produced against the LPS and other cell wall antigens, providing a means of diagnosis and likely playing a role in long-­
term immunity. The major factor in recovery from infection appears
to be development of a cell-­mediated immune response, resulting in
macrophage activation and enhanced intracellular killing. Specifically,
sensitized T lymphocytes release cytokines (e.g., interferon-­γ, tumor
necrosis factor-­α), which activate the macrophages and enhance their
intracellular killing capacity.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Brucellosis is a systemic illness that can be quite difficult to diagnose in children. Symptoms can be acute or insidious in nature
and are usually nonspecific. The incubation period is generally
2-­4 weeks but may be shorter with B. melitensis. Fever is present
in >75% of cases, and the fever pattern can vary widely. The most
common physical complaints are arthralgia, myalgia, and back
pain. Systemic symptoms, such as fatigue, sweats, chills, anorexia,
headache, weight loss, and malaise, are reported in the majority of
adult cases but are less frequent in children. Other associated symptoms include abdominal pain, diarrhea, rash, vomiting, cough, and
pharyngitis.
The most common physical manifestation of brucellosis is
hepatic and splenic enlargement, which is present in approximately
half of cases. Whereas arthralgia is common, arthritis occurs in a
minority of cases. Arthritis is typically monoarticular and most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1808 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
often involves the knee or hip in children and the sacroiliac joint
in adolescents and adults. Several types of skin lesions have been
described with brucellosis, but there is no typical rash for this infection. Epididymo-­orchitis also can occur and is more common in
adolescents and adults.
In endemic countries, Brucella spp. are an important cause of
occult bacteremia in young children. Because of the organism’s
ability to establish chronic infection, hepatic and splenic abscesses
may develop. High-­grade fever and elevations in liver enzymes are
common among children with primary bacteremia. Children with
positive blood cultures typically have more acute presentations with
increased markers of inflammation (leukocyte count, CRP, ferritin)
compared with culture-­negative cases. Recurrent episodes of bacteremia can also occur (<10% of cases), especially with inadequate
primary treatment. These recurrent episodes are less often associated with fever (40% of cases), potentially indicating the indolent
nature of chronic Brucella infections in children.
Serious manifestations of brucellosis include endocarditis, meningitis, osteomyelitis, and spondylitis. Although headache and
malaise may be demonstrated in patients with uncomplicated
brucellosis, invasion of the nervous system occurs in only 1–4%
of cases. Death from brucellosis is rare, occurring in less than 1%
of cases. Neonatal and congenital infections with these organisms
have also been described, resulting from transplacental transmission, breast milk, and blood transfusions. The signs and symptoms
associated with congenital/neonatal brucellosis are nonspecific.
Hematologic abnormalities are common with brucellosis but
occur in less than half of cases; leukopenia is the most common
cytopenia to develop. Hemolytic complications can include microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombotic microangiopathy, and
autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Secondary cases of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis have also been described after brucellosis
in children. Elevations of liver enzymes occur in approximately half
of all cases of brucellosis and are more common when bacteremia
is present.

DIAGNOSIS

A definitive diagnosis of brucellosis is established by isolating and
identifying the organisms from cultures of the blood (most common),
bone marrow, or other fluids and tissues. Unfortunately, cultures are
insensitive and positive in only a minority of pediatric cases. In a study
of 436 children with brucellosis in Israel from 2005 to 2014, 76% had
positive blood cultures. However, the prevalence of bacteremia in this
cohort, 64% of whom were hospitalized, was much higher than most
prior reports, in which less than half of cases have had positive blood
cultures. Isolation of the organism from a blood culture sample may
require as long as 4 weeks unless the laboratory is using an automated
culture system such as the lysis-­centrifugation method, where the
organism can be recovered in 5-­7 days. Therefore it is prudent to alert
the clinical microbiology laboratory that brucellosis is suspected, so
that cultures can be held longer. Bone marrow cultures may be superior
to blood cultures when evaluating patients who have received previous
antimicrobial therapy.
In addition to bacterial isolation, various serologic tests have been
applied to the diagnosis of brucellosis. Microagglutination or serum
(tube) agglutination tests are the most widely used and detect antibodies against B. abortus, B. melitensis, and B. suis. These methods do not
detect antibodies against B. canis or B. abortus vaccine strain RB51,
which lack the smooth LPS; B. canis–specific antigen is required to
diagnose this species. Antibodies can also be detected by other tests
such as enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The Rose Bengal plate test (RBT) is a rapid agglutination test that is used as a screening test in many endemic regions. It has good sensitivity (>95%) and
low cost, but confirmation of RBT results with microbiologic or other
serologic tests is advised.

For a diagnosis to be made via serology alone, acute and convalescent samples taken 2-­4 weeks apart are recommended; a fourfold or greater rise in titers is diagnostic of an acute infection. No
single titer is ever diagnostic, but most patients with acute infections have titers of ≥1:160; lower titers may be present early in the
disease course. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies can generally
be detected within a week of illness onset, whereas IgG is detectable
2-­4 weeks after infection.
Because patients with active infection have both an IgM and an IgG
response and the serum agglutination test measures the total quantity
of agglutinating antibodies, the total quantity of IgG is measured by
treatment of the serum with 2-­mercaptoethanol. This fractionation is
important in determining the significance of the antibody titer because
low levels of IgM can remain in the serum for weeks to months after the
infection has been treated. IgG titers decrease with effective therapy,
and a negative 2-­mercaptoethanol test after treatment indicates a favorable response.
It is important to remember that all serologic results must be
interpreted in light of a patient’s history and physical examination. False-­positive results from cross-­reacting antibodies to other
gram-­negative organisms, such as Yersinia enterocolitica, Francisella
tularensis, and Vibrio cholerae, can occur. In addition, the prozone
effect can give false-­negative results in the presence of high titers of
antibody. To avoid this issue, serum that is being tested should be
diluted to ≥1:320.
The enzyme immunoassay should only be used for suspected
cases with negative serum agglutination tests or for the evaluation
of patients in the following situations: (1) complicated cases, (2)
suspected chronic brucellosis, or (3) reinfection. Polymerase chain
reaction assays have been developed but are not available in most
clinical laboratories.

Differential Diagnosis

Brucellosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
fever of unknown origin in endemic areas. It may present similar
to other infections such as tularemia, cat scratch disease, malaria,
typhoid fever, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioidomycosis. Infections caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, atypical
mycobacteria, rickettsiae, and Yersinia can also present similar to
brucellosis.

TREATMENT

Many antimicrobial agents are active in vitro against Brucella spp.,
but clinical effectiveness does not always correlate with these results.
Agents that provide good intracellular killing are required for elimination of Brucella infections. Because of the risk of relapse with monotherapy, combination therapy is generally recommended. Additionally,
prolonged therapy (6 weeks or longer) is necessary to ensure an adequate and sustained response.
For uncomplicated infections in children 8 years of age or older,
≥6 weeks of doxycycline in combination with rifampin is recommended (Table 253.1). For children younger than age 8 years,
trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­
SMX) plus rifampin is
advised because of concerns about prolonged tetracycline use in
young children. Although data support that the combination of
doxycycline plus an aminoglycoside (streptomycin, gentamicin) is
superior to the other oral combination therapies, with fewer treatment failures and relapses, the inconvenience of parenteral therapy
may limit this approach in uncomplicated cases, particularly in
resource-­limited settings. Fluoroquinolones may be a viable alternative to doxycycline or TMP-­SMX but have not been studied in
children.
In more serious infections (e.g., endocarditis, meningitis, osteoarticular infections), three-­drug therapy is advised. An aminoglycoside
(streptomycin, gentamicin) should be administered for the first 7-­14

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 253 u Brucella

1809

Table 253.1  Recommended Therapy for Treatment of Brucellosis
AGE/CONDITION
≥8 yr, uncomplicated infection

<8 yr, uncomplicated infection

Complicated infection
(meningitis, endocarditis,
osteomyelitis, spondylitis)

TREATMENT REGIMEN

DURATION

Doxycycline (PO; 4.4 mg/kg/day, max 200 mg/day) in 2
divided doses
plus
Rifampin (PO; 15-­20 mg/kg/day, max 600-­900 mg/day) in 1-­2
divided doses
Alternative:
Doxycycline (PO; 4.4 mg/kg/day, max 200 mg/day) in 2
divided doses
plus
Streptomycin (IM/IV; 20-­40 mg/kg/day, max 1 g/day) in 2-­4
divided doses
or
Gentamicin (IM/IV; 5-­7.5 mg/kg/day) once daily*

≥6 wk
≥6 wk
≥6 wk
2-­3 wk
1-­2 wk

Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (PO; trimethoprim: 10 mg/kg/
day, max 480 mg/day; sulfamethoxazole: 50 mg/kg/day, max
2.4 g/day) in 2 divided doses
plus
Rifampin (PO; 15-­20 mg/kg/day, max 600-­900 mg/day) in 1-­2
divided doses

≥6 wk

Streptomycin (IM/IV; 20-­40 mg/kg/day, max 1 g/day) in 2-­4
divided doses
or
Gentamicin (IM/IV; 5-­7.5 mg/kg/day) once daily*
plus
Doxycycline (IV/PO; 4.4 mg/kg/day, max 200 mg/day) in 2
divided doses
(Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole should be used for children
<8 yr of age)
plus
Rifampin (IV/PO; 15-­20 mg/kg/day, max 600-­900 mg/day) in
1-­2 divided doses

1-­2 wk

≥6 wk

1-­2 wk
≥6 wk†

≥6 wk†

*Gentamicin can be given in divided doses if indicated based on age.
†4-6 mo for meningitis or endocarditis.

Note: Because of resistance of B. abortus strain RB51 to rifampin, treatment with doxycycline plus trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole should be used if this isolate is identified.

days of therapy, along with doxycycline (or TMP-­SMX) plus rifampin,
which are continued for at least 6 weeks. For meningitis and endocarditis, therapy is often continued for 4-­6 months. Surgical intervention should be pursued when appropriate, such as when deep tissue
abscesses have developed.
If B. abortus RB51 (cattle vaccine strain) is identified (or suspected) as the cause of infection, the use of rifampin should
be avoided. This is because the strain was derived by selection
in rifampin-­enriched media and is thus inherently resistant to
rifampin. As a result, a combination of doxycycline and TMP-­SMX
should be used as treatment.
Although relapse occurs in approximately 5–15% of cases, antimicrobial resistance is rare. Relapse is confirmed by isolation of Brucella
within weeks to months after therapy has ended. Prolonged treatment
is the key to preventing disease relapse, and steps should be taken to
assure compliance with the long courses of therapy needed to achieve
eradication.

PROGNOSIS

The primary indication of clinical response is resolution of symptoms, which may be slow; the average time to defervescence is 4-­5

days. The prognosis after therapy is excellent if patients are compliant with the prolonged therapy. Patients should be followed clinically and serologically for 1-­2 years. Before the use of antimicrobial
agents, the course of brucellosis was often prolonged and associated
with death. Since the institution of specific therapy, most deaths are
a result of specific organ system involvement (e.g., endocarditis) in
complicated cases. Initiation of antimicrobial therapy may precipitate
a Jarisch-­Herxheimer–like reaction, presumably because of a large
antigen load, but these reactions are rarely associated with serious
complications.

PREVENTION

Prevention of brucellosis depends on effective eradication of the
organism from livestock. Pasteurization of milk and dairy products
for human consumption remains an important aspect of prevention.
It should be noted that certification of raw milk does not eliminate
the risk of brucellosis acquisition. No vaccine currently exists for use
in children, and therefore education of the public continues to have a
prominent role in the prevention of brucellosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1810 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Legionellaceae are aerobic, non–spore-­
forming, nonencapsulated,
gram-­negative bacilli that stain poorly with Gram stain when performed on smears from clinical specimens. Stained smears of Legionella pneumophila taken from colonial growth resemble Pseudomonas.
Unlike other Legionella species, Legionella micdadei stains acid fast.
Although more than 60 species of the genus have now been identified,
the majority (90%) of clinical infections are caused by L. pneumophila,
and most of the remainder are caused by L. micdadei, L. bozemanii, L.
dumoffii, and L. longbeachae.
The organisms are fastidious and require l-­cysteine, ferric ion, and
α-­keto acids for growth. Colonies develop within 3-­5 days on buffered
charcoal yeast extract agar, which may contain selected antibiotics to
inhibit overgrowth by other microorganisms; Legionella rarely grows
on routine laboratory media.

The incidence of legionellosis in the United States continues to rise,
and nearly 10,000 cases were reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) through the National Notifiable Disease
Surveillance System in 2018. Because this is a passive reporting system, these are likely underestimates of the incidence of disease, which
is estimated to occur at least twice as often as reported. An active
laboratory-­based and population-­based surveillance system for tracking Legionella infections was recently launched by CDC, which will
help to better assess its true incidence and epidemiology. (For up-­to-­
date information, see https://www.cdc.gov/legionella/.)
Legionellosis demonstrates geographic differences, and the vast
majority of cases are classified as Legionnaires’ disease (99.5%), with
a small fraction as Pontiac fever (0.5%). Legionella infections are
reported most frequently in fall and summer, and recent studies show
an association with total monthly rainfall and humidity. Approximately
0.5–5.0% of those exposed to a common source develop pneumonia,
whereas the attack rate in Pontiac fever outbreaks is very high (85–
100%). Although Legionella is associated with 0.5–10% of pneumonia
cases in adults, it is a rare cause of pneumonia in children, accounting for <1% of cases; however, infrequent testing for Legionella might
underestimate its prevalence. Acquisition of antibodies to L. pneumophila in healthy children occurs progressively over time, although
these antibodies presumably reflect subclinical infection, mild respiratory disease, or antibodies that cross-­react with other bacterial species.
Community-­acquired Legionnaires’ disease in children is increasingly
reported (1.7% of reported cases), and most cases occur in children 15-­
19 years old, followed by infants. The incidence in infants is reported
to be 0.11 per 100,000. Legionnaires’ disease is particularly severe in
neonates. The epidemiology of hospital-­acquired Legionnaires’ disease
in children is derived almost exclusively from case reports, so the true
incidence of this entity is unknown.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

PATHOGENESIS

Chapter 254

Legionella
Jeffrey S. Gerber
Legionellosis comprises Legionnaires’ disease (Legionella pneumonia), other invasive extrapulmonary Legionella infections, and an acute
flulike illness known as Pontiac fever. In contrast to the syndromes
associated with invasive disease, Pontiac fever is a self-­limited illness
that develops after aerosol exposure and may represent a toxic or
hypersensitivity response to Legionella.

ETIOLOGY

The environmental reservoir of Legionella in nature is freshwater
(lakes, streams, thermally polluted waters, potable water), and invasive
pneumonia (Legionnaires’ disease) is related to exposure to human-­
made water systems (plumbing, showerheads, cooling towers, certain
medical devices, decorative fountains, hot tubs) via aerosols containing
the bacteria. Growth of Legionella occurs more readily in warm water,
and exposure to warm-­water sources is an important risk factor for
disease. Epidemic and sporadic cases (most common) of community-­
acquired Legionnaires’ disease can be attributed to potable water in the
local environment of the patient. Risk factors for acquisition of sporadic community-­acquired pneumonia include exposure to cooling
towers, nonmunicipal water supply, residential plumbing repairs, and
lower water heater temperatures, which facilitate growth of bacteria or
lead to release of a bolus of biofilm containing Legionella into potable
water. The mode of transmission may be by inhalation of aerosols or by
microaspiration. Outbreaks of Legionnaires’ disease have been associated with protozoa in the implicated water source; replication within
these eukaryotic cells presumably amplifies and maintains Legionella
within the potable-­water distribution system or in cooling towers.
Outbreaks of community-­acquired pneumonia and some nosocomial
outbreaks have been linked to common sources, including hot water
heaters, evaporative condensers, cooling towers, whirlpool baths, water
births, humidifiers, and nebulizers. Travel-­
associated Legionnaires’
disease and Pontiac fever are increasingly recognized in major outbreaks. Although person-­to-­person transmission has been reported, if
it does occur, it is extremely rare.
Hospital-­acquired infections are most often linked to potable water.
Exposure may occur through three general mechanisms: (1) inhalation
of contaminated water vapor through artificial ventilation; (2) aspiration of ingested microorganisms, including those in gastric feedings
that are mixed with contaminated tap water; and (3) inhalation of
aerosols from showers, sinks, and fountains. Extrapulmonary legionellosis may occur through topical application of contaminated tap water
into surgical or traumatic wounds. In contrast to Legionnaires’ disease,
Pontiac fever outbreaks have occurred through exposure to aerosols
from whirlpool baths and ventilation systems.

Although Legionella can be grown on artificial media, the intracellular
environment of eukaryotic cells provides the definitive site of growth.
Legionella organisms are facultative intracellular parasites of eukaryotic cells. In nature, Legionella replicate within protozoa found in
freshwater. In humans, the main target cell for Legionella is the alveolar macrophage, although other cell types may also be invaded. After
entry, virulent strains of L. pneumophila stimulate the formation of a
special phagosome that permits bacterial replication to proceed. The
phagosome consists of components of the endoplasmic reticulum and
escapes the degradative lysosomal pathway. Growth in macrophages
occurs to the point of cell death, followed by reinfection of new cells,
until these cells are activated and can subsequently kill intracellular
microorganisms. Acute, severe infection of the lung provokes an acute
inflammatory response and necrosis. Early on, more bacteria are found
in extracellular spaces as a result of intracellular replication, lysis, and
release of bacteria. Subsequently, macrophage activation and other
immune responses produce intense infiltration of tissue by macrophages that contain intracellular bacteria, ultimately leading to control
of bacterial replication and killing.
Corticosteroid therapy poses a high risk for infection by interfering
with T-­cell and macrophage function. Although community-­acquired
Legionnaires’ disease may occur in healthy, immunocompetent
patients without other comorbid conditions, those who have defects in
cellular-­mediated immunity are at higher risk for infection. As in other
diseases caused by facultative intracellular microorganisms, the outcome is critically dependent on the specific and nonspecific immune
responses of the host, particularly macrophage and T-­cell responses.
Risk factors for Legionnaires’ disease in adults include chronic diseases of the lung (smoking, bronchitis), older age, diabetes, renal failure,
immunosuppression associated with organ transplantation, corticosteroid therapy, and episodes of aspiration. In surveys of community-­
acquired infection, a significant number of adults have no identified
risk factors. The number of reported cases of community-­acquired
Legionnaires’ disease in children is small. Among these cases, immunocompromised status, especially corticosteroid treatment, coupled
with exposure to contaminated potable water, is the major risk factor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 254 u Legionella
Infection in a few children with chronic pulmonary disease without
immune deficiency has also been reported, but infection in children
lacking any risk factors is uncommon. The modes of transmission of
community-­acquired disease in children include exposure to mists,
freshwater, water coolers, and other aerosol-­generating apparatuses.
Nosocomial Legionella infection has been reported more frequently than
community-­acquired disease in children and usually occurs in those
who are immunocompromised (e.g., stem cell transplants, solid organ
transplants), those with structural lung disease, or neonates receiving
mechanical ventilation. The modes of acquisition include microaspiration, frequently associated with nasogastric tubes, and aerosol inhalation. Bronchopulmonary Legionella infections are reported in patients
with cystic fibrosis and have been associated with aerosol therapy or
mist tents. Legionnaire’s disease is also reported in children with asthma
and tracheal stenosis. Chronic corticosteroid therapy for asthma is a
reported risk factor for Legionella infections in children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Legionnaires’ disease was originally believed to cause atypical pneumonia associated with extrapulmonary symptoms and laboratory
abnormalities, including diarrhea, confusion, hyponatremia, hypophosphatemia, abnormal liver function studies, and evidence of renal
dysfunction. Although a subset of patients may exhibit these classic
manifestations, Legionella infection typically causes pneumonia that is
indistinguishable from pneumonia produced by other infectious agents.
The incubation period for Legionnaires’ disease is typically between 2
and 10 days, though it occasionally can be 3-­4 weeks. Fever, cough,
and chest pain are common presenting symptoms; the cough may be
productive of purulent sputum or may be nonproductive. Although the
classic chest radiographic appearance demonstrates rapidly progressive
alveolar filling infiltrates, the chest radiographic appearance is widely
variable, with tumor-­like shadows, evidence of nodular infiltrates,
unilateral or bilateral infiltrates, or cavitation, although cavitation is
rarely seen in immunocompetent patients. This picture overlaps substantially with disease caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. Although
pleural effusion is less often associated with Legionnaires’ disease, its
frequency varies so widely that neither the presence nor absence of
effusion is helpful in the differential diagnosis.
Most reports of nosocomial Legionella pneumonia in children demonstrate the following clinical features: rapid onset, temperature >38.5°C
(101.3°F), cough, pleuritic chest pain, tachypnea, and dyspnea. Abdominal pain, headache, and diarrhea are also common. Chest radiographs
reveal lobar consolidations or diffuse bilateral infiltrates, and pleural
effusions may be noted. Usually there is no clinical response to broad-­
spectrum β-­lactam (penicillins and cephalosporins) or aminoglycoside
antibiotics. Concomitant infection with other pathogens, including
Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae, occurs in 5–10%
of cases of Legionnaires’ disease; therefore, detection of another potential
pulmonary pathogen does not preclude the diagnosis of legionellosis.

Pontiac Fever

Pontiac fever in adults and children is characterized by a shorter incubation period (1-­3 days) followed by high fever, myalgia, headache, and
extreme debilitation, lasting for 3-­5 days. Cough, breathlessness, diarrhea, confusion, and chest pain may occur, but there is no evidence for
invasive infection. The disease is self-­limited without sequelae. Virtually all exposed individuals seroconvert to Legionella antigens. A very
large outbreak in Scotland that affected 35 children was attributed to L.
micdadei, which was isolated from a whirlpool spa. The onset of illness
was 1-­7 days (median: 3 days), and all exposed children developed significant titers of specific antibodies to L. micdadei. The pathogenesis of
Pontiac fever is not known. In the absence of evidence of true infection,
the most likely hypothesis is that this syndrome is caused by a toxic or
hypersensitivity reaction to microbial antigens.

DIAGNOSIS

Culture of Legionella from sputum, other respiratory tract specimens,
blood, or tissue is the gold standard against which indirect methods
of detection should be compared. If present, pleural fluid should be
obtained for culture. Specimens obtained from the respiratory tract

1811

that are contaminated with oral flora must be treated and processed
to reduce contaminants and plated onto selective media. Because these
are costly and time-­consuming methods, many laboratories do not
process specimens for culture.
The urinary antigen assay that detects L. pneumophila serogroup I
has revolutionized the diagnosis of Legionella infection and has 80%
sensitivity and 99% specificity. The assay is a useful method in the
prompt diagnosis of Legionnaires’ disease caused by this serogroup,
which accounts for the majority of symptomatic infections. In the
United States, this test is frequently used because it is widely available
in reference laboratories. Where available, polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) is used to identify L. pneumophila from bronchoscopic lavage
and other clinical specimens to the exclusion of other respiratory
pathogens. Other methods, including direct immunofluorescence,
have low sensitivity and are generally not employed. Serological testing
is of little clinical utility, as seroconversion may not occur for several
weeks after the onset of infection, the available serologic assays do not
detect all strains of L. pneumophila or all species, and cross reactivity
occurs with several other gram-­negative organisms.
In view of the low sensitivity of direct detection and the slow growth
of the microorganism in culture, multiple diagnostics (culture, urine
antigen, PCR if available) should be sent simultaneously and empiric
antibiotic therapy considered when there is suggestive clinical evidence, including the lack of response to usual antibiotics.

TREATMENT

In community-­
acquired pneumonia in adults who are hospitalized,
guidelines recommend empiric treatment with a β-­lactam plus a macrolide or quinolone for treatment of atypical microorganisms (Legionella, C. pneumoniae, M. pneumoniae). Evidence-­based guidelines for
management of community-­acquired pneumonia in children typically
do not include Legionella in the differential diagnosis or empiric treatment recommendations. Effective treatment of Legionnaires’ disease is
based in part on the intracellular concentration of antibiotics. Azithromycin or the quinolones (ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin) have generally
replaced erythromycin as therapy for patients with diagnosed Legionella
infection. Doxycycline is an acceptable alternative. In serious infections
or in high-­risk patients, parenteral therapy is recommended initially,
although oral conversion is favored when tolerated, particularly because
of the generally high bioavailability of oral macrolides, quinolones, and
tetracyclines. The duration of antibiotic therapy for Legionnaires’ disease
in adults is typically for a minimum of 5 days, although therapy may be
continued for 10-­14 days in more seriously ill or immunocompromised
patients. Treatment of extrapulmonary infections, including prosthetic
valve endocarditis and sternal wound infections, may require prolonged
therapy. In vitro data and case reports suggest that trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole may also be effective. A large, retrospective study of
hospitalized adults with Legionella pneumonia found no difference in
mortality between those treated with azithromycin and with quinolones.
The role of combination therapy is unknown. Antibiotic treatment for
Pontiac fever is not recommended.

PROGNOSIS

The mortality rate for community-­
acquired Legionnaires’ disease
in adults who are hospitalized is approximately 15% but may exceed
50% in immunocompromised patients, although reporting bias might
inflate these estimates. Precise estimates for children are unknown.
The prognosis depends on underlying host factors and possibly on
the duration of illness before initiation of appropriate therapy. Despite
appropriate antibiotic therapy, patients may succumb to respiratory
complications, such as acute respiratory distress syndrome. A high
mortality rate is noted in case reports of premature infants and children, virtually all of whom have been immunocompromised. Delay
in diagnosis is also associated with increased mortality. Consequently,
Legionella should be considered in the differential diagnosis of both
community-­acquired and nosocomial pneumonia in children, especially in cases refractory to empirical therapy or with epidemiologic
risk factors for legionellosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1812 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
with CSD. Development of serologic tests that showed prevalence of
antibodies in 84–100% of cases of CSD, culturing of B. henselae from
CSD nodes, and detection of B. henselae by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) in the majority of lymph node samples and pus from patients
with CSD confirmed the organism as the cause. Occasional cases of
CSD may be caused by other organisms, including B. clarridgeiae, B.
grahamii, B. alsatica, and B. quintana.

Chapter 255

Bartonella
Rachel C. Orscheln
The spectrum of disease resulting from human infection with Bartonella species includes the association of bacillary angiomatosis and cat
scratch disease with Bartonella henselae. There are more than 30 validated species of Bartonella, but six major species are responsible for most
human disease: B. henselae, B. quintana, B. bacilliformis, B. elizabethae,
B. vinsonii, and B. clarridgeiae (Table 255.1). The remaining Bartonella
spp. have been found primarily in animals, particularly rodents and
moles. However, zoonotic infections from animal-­associated strains of
Bartonella spp. have been reported. In 2013 a novel Bartonella agent
with the proposed name Candidatus Bartonella ancashi (Bartonella
ancashensis) was described as a cause of verruga peruana.
Members of the genus Bartonella are gram-­
negative, oxidase-­
negative, fastidious, aerobic rods that ferment no carbohydrates. B.
bacilliformis is the only species that is motile, achieving motility by
means of polar flagella. Optimal growth is obtained on fresh media
containing ≥5% sheep or horse blood in the presence of 5% carbon
dioxide. The use of lysis centrifugation for specimens from blood
followed by cultivation on chocolate agar for extended periods (2-­6
weeks) enhances recovery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

255.1 Cat Scratch Disease (Bartonella
henselae)
Rachel C. Orscheln
The most common presentation of Bartonella infection is cat scratch
disease (CSD), which is a subacute, regional lymphadenitis caused
most frequently by B. henselae. CSD is the most common cause of
chronic lymphadenitis that persists for >3 weeks.

ETIOLOGY

B. henselae can be cultured from the blood of healthy cats. B. henselae
organisms are the small, pleomorphic, gram-­negative bacilli visualized with Warthin-­Starry stain in affected lymph nodes from patients

Table 255.1

EPIDEMIOLOGY

CSD is common, with >24,000 estimated cases per year in the United
States. B. henselae is transmitted most frequently by cutaneous inoculation through the bite or scratch of a cat. However, transmission may
occur through other routes, such as flea bites. Most patients (87–99%)
with CSD have had contact with cats, many of which are kittens <6
months old, and >50% of patients have a definite history of a cat scratch
or bite. Cats have high-­level bacteremia with Bartonella spp. for months
without any clinical symptoms; kittens are more frequently bacteremic
than adult cats. Transmission between cats occurs through the cat flea,
Ctenocephalides felis. In temperate zones, most cases occur between
September and March, perhaps in relation to the seasonal breeding of
domestic cats or to the close proximity of family pets in the fall and
winter. In tropical zones, there is no seasonal prevalence. Distribution
is worldwide, and infection occurs in all races.
Cat scratches appear to be more common among children, and
males are affected more often than females. CSD is a sporadic illness;
usually only one family member is affected, even though many siblings
play with the same kitten. However, clusters do occur, with family cases
within weeks of one another. Anecdotal reports have implicated other
sources, such as dog scratches, wood splinters, fishhooks, cactus spines,
and porcupine quills.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathologic findings in the primary inoculation papule and affected
lymph nodes are similar. Both show a central avascular, necrotic area
with surrounding lymphocytes, giant cells, and histiocytes. Three stages
of involvement occur in affected nodes, sometimes simultaneously
in the same node. The first stage consists of generalized enlargement
with thickening of the cortex and hypertrophy of the germinal center
and with a predominance of lymphocytes. Epithelioid granulomas with
Langerhans giant cells are scattered throughout the node. The second
stage is characterized by granulomas that increase in density, fuse, and
become infiltrated with polymorphonuclear leukocytes, with beginning
central necrosis. In the third stage, necrosis progresses with formation
of large, pus-­filled sinuses. This purulent material may rupture into surrounding tissue. Similar granulomas have been found in the liver, spleen,
and osteolytic lesions of bone when those organs are involved.

Bartonella Species Causing the Majority of Human Disease

 

DISEASE

ORGANISM

VECTOR

PRIMARY RISK FACTOR

Bartonellosis (Carrión disease)

B. bacilliformis

Sandfly (Lutzomyia verrucarum)

Living in endemic areas (Andes
Mountains)

Cat scratch disease

B. henselae
B. clarridgeiae

Cat

Cat scratch or bite

Trench fever

B. quintana

Human body louse

Body louse infestation during
outbreak

Bacteremia, endocarditis

B. henselae
B. elizabethae
B. vinsonii
B. quintana

Cat for B. henselae
Rat for B. elizabethae
Vole for B. vinsonii
Human body louse for B. quintana

Severe immunosuppression

Bacillary angiomatosis

B. henselae
B. quintana

Cat for B. henselae
Human body louse for B. quintana

Severe immunosuppression

Peliosis hepatis

B. henselae
B. quintana

Cat for B. henselae
Human body louse for B. quintana

Severe immunosuppression

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 255 u Bartonella
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

After an incubation period of 7-­12 days (range: 3-­30 days), one or more
3-­to 5-­mm red papules develop at the site of cutaneous inoculation,
often reflecting a linear cat scratch. These lesions are often overlooked
because of their small size but are found in at least 65% of patients
when careful examination is performed (Fig. 255.1). Lymphadenopathy is generally evident within 1-­4 weeks (Fig. 255.2). Chronic
regional lymphadenitis is the hallmark, affecting the first or second
set of nodes draining the entry site. Affected lymph nodes in order of
frequency include the axillary, cervical, submandibular, preauricular,
epitrochlear, femoral, and inguinal nodes. Involvement of one or more
groups of nodes occurs in 10–20% of patients, although at a given site,
half the cases involve several nodes.
Nodes involved are usually tender and have overlying erythema
but without cellulitis. They usually range between 1 and 5 cm in size,
although they can become much larger. From 10% to 40% eventually
suppurate. The duration of enlargement is usually 1-­2 months, with
persistence up to 1 year in rare cases. Fever occurs in approximately
30% of patients, usually 38–39°C (100.4–102.2°F). Other nonspecific
symptoms, including malaise, anorexia, fatigue, and headache, affect
less than one third of patients. Transient rashes, which may occur
in approximately 5% of patients, are mainly truncal maculopapular rashes. Erythema nodosum, erythema multiforme, and erythema
annulare have also been reported.

1813

CSD is usually a self-­limited infection that spontaneously resolves
within a few weeks to months. The most common ocular presentation
of CSD is Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome, which is unilateral
conjunctivitis followed by preauricular lymphadenopathy and occurs
in 5% of patients with CSD (Fig. 255.3). Direct eye inoculation as a
result of rubbing with the hands after cat contact is the presumed mode
of spread. A conjunctival granuloma may be found at the inoculation
site. The involved eye is usually not painful and has little or no discharge but may be quite red and swollen. Submandibular or cervical
lymphadenopathy may also occur.
More severe, disseminated illness occurs up to 14% of patients and
is characterized by presentation with high fever, often persisting for
several weeks. Other prominent symptoms include significant abdominal pain and weight loss. Hepatosplenomegaly may occur, although
hepatic dysfunction is rare (Fig. 255.4). Granulomatous changes may
be seen in the liver and spleen. Another common site of dissemination
is bone, with the development of multifocal granulomatous osteolytic lesions associated with localized pain but without erythema,

Fig. 255.3 The granulomatous conjunctivitis of Parinaud oculoglan-

Fig. 255.1 A child with typical cat scratch disease demonstrating the

dular syndrome is associated with ipsilateral local lymphadenopathy,
usually preauricular and, less often, submandibular. (From Mandell GL,
Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:2739.)

original scratch injuries and the primary papule that soon thereafter developed proximal to the middle finger. (Courtesy Dr. V.H. San Joaquin,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City.)

Fig. 255.4 In this CT scan of a patient with hepatic involvement of cat
Fig. 255.2 Right axillary lymphadenopathy followed the scratches

and development of a primary papule in this child with typical cat
scratch disease. (From Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2006:2737.)

scratch disease, the absence of enhancement of the multiple lesions
after contrast infusion is consistent with the granulomatous inflammation of this entity. Treated empirically with various antibiotics without
improvement before establishment of this diagnosis, the patient subsequently recovered fully with no further antimicrobial therapy. (Courtesy
Dr. V.H. San Joaquin, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1814 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
tenderness, or swelling. Other uncommon manifestations are neuroretinitis with papilledema and stellate macular exudates, encephalitis,
endocarditis, and atypical pneumonia.

DIAGNOSIS

In most cases the diagnosis can be strongly suspected on clinical
grounds in a patient with history of exposure to a cat. Serologic testing
can be used to confirm the diagnosis. Most patients have elevated IgG
antibody titers at presentation. However, the IgM response to B. henselae has frequently resolved by the time testing is considered. There is
cross reactivity among Bartonella spp., particularly B. henselae and B.
quintana.
If tissue specimens are obtained, bacilli may be visualized with
Warthin-­Starry and Brown-­Hopps tissue stains. Bartonella DNA can
be identified through PCR analysis of tissue specimens. Culturing of
the organism is not generally practical for clinical diagnosis. Nextgeneration sequencing and 16S rRNA sequencing have been used to
identify Bartonella species on tissue that is fresh or formalin-fixed, as
well as on body fluids other than blood.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of CSD includes virtually all causes of
lymphadenopathy (see Chapter 539). The more common entities include pyogenic (suppurative) lymphadenitis, primarily from
staphylococcal or streptococcal infections, atypical mycobacterial
infections, and malignancy. Less common entities are tularemia,
brucellosis, and sporotrichosis. Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus,
and Toxoplasma gondii infections usually cause more generalized
lymphadenopathy.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Routine laboratory tests are not helpful. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is often elevated. The white blood cell count may be normal
or mildly elevated. Hepatic transaminases are often normal but may
be elevated in systemic disease. Ultrasonography or CT may reveal
many granulomatous nodules in the liver and spleen; the nodules
appear as hypodense, round, irregular lesions and are usually multiple. However, CSD presenting as a solitary splenic lesion has been
reported.

TREATMENT

Antibiotic treatment of CSD is not always needed and is not clearly
beneficial. For most patients, treatment consists of conservative symptomatic care and observation. Studies show a significant discordance
between in vitro activity of antibiotics and clinical effectiveness. For
many patients, diagnosis is considered in the context of failure to
respond to β-­lactam antibiotic treatment of presumed staphylococcal
lymphadenitis.
A small prospective study of oral azithromycin (500 mg on day
1, then 250 mg on days 2-­5 ; for smaller children, 10 mg/kg/24
hr on day 1 and 5 mg/kg/24 hr on days 2-­5 ) showed a decrease
in initial lymph node volume in 50% of patients during the first
30 days, but after 30 days there was no difference in lymph node
volume. No other clinical benefit was found. For the majority of
patients, CSD is self-­limited, and resolution occurs over weeks to
months without antibiotic treatment. Azithromycin, clarithromycin, trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­
SMX), rifampin,
ciprofloxacin, and gentamicin appear to be the best agents if treatment is considered.
Suppurative lymph nodes that become tense and extremely painful may require surgical drainage for both therapeutic and diagnostic
purposes.
Children with hepatosplenic CSD appear to respond well to treatment with azithromycin with or without the addition of rifampin.

COMPLICATIONS

Encephalopathy can occur in as many as 5% of patients with CSD
and typically manifests 1-­3 week after the onset of lymphadenitis as

the sudden onset of neurologic symptoms, which often include seizures, combative or bizarre behavior, and altered level of consciousness. Imaging studies are generally normal. The cerebrospinal fluid is
normal or shows minimal pleocytosis and protein elevation. Recovery
occurs without sequelae in almost all patients but may take place slowly
over many months.
Other neurologic manifestations include peripheral facial nerve
paralysis, myelitis, radiculitis, compression neuropathy, and cerebellar ataxia. One patient has been reported to have encephalopathy with
persistent cognitive impairment and memory loss.
Stellate macular retinopathy is associated with several infections, including CSD. Children and young adults present with unilateral or, rarely, bilateral loss of vision with central scotoma, optic
disc swelling, and macular star formation from exudates radiating out from the macula. The findings usually resolve completely,
with recovery of vision, generally within 2-­3 months. The optimal
treatment for the neuroretinitis is unknown, although treatment of
adults with doxycycline and rifampin for 4-­6 weeks has had good
results.
Hematologic manifestations include hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenic purpura, nonthrombocytopenic purpura, and eosinophilia.
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis, similar to Henoch-­Schönlein purpura,
has been reported in association with CSD in one child. A systemic
presentation of CSD with pleurisy, arthralgia or arthritis, mediastinal
masses, enlarged nodes at the head of the pancreas, and atypical pneumonia also has been reported.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for CSD in a normal host is generally excellent, with
resolution of clinical findings over weeks to months. Recovery is occasionally slower and may take as long as 1 year.

PREVENTION

Person-­to-­person spread of Bartonella infections is not known.
Isolation of the affected patient is not necessary. Prevention would
require elimination of cats from households, which is not practical or necessarily desirable. Awareness of the risk of cat (and particularly kitten) scratches should be emphasized to parents. Cat
scratches or bites should be washed immediately. Cat flea control
is helpful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

255.2 Bartonellosis (Bartonella bacilliformis)
Rachel C. Orscheln
The first human Bartonella infection described was bartonellosis, a
geographically distinct disease caused by B. bacilliformis. There are two
predominant forms of illness caused by B. bacilliformis: Oroya fever,
a severe, febrile hemolytic anemia, and verruca peruana (verruga
peruana), an eruption of hemangioma-­like lesions. B. bacilliformis also
causes asymptomatic infection. Bartonellosis is also called Carrión
disease.

ETIOLOGY

B. bacilliformis is a small, motile, gram-­negative organism with a
brush of ≥10 unipolar flagella, which appear to be important components for invasiveness. An obligate aerobe, it grows best at 28°C
(82.4°F) in semisolid nutrient agar containing rabbit serum and
hemoglobin.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Bartonellosis is a zoonosis found only in mountain valleys of the Andes
Mountains in Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Chile, and Bolivia at altitudes
and environmental conditions favorable for the vector, which is the
sandfly, Lutzomyia verrucarum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 255 u Bartonella
PATHOGENESIS

After the sandfly bite, Bartonella organisms enter the endothelial
cells of blood vessels, where they proliferate. Found throughout the
reticuloendothelial system, they then reenter the bloodstream and
parasitize erythrocytes. They bind on the cells, deform the membranes, and then enter intracellular vacuoles. The resultant hemolytic anemia may involve as many as 90% of circulating erythrocytes.
Patients who survive this acute phase may or may not experience
the cutaneous manifestations, which are nodular hemangiomatous
lesions or verrucae ranging in size from a few millimeters to several
centimeters.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period is 2-­14 weeks. Patients may be totally asymptomatic or may have nonspecific symptoms such as headache and malaise without anemia.
Oroya fever is characterized by fever with rapid development
of anemia. Clouding of the sensorium and delirium are common
symptoms and may progress to overt psychosis. Physical examination demonstrates signs of severe hemolytic anemia, including icterus and pallor, sometimes in association with generalized
lymphadenopathy.
In the preeruptive stage of verruca peruana (Fig. 255.5), patients
may complain of arthralgias, myalgias, and paresthesias. Inflammatory reactions such as phlebitis, pleuritis, erythema nodosum, and
encephalitis may develop. The appearance of verrucae is pathognomonic of the eruptive phase. Lesions vary greatly in size and
number.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of bartonellosis is established on clinical grounds in
conjunction with a blood smear demonstrating organisms or with
blood culture. The anemia is macrocytic and hypochromic, with
reticulocyte counts as high as 50%. B. bacilliformis may be seen on
Giemsa stain preparation as red-­violet rods in the erythrocytes. In
the recovery phase, organisms change to a more coccoid form and
disappear from the blood. In the absence of anemia, the diagnosis
depends on blood cultures. In the eruptive phase, the typical verruca
confirms the diagnosis. Antibody testing has been used to document
infection.

TREATMENT

B. bacilliformis is sensitive to many antibiotics, including rifampin, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol. Treatment is highly effective in rapidly diminishing fever and eradicating the organism from the blood.
Chloramphenicol (50-­75 mg/kg/day) is considered the drug of choice
because it is also useful in the treatment of concomitant infections such
as Salmonella. Fluoroquinolones are used successfully as well. Blood
transfusions and supportive care are critical in patients with severe
anemia. Antimicrobial treatment for verruca peruana is considered
when there are >10 cutaneous lesions, if the lesions are erythematous
or violaceous, or if the onset of the lesions was <1 month before presentation. Oral rifampin is effective in the healing of lesions. Surgical
excision may be needed for lesions that are large and disfiguring or that
interfere with function.

PREVENTION

Prevention depends on avoidance of the vector, particularly at
night, by the use of protective clothing and insect repellents (see
Chapter 218).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

255.3 Trench Fever (Bartonella quintana)
Rachel C. Orscheln

ETIOLOGY

The causative agent of trench fever was first designated Rickettsia quintana, was then assigned to the genus Rochalimaea, and now has been
reassigned as Bartonella quintana.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Trench fever was first recognized as a distinct clinical entity during
World War I, when more than a million troops in the trenches were
infected. Infection with B. quintana is currently rare in the United
States and primarily occurs in the setting of conditions favorable to
body lice infestations, such as homelessness, crowding, and poor sanitation. When pooled samples of head and body lice have been collected
from homeless populations, up to 33% of individuals have lice pools
that test positive for B. quintana.
Humans are the only known reservoir. No other animal is naturally
infected, and usual laboratory animals are not susceptible. The human
body louse, Pediculus humanus var. corporis, is the vector and is capable of transmission to a new host 5-­6 days after feeding on an infected
person. Lice excrete the organism for life; transovarian passage does
not occur. Humans may have prolonged asymptomatic bacteremia for
years.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Fig. 255.5 A single large lesion of verruca peruana on the leg of an

inhabitant of the Peruvian Andes. Such lesions are prone to superficial
ulceration, and their vascular nature may lead to copious bleeding. Ecchymosis of the skin surrounding the lesion is also evident. (Courtesy
Dr. J.M. Crutcher, Oklahoma State Department of Health, Oklahoma
City.)

1815

The incubation period for trench fever averages about 22 days (range:
4-­35 days). The clinical presentation is highly variable. Symptoms can
be very mild and brief. About half of infected persons have a single
febrile illness with abrupt onset lasting 3-­6 days. In other patients,
prolonged, sustained fever may occur. More commonly, patients have
periodic febrile illness with three to eight episodes lasting 4-­5 days
each, sometimes occurring over 1 year or more. This form is reminiscent of malaria or relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis). Afebrile
bacteremia can occur.
Clinical findings usually consist of fever (typically with a temperature of 38.5–40°C [101.3–104°F]), malaise, chills, sweats, anorexia,
and severe headache. Common findings include marked conjunctival
injection, tachycardia, myalgias, arthralgias, and severe pain in the
neck, back, and legs. Crops of erythematous macules or papules may
occur on the trunk on as many as 80% of patients. Splenomegaly and
mild liver enlargement may be noted.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1816 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
DIAGNOSIS

In nonepidemic situations, it is impossible to establish a diagnosis of
trench fever on clinical grounds because the findings are not distinctive. A history of body louse infection or having been in an area of epidemic disease should heighten suspicions. B. quintana can be cultured
from the blood with modification to include culture on epithelial cells.
Serologic tests for B. quintana are available, but there is cross-­reaction
with B. henselae.

BACILLARY PELIOSIS

There are no controlled trials of treatment, but bacteremia with Bartonella treated with a combination of gentamicin and doxycycline
increases the rate of cure compared with other regimens, such as doxycycline or β-­lactam antibiotics alone.

Bacillary peliosis affects the reticuloendothelial system, primarily
the liver (peliosis hepatis) and, less frequently, the spleen and lymph
nodes. It is a vasoproliferative disorder characterized by random proliferation of venous lakes surrounded by fibromyxoid stroma harboring numerous bacillary organisms. Clinical findings include fever and
abdominal pain in association with abnormal liver function test results,
particularly a greatly increased alkaline phosphatase level. Cutaneous
bacillary angiomatosis with splenomegaly may be associated with
thrombocytopenia or pancytopenia. The vascular proliferative lesions
in the liver and spleen appear on CT scan as hypodense lesions scattered throughout the parenchyma. The differential diagnosis includes
hepatic Kaposi sarcoma, lymphoma, and disseminated infection with
Pneumocystis jirovecii or Mycobacterium avium complex.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

BACTEREMIA AND ENDOCARDITIS

TREATMENT

255.4 Bacillary Angiomatosis and Bacillary
Peliosis Hepatis (Bartonella henselae
and Bartonella quintana)
Rachel C. Orscheln
Both B.henselae and B.quintana cause vascular proliferative disease
in severely immunocompromised persons, primarily adult patients
with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), persons
receiving cancer chemotherapy, and organ transplant recipients.
The subcutaneous and lytic bone lesions of bacillary angiomatosis
can be caused by infection with either B. henselae or B. quintana.
The lesions of peliosis hepatis are almost exclusively associated with
B. henselae.

BACILLARY ANGIOMATOSIS

Lesions of cutaneous bacillary angiomatosis, also known as epithelioid angiomatosis, are the most easily identified and recognized form
of Bartonella infection in immunocompromised hosts. They are found
primarily in patients with AIDS who have very low CD4 counts. The
clinical appearance can be quite diverse. The vasoproliferative lesions
of bacillary angiomatosis may be cutaneous or subcutaneous and may
resemble the vascular lesions (verruca peruana) of B. bacilliformis in
immunocompetent persons, characterized by erythematous papules
on an erythematous base with a collarette of scale. They may enlarge to
form large, pedunculated lesions and may ulcerate. Trauma may result
in profuse bleeding.
Bacillary angiomatosis may be clinically indistinguishable from
Kaposi sarcoma. Other considerations in the differential diagnosis
are pyogenic granuloma and verruca peruana (B. bacilliformis). Deep
soft tissue masses caused by bacillary angiomatosis may mimic a
malignancy.
Osseous bacillary angiomatosis lesions typically involve the long
bones. These lytic lesions are very painful and highly vascular and are
occasionally associated with an overlying erythematous plaque. The
high degree of vascularity produces a positive result on a technetium-­
99m methylene diphosphonate bone scan, resembling that of a malignant lesion.
Lesions can be found in virtually any organ, producing similar
vascular proliferative lesions. They may appear raised, nodular, or
ulcerative when seen on endoscopy or bronchoscopy. They may
be associated with enlarged lymph nodes with or without an obvious local cutaneous lesion. Brain parenchymal lesions have been
described.

B. henselae, B. quintana, B. vinsonii, and B. elizabethae all are reported
to cause bacteremia or endocarditis. They are associated with symptoms such as prolonged fevers, night sweats, and profound weight
loss. A cluster of cases in Seattle in 1993 occurred in a homeless
population with chronic alcoholism. These patients with high fever
or hypothermia were thought to represent urban trench fever, but no
body louse infestation was associated. Some cases of culture-­negative
endocarditis may represent Bartonella endocarditis. One report
described central nervous system involvement with B. quintana
infection in two children.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of bacillary angiomatosis is made initially by biopsy.
The characteristic small-­vessel proliferation with mixed inflammatory response and the staining of bacilli by Warthin-­Starry silver distinguish bacillary angiomatosis from pyogenic granuloma or Kaposi
sarcoma (see Chapter 304). Travel history can usually preclude verruca peruana.
Culture is impractical for CSD but is the diagnostic procedure for
suspected bacteremia or endocarditis. Lysis centrifugation technique
or fresh chocolate or heart infusion agar with 5% rabbit blood and prolonged incubation may increase the yield of culture. PCR on tissue can
also be a useful tool, and positive serologic testing can provide support
for the diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Bartonella infections in immunocompromised hosts caused by both
B. henselae and B. quintana have been treated successfully with
antimicrobial agents. Bacillary angiomatosis responds rapidly to
erythromycin, azithromycin, and clarithromycin, which are the drugs
of choice. Alternative choices are doxycycline or tetracycline. Severely
ill patients with peliosis hepatis or patients with osteomyelitis may be
treated initially with a macrolide or doxycycline and the addition of
rifampin or gentamicin. The use of doxycycline for 6 weeks with the
addition of an aminoglycoside for a minimum of 2 weeks is associated with improved prognosis in endocarditis. A Jarisch-­Herxheimer
reaction may occur. Relapses may follow, and prolonged treatment for
several months may be necessary.

PREVENTION

Immunocompromised persons should consider the potential risks of
cat ownership because of the risks for Bartonella infections as well as
toxoplasmosis and enteric infections. Those who elect to obtain a cat
should adopt or purchase a cat >1 year old and in good health. Prompt
washing of any wounds from cat bites or scratches is essential.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 256 u Botulism (Clostridium botulinum)

Section 6

Anaerobic Bacterial
Infections
Chapter 256

Botulism (Clostridium
botulinum)
Mark R. Schleiss
There are three naturally occurring forms of human botulism, characterized by mode of acquisition: infant botulism (intestinal toxemia),
food-­borne botulism, and wound botulism. Infant botulism is the
most common form in the United States. Under rare circumstances of
altered intestinal anatomy, physiology, and microflora, older children
and adults may contract infant-­type botulism (adult intestinal toxemia). Two other forms, both human-­made, also occur: inhalational
botulism, from inhaling accidently aerosolized toxin, and iatrogenic
botulism, from overdosage of botulinum toxin used for therapeutic or
cosmetic purposes.

ETIOLOGY

Botulism is the acute, flaccid paralysis caused by the neurotoxin produced by Clostridium botulinum or, infrequently, an equivalent neurotoxin produced by the related species Clostridium butyricum and
Clostridium baratii. C. botulinum is a gram-­positive, spore-­forming,
obligate anaerobe whose natural habitat worldwide is soil, dust, and
marine sediments. The organism is found in a wide variety of fresh
and cooked agricultural products. Remarkably, the spores of some C.
botulinum strains endure boiling for several hours, enabling the organism to survive efforts at food preservation. In contrast, botulinum toxin
is heat labile and easily destroyed by heating at ≥85°C (185°F) for 5
minutes. Neurotoxigenic C. butyricum has been isolated from soils
near Lake Weishan in China, the site of food-­borne botulism outbreaks
associated with this organism, and from vegetables, soured milk, and
cheeses. Although first recognized in China, cases of infant botulism
caused by C. butyricum have now been identified in Japan, Europe, and
the United States. Little is known about the ecology of neurotoxigenic
C. baratii.
Botulinum toxin is synthesized as a 150-­kDa precursor protein that
enters the circulation and is transported to the neuromuscular junction.
The toxin is only released by actively replicating (vegetative) bacteria
and not the spore form. At the neuromuscular junction, toxin binds to
the neuronal membrane on the presynaptic side of the neural synapse.
It undergoes proteolysis to a 100-­kDa heavy chain and a 50-­kDa light
chain. These chains are joined via disulfide bond formation. The heavy
chain contains the neuronal attachment sites that mediate binding to
presynaptic nerve terminals. It also mediates translocation of the light
chain into the cell cytoplasm after binding. The light chain, a key component of the toxin, is a member of the zinc metalloprotease family and
mediates cleavage of the fusogenic SNARE (Soluble NSF Attachment
REceptor) protein family member, SNAP-­25. Cleavage of this protein
precludes release of acetylcholine from axons at the presynaptic terminal, abrogating nerve signaling and producing paralysis. Botulinum
toxin is among the most potent poisons known to humankind; indeed,
the parenteral human lethal dose is estimated to be on the order of 10−6
mg/kg. The toxin blocks neuromuscular transmission and causes death
through airway and respiratory muscle paralysis. At least nine antigenic toxin types, designated by letters A-­H and X, are distinguished

1817

serologically by demonstration of the inability of neutralizing antibody
against one toxin type to protect against a different type. Toxin types
are further differentiated into subtypes by differences in the nucleotide
sequences of their toxin genes. The gene for botulinum toxin for some
toxin types and subtypes resides on a plasmid. Some toxins are fully
activated by the bacteria that produce them (proteolytic strains of types
A, B, and F), and some require exogenous proteolytic activation (types
E and nonproteolytic types B and F).
The toxin types serve as convenient clinical and epidemiologic markers. Toxin types A, B, E, and F are well-­established causes of human
botulism, whereas types C and D cause illness in other animals. Toxin
types A and B cause the majority of cases of infant botulism in the
United States. Neurotoxigenic C. butyricum strains produce a type E
toxin, whereas neurotoxigenic C. baratii strains produce a type F toxin.
Type G toxin has not been established as a cause of either human or
animal disease. Some strains produce two toxins such as B and A or
B and F; rare strains may produce three toxins. Dual (bivalent) toxin
mediated disease tends to be more severe than single toxin production.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Infant botulism has been reported from all inhabited continents except
Africa. Notably, in a typical case the infant is the only family member
who is ill. The most striking epidemiologic feature of infant botulism
is its age distribution: approximately 90% of cases involving infants 3
weeks to 6 months of age, with a broad peak spanning 2-­4 months of
age. Cases have been recognized in infants as young as 1.5 days or as
old as 382 days at onset. Identified risk factors for the illness include
breastfeeding, the ingestion of honey, a slow intestinal transit time (<1
stool/day), and ingestion of untreated well water (Fig. 256.1). Although
breastfeeding appears to provide protection against fulminant sudden
death from infant botulism, cases can occur in breastfed infants at the
time of introduction of nonhuman milk for feeding.
Although infant botulism is an uncommon and often unrecognized illness, it is the most common form of human botulism in the
United States, with approximately 80-­140 hospitalized cases diagnosed
annually. The Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE)
maintains a National Botulism Surveillance System for intensive surveillance for cases of botulism in the United States (https://www.cdc.go
v/botulism/surveillance.html). In 2017, 182 laboratory-­confirmed botulism cases were reported to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Botulism was predominately observed in infants, with 141
such cases reported. A total of 19 (10%) food-borne cases and 19 (10%)
wound cases were reported. Infant botulism cases were reported from
26 states and the District of Columbia, with California reporting the
Environmental events
High soil concentration Spores
of spores
Soil disruption

Host susceptibility factors
Gut
permissiveness

Noninhibitory gut flora
Very young infant
Perturbation at
weaning
Antibiotic disruption

Consumption of honey

Decreased gut motility

Colonization
Outgrowth
Toxin elaboration
Toxin absorption

Fig. 256.1 Environmental, host, and pathophysiologic events in infant

botulism. (From Arnon SS, Long SS. Clostridium botulinum [Botulism].
In Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, Kimberlin DW, eds. Principles and
Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2023: Fig. 189.3, p. 1019.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1818 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
most (n = 48, 34%). Toxin type B (n = 88) predominated. The median
age of infants was 4 months (range: 0-­12 months), and no deaths were
reported.
Food-­borne botulism results from the ingestion of a food in which
C. botulinum has multiplied and produced toxin. Although the traditional view of food-­borne botulism has been thought of as resulting chiefly from ingestion of home-­canned foods, in fact, outbreaks
in North America have been more often associated with restaurant-­
prepared foods, including nacho cheese in convenience stores, sautéed
onions, chopped garlic, and seal blubber (in Alaska). Other outbreaks
in the United States have occurred from commercial foods sealed in
plastic pouches that relied solely on refrigeration to prevent outgrowth
of C. botulinum spores. Uncanned foods responsible for food-­borne
botulism cases include peyote tea, hazelnut flavoring added to yogurt,
sweet cream cheese, sautéed onions in patty melt sandwiches, potato
salad, and fresh and dried fish, including botulism type E that has been
acquired by eating an Egyptian salt-­cured fish dish called fesikh. For
food-borne botulism cases reported to the 2017 National Botulism Surveillance System, the median age of patients was 42 years (range: 14-­85
years), and three deaths were reported. Most of the continental U.S.
outbreaks resulted from proteolytic type A or type B strains, whereas
in Alaska and Canada, most food-­borne outbreaks have resulted from
nonproteolytic type E strains. A further hazard of type E strains is their
ability to grow at the temperatures maintained by household refrigerators (5°C [41°F]).
Wound botulism is an exceptionally rare disease, with <400 cases
reported worldwide, but it is important to pediatrics because adolescents and children may be affected. Although many cases have
occurred in young, physically active males who are at the greatest risk
for traumatic injury, wound botulism also occurs with crush injuries
in which no break in the skin is evident. In recent years, wound botulism from injection has become increasingly common in adult heroin
abusers in the western United States and in Europe, not always with
concomitant evidence of abscess formation or cellulitis.
A single outbreak of inhalational botulism was reported in 1962
in which three laboratory workers in Germany were exposed unintentionally to aerosolized botulinum toxin. Some patients in the United
States have been hospitalized by accidental overdose of therapeutic or
cosmetic botulinum toxin.

PATHOGENESIS

All forms of botulism produce disease through a final common pathway. Botulinum toxin is carried by the bloodstream to peripheral cholinergic synapses, where it binds irreversibly, blocking acetylcholine
release and causing impaired neuromuscular and autonomic transmission. Infant botulism results from ingesting the spores of botulinum toxin–producing strains, with subsequent spore germination,
multiplication, and production of botulinum toxin in the large intestine. This sequence is distinct from food-­borne botulism, which is an
intoxication that results when preformed botulinum toxin contained
in an improperly preserved or inadequately cooked food is swallowed.
Wound botulism results from spore germination and colonization of
traumatized tissue by C. botulinum; the pathogenesis of this form of
botulism is similar in this respect to that of tetanus. Inhalational botulism occurs when aerosolized botulinum toxin is inhaled and could
conceivably be a route of exposure generated by a bioterrorist attack.
Because botulinum toxin is not a cytotoxin, it does not cause overt
macroscopic or microscopic pathology. Pathologic changes (pneumonia, petechiae on intrathoracic organs) may be found at autopsy, but
these are secondary changes and not primarily attributable to botulinum toxin. No diagnostic technique is available to identify botulinum
toxin binding at the neuromuscular junction. Nerve conduction velocity studies are typically normal. Electromyography (EMG) findings are
often nonspecific and nondiagnostic (see later). The healing process
in botulism consists of sprouting new terminal unmyelinated motor
neurons. Movement resumes when these new nerve terminals locate
noncontracting muscle fibers and reinnervate them by inducing formation of a new motor end plate. In experimental animals, this process
takes about 4 weeks.

Fig. 256.2 A 3-­mo-­old infant with botulism just before intubation.

Note bilateral ptosis and facial palsy and the absence of tears. (From
Arnon SS, Long SS. Clostridium botulinum [Botulism]. In: Long SS,
Prober CG, Fischer M, Kimberlin DW, eds. Principles and Practice of
Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Fig.
189.4, p. 1020.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The full clinical spectrum of infant botulism ranges from mild to fulminant sudden death. Botulinum toxin is distributed hematogenously.
Because relative blood flow and density of innervation are greatest in
the bulbar musculature, all forms of botulism manifest neurologically
as a symmetric, descending, flaccid paralysis beginning with the cranial
nerve musculature and progressing over hours to days. Bulbar palsies
may manifest with such symptoms as poor feeding, weak suck, feeble
cry, drooling, and even obstructive apnea. These clinical clues unfortunately may not be recognized as bulbar in origin (Fig. 256.2). Patients
with evolving illness may already have generalized weakness and hypotonia in addition to bulbar palsies when first examined. The brain itself
is spared in infant botulism, because botulinum toxin does not cross
the blood-­brain barrier.
In contrast to botulism caused by C. botulinum, a majority of the rare
cases caused by intestinal colonization with C. butyricum are associated with a Meckel diverticulum accompanying abdominal distention,
often leading to misdiagnosis as an acute abdomen. The also rare C.
baratii type F infant botulism cases have been characterized by very
young age at onset, rapidity of onset, and greater severity but shorter
duration of paralysis.
In older children with food-­borne or wound botulism, the onset of
neurologic symptoms follows a characteristic pattern of diplopia, ptosis, dry mouth, dysphagia, dysphonia, and dysarthria, with decreased
gag and corneal reflexes. Importantly, because the toxin acts only on
motor nerves, paresthesias are not seen in botulism, except when a
patient hyperventilates from anxiety. The sensorium remains clear, but
this fact may be difficult to ascertain because of the slurred speech.
Food-­borne botulism begins with gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms
of nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea in approximately 30% of cases. These
symptoms are thought to result from metabolic by-­products of growth
of C. botulinum or from the presence of other toxic contaminants in
the food, because GI distress is rarely observed in wound botulism.
Constipation may occur in food-­borne botulism once flaccid paralysis
becomes evident. Illness usually begins 12-­36 hours after ingestion of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 256 u Botulism (Clostridium botulinum)
the contaminated food but can range from as short as 2 hours to as
long as 8 days. The incubation period in wound botulism is 4-­14 days.
Fever may be present in wound botulism but is absent in food-­borne
botulism unless a secondary infection (often pneumonia) is present.
All forms of botulism display a wide spectrum of clinical severity, from
the very mild, with minimal ptosis, flattened facial expression, minor
dysphagia, and dysphonia, to the fulminant, with rapid onset of extensive paralysis, frank apnea, and fixed, dilated pupils. Fatigability with
repetitive muscle activity is the clinical hallmark of botulism.
Infant botulism differs in apparent initial symptoms of illness only
because the infant cannot verbalize them. Clinical progression can
be more rapid and more severe in very young infants. The incubation period in infant botulism is estimated to be 3-­30 days. Usually,
the first indication of illness is a decreased frequency or even absence
of defecation, and indeed, constipation may be the chief complaint
(although this sign is also frequently overlooked). Parents typically
notice inability to feed, lethargy, weak cry, and diminished spontaneous movement. Dysphagia may be evident, and an increase in secretions drooling from the mouth may be noted. Gag, suck, and corneal
reflexes all diminish as the paralysis advances. Oculomotor palsies
may be evident. Paradoxically, the pupillary light reflex may be unaffected until the child is severely paralyzed, or it may be initially sluggish. Loss of head control is typically a prominent sign. Opisthotonos
may be observed. Respiratory arrest may occur suddenly from airway
occlusion by unswallowed secretions or from obstructive flaccid pharyngeal musculature. Death from botulism results either from airway
obstruction or paralysis of the respiratory muscles. Occasionally, the
diagnosis of infant botulism is suggested by a respiratory arrest that
occurs after the infant is curled into position for lumbar puncture or
after the administration of an aminoglycoside antibiotic administered
for suspected sepsis (see later).
In mild cases or in the early stages of illness, the physical signs of
infant botulism may be subtle and easily missed. Eliciting cranial nerve
palsies and fatigability of muscular function requires careful examination. Ptosis may not be seen unless the head of the child is kept erect.

DIAGNOSIS

Definitive diagnosis of botulism is made by specialized laboratory testing that requires hours to days to complete. Therefore clinical diagnosis
is the foundation for early recognition of and response to all forms of
botulism. Routine laboratory studies, including those of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), are normal in botulism unless dehydration, undernourishment (metabolic acidosis and ketosis), or secondary infection
is present.
The classic triad of botulism is the acute onset of a symmetric, flaccid descending paralysis with clear sensorium, no fever, and no paresthesias. Suspected botulism represents a medical and public health
emergency that is immediately reportable by telephone in most U.S.
health jurisdictions. State health departments (first call) and the CDC
(770-­488-­7100 at any time) can arrange for diagnostic testing, epidemiologic investigation, and provision of equine antitoxin.
The diagnosis of botulism is unequivocally established by demonstration of the presence of botulinum toxin in serum or of C. botulinum toxin or organisms in wound material, enema fluid, or feces. C.
botulinum is not part of the normal resident intestinal flora of humans,
and its presence in the setting of acute flaccid paralysis is diagnostic.
An epidemiologic diagnosis of food-­borne botulism can be established
when C. botulinum organisms and toxin are found in food eaten by
patients.
Electromyography can sometimes distinguish between causes of
acute flaccid paralysis, although results may be variable, including normal, in patients with botulism. The distinctive EMG finding in botulism is facilitation (potentiation) of the evoked muscle action potential
at high-­frequency (50 Hz) stimulation. In infant botulism, a characteristic pattern known as BSAP (Brief, Small, Abundant motor unit action
Potentials) is present only in clinically weak muscles. Nerve conduction velocity and sensory nerve function are normal in botulism.
Infant botulism requires a high index of suspicion for early diagnosis
(Table 256.1). “Rule-­out sepsis” remains the most common admission

1819

Table 256.1  Mimics of Initial Diagnosis of Infant Botulism
NEUROMUSCULAR
Spinal muscular atrophy (type 1)
Congenital myasthenia gravis
Guillain-Barré syndrome and its variants
Poliomyelitis
Acute flaccid paralysis
Transverse myelitis
ADEM
Congenital myopathy
Encephalitis (viral, autoimmune)
Global developmental delay
Leukodystrophy
METABOLIC
Medium chain acetyl-­coenzyme A deficiency
Carnitine deficiency
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Urea cycle defects
Mitochondrial disorders
Glutaric aciduria type 1
Maple syrup urine disease
INFECTIOUS
Enteroviral and parechovirus encephalitis
Sepsis
OTHERS
Hypothyroidism
Drug ingestion
Organophosphate poisoning
Heavy metal poisoning (lead, arsenic)

diagnosis. If a previously healthy infant (usually 2-­4 months of age)
demonstrates weakness with difficulty in sucking, swallowing, crying,
or breathing, infant botulism should be considered a likely diagnosis. A
careful cranial nerve examination is then quite helpful. Rare instances
of co-­infection with Clostridioides difficile, respiratory syncytial virus,
or influenza virus have occurred.

Differential Diagnosis

Botulism is frequently misdiagnosed, most often as a polyradiculoneuropathy (Guillain-­Barré or Miller Fisher syndrome), myasthenia
gravis, or a central nervous system (CNS) disease (Table 256.2). In the
United States, botulism is more likely than Guillain-­Barré syndrome,
intoxication, or poliomyelitis to cause a cluster of cases of acute flaccid paralysis. Botulism differs from other flaccid paralyses in its initial
and prominent cranial nerve palsies that are disproportionate to milder
weakness and hypotonia below the neck, in its symmetry, and in its
absence of sensory nerve damage. Spinal muscular atrophy may closely
mimic infant botulism at presentation.
Additional diagnostic procedures may be useful in rapidly excluding
botulism as the cause of paralysis. The CSF is unchanged in botulism
but is abnormal in many CNS diseases. Although the CSF protein concentration is eventually elevated in Guillain-­Barré syndrome, it may
be normal early in the illness. Imaging of the brain, spine, and chest
may reveal hemorrhage, inflammation, or neoplasm. A test dose of
edrophonium chloride briefly reverses paralytic symptoms in many
patients with myasthenia gravis and, reportedly, in some with botulism, although this is rarely performed in infants. A close inspection of
the skin, especially the scalp, may reveal an attached tick that is causing paralysis. Possible organophosphate intoxication should be pursued aggressively, because specific antidotes (oximes) are available and
because the patient may be part of a commonly exposed group, some of
whom have yet to demonstrate illness. Other tests that require days for
results include stool culture for Campylobacter jejuni as a precipitant of
Guillain-­Barré syndrome, spinal muscular atrophy and other genetic
(including mitochondrial) disorders, and assays for the autoantibodies
that cause myasthenia gravis, Lambert-­Eaton syndrome, and Guillain-­
Barré syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1820 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 256.2  Conditions Considered in the Differential
Diagnosis of Food-­Borne Botulism and
Wound Botulism
Acute gastroenteritis
Myasthenia gravis
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Organophosphate poisoning
Meningitis
Encephalitis
Transverse myelitis
Psychiatric illness
Cerebrovascular accident
Poliomyelitis
Hypothyroidism
Genetic disorder
Aminoglycoside-­associated paralysis
Tick paralysis
Hypocalcemia
Hypermagnesemia
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Hyperemesis gravidarum
Laryngeal trauma
Diabetic complications
Inflammatory myopathy
Overexertion

TREATMENT

Human botulism immune globulin, given intravenously (BIG-­IV, also
referred to as BabyBIG), is licensed for the treatment of infant botulism
caused by type A or B botulinum toxin. The purified immunoglobulin is derived from pooled adult plasma from individuals immunized
with pentavalent botulinum toxoid who were selected for their high
titers of neutralizing antibody against botulinum neurotoxins type A
and B. Treatment with BIG-­IV consists of a single intravenous infusion of 50 mg/kg (see package insert) that should be given as soon as
possible after infant botulism is suspected so as to immediately end
the toxemia that is the cause of the illness and arrest progression of
paralysis. When the diagnosis of infant botulism is suspected, treatment
should not be delayed for laboratory confirmation. In the United States,
for clinical consultation for a patient with suspected infant botulism,
the patient’s physician should contact the Infant Botulism Treatment
and Prevention Program (IBTPP) on-­call physician at (510) 231-­7600
(24/7/365). To obtain BabyBIG for a patient with suspect infant botulism, the physician must contact the IBTPP on-­call physicians (https
://www.infantbotulism.org/physician/obtain.php). The use of BIG-­IV
shortens mean hospital stay from approximately 6 weeks to 2 weeks.
Most of the decrease in hospital stay results from shorter duration of
mechanical ventilation and reduced days in intensive care.
Older patients with suspected food, wound, or inhalational botulism may be treated with one vial of licensed equine heptavalent (A-­G)
botulinum antitoxin (HBAT). (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm5910a4.htm), which is available in the United States
through the CDC by way of state and local health departments.
Antibiotic therapy is not part of the treatment of uncomplicated infant
or food-­borne botulism, because the toxin is primarily an intracellular
molecule that is released into the intestinal lumen with vegetative bacterial cell death and lysis. Indeed, there is a theoretical concern that
antibiotics with clostridiocidal activity may increase the amount of free
toxin in the large bowel and actually worsen an infant’s clinical status. Antibiotic use in infant botulism patients is indicated only for the
treatment of secondary infections. In these patients, aminoglycosides
in particular should be avoided, because this class of antibiotics can
potentiate the action of botulinum toxin at the neuromuscular junction. Wound botulism requires aggressive treatment with antibiotics
and antitoxin in a manner analogous to that for tetanus (see Chapter
257) and may require wound debridement to remove the source of the
toxin.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Management of botulism rests on the following three principles: (1)
fatigability with repetitive muscle activity is the clinical hallmark of the
disease, (2) complications are best avoided by anticipating them, and
(3) meticulous supportive care is a necessity. The first principle applies
mainly to feeding and breathing. Correct positioning is imperative to
protect the airway and improve respiratory mechanics. The patient
should be positioned face-­up on a rigid-­bottomed crib (or bed), the
head of which is tilted at 30 degrees. A small cloth roll is placed under
the cervical vertebrae to tilt the head back so that secretions drain to
the posterior pharynx and away from the airway. In this tilted position, the abdominal viscera pull the diaphragm down, thereby improving respiratory mechanics. The patient’s head and torso should not be
elevated by bending the middle of the bed; in such a position, the hypotonic thorax would slump into the abdomen, and breathing would be
compromised.
About half of patients with infant botulism require endotracheal
intubation, which is best done prophylactically. The indications include
diminished gag and cough reflexes and progressive airway obstruction
by secretions. Enteral nutrition should be undertaken using a nasogastric or nasojejunal tube until sufficient oropharyngeal strength and
coordination enable oral feeding by breast or bottle. Expressed breast
milk is the most desirable food for infants, in part because of its immunologic components (e.g., secretory IgA, lactoferrin, leukocytes). Tube
feeding also assists in the restoration of peristalsis, a nonspecific but
probably essential part of eliminating C. botulinum from the intestinal
flora. Intravenous feeding (hyperalimentation) is discouraged because
of the potential for infection and the advantages of tube feeding.
Because sensation and cognitive function remain fully intact, providing auditory, tactile, and visual stimuli is beneficial. Maintaining strong
central respiratory drive is essential, so sedatives and CNS depressants
should be avoided. Full hydration and stool softeners such as lactulose
may mitigate the protracted constipation. Cathartics are not recommended. Patients with food-­borne and infant botulism excrete C. botulinum toxin and organisms in their feces, often for many weeks, and
care should be taken in handling their excreta, with full engagement
of hospital infection control staff. When bladder palsy occurs in severe
cases, gentle suprapubic pressure with the patient in the sitting position with the head supported may help attain complete voiding and
reduce the risk for urinary tract infection (UTI). Families of affected
patients may require emotional and financial support, especially when
the paralysis of botulism is prolonged.

COMPLICATIONS

Almost all the complications of botulism are nosocomial, and a few are
iatrogenic (Table 256.3). Some critically ill, toxin-­paralyzed patients
who must spend weeks or months on ventilators in intensive care
units inevitably experience some of these complications. Suspected
“relapses” of infant botulism usually reflect premature hospital discharge or an inapparent underlying complication such as pneumonia,
UTI, or otitis media.

PROGNOSIS

When the regenerating nerve endings have induced formation of a
new motor end plate, neuromuscular transmission is restored. In the
absence of complications, particularly those related to hypoxia, the
prognosis in infant botulism is for full and complete recovery. Hospital stay in untreated infant botulism averages 5.7 weeks but differs
significantly by toxin type, with patients with untreated type B disease
being hospitalized a mean of 4.2 weeks and those with untreated type
A disease being hospitalized a mean of 6.7 weeks.
In the United States, the case fatality ratio for hospitalized cases of
infant botulism is <1%. After recovery, patients with untreated infant
botulism appear to have an increased incidence of strabismus that
requires timely screening and treatment. The case fatality ratio in food-­
borne and wound botulism varies by age, with younger patients having
the best prognosis. Some adults with botulism have reported chronic
weakness and fatigue for >1 year as sequelae of the illness.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 257 u Tetanus (Clostridium tetani)
Table 256.3  Complications of Infant Botulism
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Aspiration
Clostridioides difficile enterocolitis
Hypotension
Inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
Long bone fractures
Misplaced or plugged endotracheal tube
Nosocomial anemia
Otitis media
Pneumonia
Pneumothorax
Recurrent atelectasis
Seizures secondary to hyponatremia
Sepsis
Subglottic stenosis
Tracheal granuloma
Tracheitis
Transfusion reaction
Urinary tract infection

PREVENTION

Food-­borne botulism is best prevented by adherence to safe methods
of home canning (pressure cooker and acidification), by avoiding suspicious foods, and by heating all home-­canned foods to 85°C (185°F)
for ≥5 minutes. Wound botulism is best prevented by not using illicit
drugs and by treating contaminated wounds with thorough cleansing,
surgical debridement, and provision of appropriate antibiotics.
Many patients with infant botulism are presumed to have inhaled
and then swallowed airborne clostridial spores; these cases cannot be
prevented. However, a clearly identified and avoidable source of botulinum spores for infants is honey. Honey is an unsafe food for any child
<1 year old. Corn syrups were once thought to be a possible source
of botulinum spores, but evidence indicates otherwise. Breastfeeding
appears to slow the onset of infant botulism and to diminish the risk for
sudden death in infants in whom the disease develops.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 257

Tetanus (Clostridium
tetani)
Mark R. Schleiss
ETIOLOGY

The clinical syndrome of tetanus involves an acute, spastic paralytic
illness caused by a neurotoxin produced by Clostridium tetani. Thus
tetanus can be considered a toxin-­mediated process more than an acute
infectious process per se, because there are few, if any, symptoms elicited either by the presence of replicating microorganisms or through
elicitation of the host inflammatory response. Unlike other pathogenic
clostridia species, C. tetani is not a tissue-­invasive organism. Instead,
it causes illness through the toxin, tetanospasmin, more commonly
referred to as tetanus toxin. Tetanospasmin is the second most poisonous substance known, surpassed in potency only by botulinum toxin.
The human lethal dose of tetanus toxin is estimated to be 10−5 mg/kg.
C. tetani is a motile, gram-­positive, spore-­forming obligate anaerobe.
The organism’s natural habitat worldwide is soil, dust, and the alimentary tracts of various animals.

1821

C. tetani forms spores terminally, with a classic morphologic appearance resembling a drumstick or tennis racket when viewed microscopically. The formation of spores is a critical aspect of the organism’s
persistence in the environment. Spores can survive boiling but not
autoclaving, whereas the vegetative cells are killed by antibiotics, heat,
and standard disinfectants.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Tetanus occurs worldwide and is endemic in many developing countries, although its incidence varies considerably. Public health efforts
in recent years have had an impressive impact on tetanus-­associated
mortality, but many challenges remain. In 1990, 314,000 people died
because of tetanus, whereas in 2017 there were just slightly over 38,000
deaths. Over half of these deaths (approximately 18,000) were in children under 5 years of age (Fig. 257.1A). Individuals age 15-­49 years
represent the second most common group to suffer tetanus-­related
mortality. Global mortality in adults is largely driven by maternal
tetanus, which results from postpartum, postabortal, or postsurgical
wound infection with C. tetani. Most mortality related to neonatal tetanus (also referred to as umbilical tetanus) occurs in South Asia and
sub-­Saharan Africa. The mortality of neonatal tetanus has been substantially reduced globally, driven by increased rates of maternal tetanus vaccination, although the disease remains endemic in a number of
countries (see Fig. 257.1B). Reported tetanus cases in the United States
have declined more than 95% since 1947, and deaths caused by tetanus
have declined by more than 99% in that same period. From 2009 to
2017, a total of 264 cases and 19 deaths from tetanus were reported in
the United States. Sixty (23%) cases were in persons 65 years of age or
older, 168 (64%) were in persons 20 through 64 years of age, and 36
(13%) were in persons younger than 20 years, including 3 cases of neonatal tetanus. The majority of childhood cases of tetanus in the United
States have occurred in unimmunized children whose parents objected
to vaccination.
Most non­neonatal cases of tetanus are associated with a traumatic
injury, often a penetrating wound inflicted by a dirty object such as
a nail, splinter, fragment of glass, or unsterile injection. Tetanus may
also occur in the setting of illicit drug injection. The disease has
been associated with the use of contaminated suture material and
after intramuscular injection of medicines, most notably quinine for
chloroquine-­resistant falciparum malaria. The disease may also occur
in association with animal bites, abscesses (including dental abscesses),
ear and other body piercing, chronic skin ulceration, burns, compound
fractures, frostbite, gangrene, intestinal surgery, ritual scarification,
infected insect bites, and female circumcision. Rarely, cases may present to clinical attention without an antecedent history of trauma. Tetanus is not transmitted person to person.

PATHOGENESIS

Tetanus typically occurs after spores (introduced by traumatic injury)
germinate, multiply, and produce tetanus toxin. A plasmid carries the
toxin gene. Toxin is produced only by the vegetative cell, not the spore.
It is released after the vegetative phase of replication, with replication
occurring under anaerobic conditions. The low oxidation-­reduction
potential of an infected injury site therefore provides an ideal environment for transition from the spore to the vegetative stage of growth.
After bacterial cell death and lysis, tetanospasmin is produced. The
toxin has no known function for clostridia in the soil environment
where they normally reside. Tetanus toxin is a 150-­kDa simple protein consisting of a heavy chain (100 kDa) and a light (50 kDa) chain
joined by a single disulfide bond. Tetanus toxin binds at the neuromuscular junction and enters the motor nerve by endocytosis, after
which it undergoes retrograde axonal transport, facilitated by dyneins,
to the cytoplasm of the α-­motoneuron. In the sciatic nerve, the transport rate was found to be 3.4 mm/hr. The toxin exits the motoneuron
in the spinal cord and next enters adjacent spinal inhibitory interneurons, where it prevents release of the neurotransmitters glycine and
γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA). Tetanus toxin thus blocks the normal
inhibition of antagonistic muscles on which voluntary coordinated
movement depends; as a consequence, affected muscles sustain maximal contraction and cannot relax. This aspect of pathogenesis lead to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1822 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
300,000

250,000

200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

A

0

Under 5
70+ years
50-69 years
15-49 years
5-14 years

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2017

B

No data

no cases

0

10

20

30

40

>50

Fig. 257.1 Evolving epidemiology of tetanus. A, Deaths from tetanus, by age, globally from 1990 to 2017. Most cases of tetanus occur in chil-

dren under the age of 5, and this group accounts for ∼50% of the global mortality attributable to this infection. (Source: Institute for Health Metrics
and Evaluation, Global Burden of Disease). B, Global distribution of neonatal tetanus. Number of new cases of neonatal tetanus per million, 2016.
Sources: World Health Organization and UN Population Prospects, 2017. (From Behrens H, Ochmann S, Dadonaite B, Roser M. Tetanus. Published
online at OurWorldInData.org, 2019. Retrieved from https://ourworldindata.org/tetanus.)

the term lockjaw, classically applied to the clinical manifestations of tetanus in the affected individual. Neurotransmission at neuromuscular
junctions in the autonomic nervous system are also rendered unstable
in tetanus, producing “autonomic storm” (described later).
The phenomenal potency of tetanus toxin is enzymatic. The 50-­kDa
light chain (A-­chain) of tetanus toxin is a zinc-­containing endoprotease
whose substrate is synaptobrevin, a constituent protein of the docking
complex that enables the synaptic vesicle to fuse with the terminal neuronal cell membrane. The cleavage of synaptobrevin is the final target
of tetanus toxin, and even in low doses the neurotoxin will inhibit neurotransmitter exocytosis in the inhibitory interneurons. The blockage
of GABA and glycine causes the physiologic effects of tetanus toxin.
The 100-­kDa heavy chain (B-­chain) of the toxin contains its binding
and internalization domains. It binds to disialogangliosides (GD2 and
GD1b) on the neuronal membrane. The translocation domain aids the
movement of the protein across that membrane and into the neuron.
Because C. tetani is not an invasive organism, its toxin-­producing
vegetative cells remain where introduced into the wound, which may
display local inflammatory changes and a mixed bacterial flora.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Tetanus is most often generalized but may also be localized. The incubation period typically is 2-­14 days but may be as long as months after
the injury. In generalized tetanus, the presenting symptom in about
half of cases is trismus (masseter muscle spasm, or lockjaw). Headache, restlessness, and irritability are early symptoms, often followed
by stiffness, difficulty chewing, dysphagia, and neck muscle spasm. The
so-­called sardonic smile of tetanus (risus sardonicus) results from
intractable spasms of facial and buccal muscles. When the paralysis
extends to abdominal, lumbar, hip, and thigh muscles, the patient may
assume an arched posture of extreme hyperextension of the body, or
opisthotonos, with the head and the heels bent backward and the
body bowed forward. In severe cases, only the back of the head and
the heels of the patient are noted to be touching the supporting surface.
Opisthotonos is an equilibrium position that results from unrelenting
total contraction of opposing muscles, all of which display the typical
boardlike rigidity of tetanus. Laryngeal and respiratory muscle spasm
can lead to airway obstruction and asphyxiation. Because tetanus toxin
does not affect sensory nerves or cortical function, the patient unfortunately remains conscious, in extreme pain, and in fearful anticipation
of the next tetanic seizure. The seizures are characterized by sudden,
severe tonic contractions of the muscles, with fist clenching, flexion,
and adduction of the arms and hyperextension of the legs. Without
treatment, the duration of these seizures may range from a few seconds to a few minutes in length with intervening respite periods. As
the illness progresses, the spasms become sustained and exhausting.
The smallest disturbance by sight, sound, or touch may trigger a tetanic

spasm. Dysuria and urinary retention result from bladder sphincter
spasm; forced defecation may occur. Fever, occasionally as high as 40°C
(104°F), is common and is caused by the substantial metabolic energy
consumed by spastic muscles. Notable autonomic effects include tachycardia, dysrhythmias, labile hypertension, diaphoresis, and cutaneous
vasoconstriction. The tetanic paralysis usually becomes more severe in
the first week after onset, stabilizes in the second week, and ameliorates
gradually over the ensuing 1-­4 weeks.
Neonatal tetanus, the infantile form of generalized tetanus, typically
manifests within 3-­12 days of birth. It presents as progressive difficulty
in feeding (sucking and swallowing), associated hunger, and crying.
Paralysis or diminished movement, stiffness and rigidity to the touch,
and spasms, with or without opisthotonos, are characteristic. The
umbilical stump, which is typically the portal of entry for the microorganism, may retain remnants of dirt, dung, clotted blood, or serum, or
it may appear relatively benign.
Localized tetanus results in painful spasms of the muscles adjacent
to the wound site and may precede generalized tetanus. Cephalic tetanus is a rare form of localized tetanus involving the bulbar musculature and cranial nerves (particularly cranial nerve VII) that occurs with
wounds or foreign bodies in the head, nostrils, or face. It also occurs in
association with chronic otitis media. Cephalic tetanus is characterized
by retracted eyelids, deviated gaze, trismus, risus sardonicus, and spastic paralysis of the tongue and pharyngeal musculature and may mimic
a cerebrovascular accident.

DIAGNOSIS

The picture of tetanus is one of the most dramatic in medicine, and the
diagnosis may be established clinically. The typical setting is an unimmunized patient (and/or mother) who was injured or born within the
preceding 2 weeks, who presents with trismus, dysphagia, generalized
muscle rigidity and spasm, and a clear sensorium.
Results of routine laboratory studies are usually normal. A peripheral leukocytosis may result from a secondary bacterial infection
of the wound or may be stress-­induced from the sustained tetanic
spasms. The cerebrospinal fluid analysis is normal, although the
intense muscle contractions may raise intracranial pressure. Serum
muscle enzymes (creatine kinase, aldolase) may be elevated. Neither
the electroencephalogram nor the electromyogram (EMG) shows a
characteristic pattern, although EMG may show a continuous discharge of motor subunits and shortening or absence of the silent
interval normally observed after an action potential. An assay for
antitoxin levels is not readily available, although a serum antitoxin
level of 0.01 IU/mL or higher is generally considered protective and
makes the diagnosis of tetanus less likely. C. tetani is not always visible
on Gram stain of wound material and is isolated by culture in only
approximately 30% of cases. The spatula test is a simple diagnostic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 257 u Tetanus (Clostridium tetani)
bedside test that involves touching the oropharynx with a spatula or
tongue blade. Normally this maneuver will elicit a gag reflex, as the
patient tries to expel the spatula (negative test). If tetanus is present,
patients develop a reflex spasm of the masseters and bite the spatula
(positive test). This bedside diagnostic maneuver is said to have a high
sensitivity and specificity.

Differential Diagnosis

Florid and generalized tetanus is typically not mistaken for any other
disease. However, trismus may result from parapharyngeal, retropharyngeal, or dental abscesses or, rarely, from acute encephalitis involving
the brainstem. Either rabies or tetanus may follow an animal bite, and
rabies may manifest as trismus with seizures. Rabies may be distinguished from tetanus by hydrophobia, marked dysphagia, predominantly clonic seizures, and pleocytosis (see Chapter 320). Although
strychnine poisoning may result in tonic muscle spasms and generalized seizure activity, it seldom produces trismus, and unlike in tetanus, general relaxation usually occurs between spasms. Hypocalcemia
may produce tetany that is characterized by laryngeal and carpopedal
spasms, but trismus is absent. Occasionally, epileptic seizures, narcotic
withdrawal, or other drug reactions may suggest tetanus.

TREATMENT

Management of tetanus requires eradication of C. tetani, correction of
wound environment conditions conducive to its anaerobic replication,
neutralization of all accessible tetanus toxin, control of seizures and
respiration, palliation, provision of meticulous supportive care, and,
finally, prevention of recurrences.
Surgical wound excision and debridement are often needed to
remove the foreign body or devitalized tissue that created the anaerobic
growth conditions necessary for vegetative replication. Surgery should
be performed promptly after administration of human tetanus immunoglobulin (TIG) and antibiotics. Excision of the umbilical stump in
the neonate with tetanus is no longer recommended.
Tetanus toxin cannot be neutralized by TIG after it has begun its axonal ascent to the spinal cord. However, TIG should be given as soon as
possible, with the goal of neutralizing toxin that diffuses from the wound
into the circulation before the toxin can bind at distant muscle groups.
The optimal dose of TIG has not been determined. Most experts recommend that a single intramuscular (IM) injection of 500 units of TIG
is sufficient to neutralize systemic tetanus toxin; although doses as high
as 3,000-6,000 have been recommended by some experts, they do not
seem to confer better outcomes. Infiltration of part of the dose of TIG
into the wound is no longer recommended by the Red Book Committee of the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the entire dose can be
administered IM. If TIG is unavailable, use of human intravenous immunoglobulin (at a dose of 200-­400 mg/kg) can be considered. Intravenous
immunoglobulin contains 4-­90 units/mL of TIG; the optimal dosage of
intravenous immunoglobulin for treating tetanus is not known, and its
use is not approved for this indication. In parts of the world where it
is available, another alternative may be equine-­derived tetanus antitoxin
(TAT). This product is no longer available in the United States. A dose
of 1,500-­3,000 U is recommended and should be administered after
appropriate testing for sensitivity and desensitization, because up to 15%
of patients given the usual dose of TAT will experience serum sickness.
The human-­derived immunoglobulins are much preferred because of
their longer half-­lives (30 days) and the virtual absence of allergic and
serum sickness adverse effects. Results of studies examining the potential benefit of intrathecal administration of TIG are conflicting. The TIG
preparation available for use in the United States is neither licensed nor
formulated for intrathecal or intravenous use.
Oral (or intravenous) metronidazole (30 mg/kg per day, given at
6-­hour intervals; maximum dose, 4 g/day) decreases the number of
vegetative forms of C. tetani and is currently considered the antibiotic
of choice. Parenteral penicillin G (100,000 U/kg per day, administered
at 4-­to 6-­hour intervals, with a daily maximum of 12 million U) is
an alternative treatment. Antimicrobial therapy for a total duration
of 7-­10 days is recommended (https://publications.aap.org/redbook/
book/347/chapter-abstract/5757094/Tetanus-Lockjaw).

1823

Supportive care and pharmacologic interventions targeted at control of
tetanic spasms are of critical importance in the management of tetanus.
In light of this goal, all patients with generalized tetanus should receive
muscle relaxants. Diazepam provides both relaxation and seizure control.
For neonatal tetanus, an initial dose of 0.1-­0.2 mg/kg every 3-­6 hours given
intravenously is subsequently titrated to control the tetanic spasms (continuous IV infusion doses of 15-40 mg/kg/day have been recommended,
titrated to control the spasm). After 5-7 days, the dosage can be decreased
by 5-10 mg/day, with the drug given orally or by the nasogastric route,
after which the effective dose is sustained for 2-­6 weeks before a tapered
withdrawal. Magnesium sulfate may be useful in controlling autonomic
dysfunction: a loading dose of 40 mg/kg IV over 30 minutes has been recommended in a study in tetanus patients >15 years of age, in which the
loading dose was followed by 2 g/hr continuously for patients weighing
>45 kg, or 1.5 g/hr continuously for patients weighing <45 kg. For neonatal
tetanus, a loading dose of 50 mg/kg of magnesium sulfate, followed by a
maintenance infusion of 30-50 mg/kg/hr (titrated against clinical effect)
has been recommended. Monitoring of serum magnesium levels at least
every 6 hours is recommended. In addition to diazepam, other benzodiazepines (midazolam), chlorpromazine, dantrolene, and baclofen are also
used. Intrathecal baclofen produces such complete muscle relaxation that
apnea often ensues; like most other agents listed, baclofen should be used
only in an intensive care unit setting. Favorable survival rates in generalized tetanus have been described with the use of neuromuscular blocking
agents such as vecuronium and pancuronium, which produce a general
flaccid paralysis that is then managed by mechanical ventilation. Autonomic instability is regulated with standard α-­ or β-­(or both) blocking
agents; morphine has also proved useful.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Meticulous supportive care in a quiet, dark, secluded setting is most
desirable. Because tetanic spasms may be triggered by minor stimuli,
the patient should be sedated and protected from all unnecessary
sounds, sights, and touch, and all therapeutic and other manipulations
must be carefully scheduled and coordinated. Endotracheal intubation
may not be required, but it should be done to prevent aspiration of
secretions before laryngospasm develops. A tracheostomy kit should
be immediately at hand for unintubated patients. Endotracheal intubation and suctioning easily provoke reflex tetanic seizures and spasms,
so early tracheostomy should be considered in severe cases not managed by pharmacologically induced flaccid paralysis. Therapeutic botulinum toxin has been used for this purpose (i.e., to overcome trismus).
Cardiorespiratory monitoring, frequent suctioning, and maintenance
of the patient’s substantial fluid, electrolyte, and caloric needs are fundamental. Careful nursing attention to mouth, skin, bladder, and bowel
function is needed to avoid ulceration, infection, and obstipation. Prophylactic subcutaneous heparin has been suggested to be of value, but
it must be balanced with the risk for hemorrhage. Enoxaparin would be
an alternative for the patient for whom deep venous thrombosis (DVT)
prophylaxis is warranted.

COMPLICATIONS

The seizures and the severe, sustained rigid paralysis of tetanus predispose the patient to many complications. Aspiration of secretions
with attendant pneumonia is an important complication to consider
and may be present at the time of the initial diagnosis. Maintaining
airway patency often mandates endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation with their attendant hazards, including pneumothorax
and mediastinal emphysema. The seizures may result in lacerations of
the mouth or tongue, in intramuscular hematomas or rhabdomyolysis
with myoglobinuria and renal failure, or in long bone or spinal fractures. Venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, gastric ulceration
with or without hemorrhage, paralytic ileus, and decubitus ulceration are described as complications. Excessive use of muscle relaxants, which are an integral part of care, may produce iatrogenic apnea.
Cardiac arrhythmias, including asystole, unstable blood pressure, and
labile temperature regulation, reflect disordered autonomic nervous
system control that may be aggravated by inattention to maintenance
of intravascular volume needs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1824 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 257.1  Tetanus Vaccination and Immune Globulin Use in Wound Management
CLEAN, MINOR WOUNDS

HISTORY OF ABSORBED
TETANUS TOXOID

DTaP, Tdap, OR Td†

ALL OTHER WOUNDS*
TIG‡

DTaP, Tdap, Or TD†

TIG‡

Uncertain or <3 doses

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

3 or more doses

No, if <10 yr since last dose of
tetanus-­containing vaccine

No

No, if <5 yr since last tetanus-­
containing vaccine‖

No

Yes, if ≥10 yr since last dose of
tetanus-­containing vaccine

No

Yes, if ≥5 yr since last tetanus-­
containing vaccine dose

No

*Including but not limited to wounds contaminated with dirt, feces, and saliva; puncture wounds; avulsions; wounds resulting from missiles, crushing, burns, and frostbite.
†DTaP is used for children younger than 7 yr. Tdap is preferred over Td for underimmunized children 7 yr and older who have not received Tdap previously.
‡Intravenous immune globulin should be used when TIG is unavailable.
‖More frequent boosters are not needed and can accentuate adverse events.
DT, Diphtheria and tetanus toxoid vaccine; DTaP, combined diphtheria toxoid–tetanus toxoid–acellular pertussis vaccine; Td, tetanus toxoid and reduced diphtheria toxoid vaccine;
Tdap, tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccine; TIG, tetanus immune globulin.
Data from American Academy of Pediatrics. Tetanus (lockjaw). In Kiberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious
Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021;750–755.

PROGNOSIS

Recovery in tetanus occurs through regeneration of synapses within
the spinal cord that results in restoration of muscle relaxation. Interestingly, an episode of tetanus does not result in the production of toxin-­
neutralizing antibodies, presumably because the infinitesimally small
amounts of toxin required to cause disease are not sufficient to elicit an
immune response. Therefore active immunization with tetanus toxoid
during convalescence and/or at discharge, with provision for completion of the primary vaccine series, is mandatory.
The most important factor that influences outcome is the quality of
supportive care. Mortality is highest in the very young and the very
old. A favorable prognosis is associated with a long incubation period,
absence of fever, and localized disease. An unfavorable prognosis is
associated with onset of trismus <7 days after injury and with onset
of generalized tetanic spasms <3 days after onset of trismus. Sequelae
of hypoxic brain injury, especially in infants, include cerebral palsy,
diminished mental abilities, and behavioral difficulties. Most fatalities
occur within the first week of illness. Reported case fatality rates for
generalized tetanus are 5–35%, and for neonatal tetanus they extend
from <10% with intensive care treatment to >75% without it. Cephalic
tetanus has an especially poor prognosis because of breathing and feeding difficulties.

PREVENTION

Tetanus is an entirely and easily preventable disease. A serum antibody
titer of ≥0.01 units/mL is considered protective. Active immunization
should begin in early infancy with combined diphtheria toxoid–tetanus
toxoid–acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 15-­18 months
of age, with boosters at 4-­6 years (DTaP) and 11-­12 years (Tdap) of age,
and at 10-­year intervals thereafter throughout adult life with tetanus
and reduced diphtheria toxoid (Td). Recovery from tetanus does not
confer permanent protective immunity, so immunization is recommended in those who have survived documented infection. Immunization of women with tetanus toxoid prevents neonatal tetanus, and
pregnant women should receive one dose of reduced diphtheria and
pertussis toxoids (Tdap) during each pregnancy, preferably at 27-­36
weeks of gestation. Recommended immunization schedules are regularly updated; the most current versions may be found at http://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules.
Arthus reactions (type III hypersensitivity reactions), a localized
vasculitis associated with deposition of immune complexes and activation of complement, are reported rarely after tetanus vaccination. Mass
immunization campaigns in developing countries have occasionally
provoked a widespread hysterical reaction.

Wound Management

Tetanus prevention measures after trauma consist of inducing active
immunity to tetanus toxin and of passively providing antitoxic antibody (Table 257.1). Tetanus prophylaxis is an essential part of all
wound management, but specific measures depend on the nature of
the injury and the immunization status of the patient. Prevention of
tetanus must be included in planning for the consequences of bombings, natural disasters, and other possible civilian mass-­casualty events.
Tetanus toxoid should always be given after a dog or other animal
bite, even though C. tetani is infrequently found in canine mouth flora.
Nonminor wounds require human TIG except those in a fully immunized patient (i.e., ≥3 doses of adsorbed tetanus toxoid). In any other
circumstance (e.g., patients with an unknown or incomplete immunization history; crush, puncture, or projectile wounds; wounds contaminated with saliva, soil, or feces; avulsion injuries; compound fractures;
or frostbite), TIG 250 units should be administered intramuscularly,
regardless of the patient’s age or weight. If TIG is unavailable, use of
human intravenous immunoglobulin may be considered. If neither of
these products is available, then 3,000-­5,000 units of equine-­derived
TAT (in regions of the world where it is available) may be given intramuscularly after testing for hypersensitivity. Serum sickness may occur
with this agent. Human monoclonal antibodies against the tetanus
neurotoxin have recently been generated and characterized, but these
are not yet available for clinical use.
The wound should undergo immediate, thorough surgical cleansing and debridement to remove foreign bodies and any necrotic tissue
in which anaerobic conditions might develop. Tetanus toxoid should
be given to stimulate active immunity and may be administered concurrently with TIG (or TAT); if a tetanus toxoid-containing vaccine
and TIG are administered at the same time, then separate syringes
and sites should be used. A tetanus toxoid booster (preferably Tdap)
is administered to all persons with any wound if the tetanus immunization status is unknown or incomplete. A booster is administered to
injured persons who have completed the primary immunization series
if (1) the wound is clean and minor, but 10 or more years have passed
since the last booster, or (2) the wound is more serious, and 5 or more
years have passed since the last booster (see Table 257.1). Persons who
experienced an Arthus reaction after a dose of tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine should not receive Td more frequently than every 10 years,
even for tetanus prophylaxis as part of wound management. In a situation of delayed wound care, active immunization should be started
at once.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 258 u Clostridioides difficile Infection

Chapter 258

Clostridioides difficile
Infection
David P. Galloway and Mitchell B. Cohen
Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) infection (CDI),
also known as pseudomembranous colitis or C. difficile–associated
diarrhea, refers to gastrointestinal (GI) colonization with C. difficile
resulting in a diarrheal illness. It is a common cause of antibiotic-­
associated diarrhea and the most common cause of healthcare-­
associated infections in the United States, accounting for 12% of these
infections. An increase in inpatient and outpatient (community) acquisition of CDI has been observed, and additional risk factors have been
identified.

ETIOLOGY

C. difficile is a gram-­positive, spore-­forming, anaerobic bacillus that
is resistant to killing by alcohol. It is acquired from the environment
or by the fecal-­oral route. Organisms causing symptomatic intestinal
disease produce toxin A and/or toxin B. These toxins affect intracellular signaling pathways, resulting in inflammation and cell death.
The cytotoxic binary toxin, which belongs to the AB toxin family, is
not present in the majority of strains but has been detected in epidemic strains.

1825

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infection with toxin-­producing strains of C. difficile leads to a spectrum of disease ranging from mild, self-­limited diarrhea, to explosive,
watery diarrhea with occult blood or mucus, to pseudomembranous
colitis, and even death. Pseudomembranous colitis is characterized
by bloody diarrhea with accompanying fever, abdominal pain/cramps,
nausea, and vomiting. Rarely, small-­gut involvement, toxic megacolon, bacteremia, abscess formation, intestinal perforation, and death
can occur.
Symptoms of CDI generally begin less than a week after colonization
and may develop during or weeks after antibiotic exposure. Symptoms
are generally more severe in certain populations, including patients
receiving chemotherapy, patients with chronic GI disease (e.g., IBD),
and some patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). CDI-­associated reactive
arthritis is an occasional complication, occurring in approximately
1.4% of children with CDI. Reactive arthritis begins a median of 10
days after initial GI symptoms, often accompanied by fever or rash.
Joint involvement may be migratory or polyarticular and may resemble
septic arthritis.

DIAGNOSIS

Evaluation for CDI should be reserved for children with diarrhea,
defined as the passage of at least three loose stools within a 24-­hour
period or bloody diarrhea (Fig. 258.1 and Table 258.1). CDI is diagnosed by the detection of a C. difficile toxin in the stool of a symptomatic patient. Most patients present with a history of recent antibiotic

Patient with
suspected CDI

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of CDI is increasing in pediatric patients, and the setting of acquisition is changing. There is both high incidence in hospitalized children and an emergence of community-­onset infection.
National data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) estimate three cases of community-­acquired CDI in children
for every healthcare-­acquired case. In addition to an overall increase
in all strains, a hypervirulent strain, denoted NAP1/BI/027 (also called
BI), has emerged and is estimated to cause 10–20% of pediatric infections. This strain produces binary toxin and exhibits 16-­and 23-­fold
increases in the production of toxins A and B, respectively.
Asymptomatic carriage occurs with potentially pathogenic strains
and is common in neonates and infants ≤1 year old. A carrier frequency rate of 50% may occur in children <1 year old. Colonization
rates decrease to less than 5% in healthy children >5 years old. Asymptomatic colonization with C. difficile is common in recently hospitalized patients, with rates of 20%. Carriers can infect other susceptible
individuals.
Risk factors for CDI include the use of broad-­spectrum antibiotics,
hospitalization, exposure to a household member with diarrhea or an
asymptomatic carrier, GI surgery, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),
Hirschsprung disease, chemotherapy, enteral tube feeding, proton
pump inhibitor (PPI) or H2-­receptor antagonist use, malnutrition, and
chronic illness.

PATHOGENESIS

Disease is caused by GI infection with a toxin-­producing strain. Any
process that disrupts normal flora, impairs the acid barrier defense,
alters the normal GI immune response (e.g., IBD), or inhibits intestinal
motility may lead to infection. Normal bowel flora appears to be protective, conferring colonization resistance.
By affecting intracellular signaling pathways and cytoskeletal organization, toxins induce an inflammatory response and cell death, leading to diarrhea and pseudomembrane formation. Antibodies against
toxin A have been shown to confer protection against symptomatic
disease, and failure of antibody production occurs in patients with
recurrent disease.

Start with a highly
sensitive test:
GDH or NAAT

Negative
Not CDI

Positive
Proceed to more
specific test:
Toxin EIA

Positive
CDI

Negative
1. Not CDI/colonized
OR
2. False negative Toxin EIA
OR
3. Toxin levels below the threshold of
detection

Consider other possible causes of
symptoms
Consider NAAT in GDH-negative
patients with high clinical suspicion
Empiric treatment if high clinical
suspicion

Fig. 258.1 Proposed algorithm for testing of Clostridioides difficile in-

fection (CDI). EIA, Enzyme immunoassay; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification testing. (From Kelly CR, Fischer
M, Allegretti JR, et al. ACG clinical guidelines: prevention, diagnosis,
and treatment of Clostridioides difficile in infections. Am J Gastroenterol. 2021;116:1124–1147, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1826 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 258.1  Diagnosis of C. difficile Disease
• Clostridium difficile (renamed Clostridioides difficile) infection is
diagnosed by a combination of clinical and laboratory findings.
• Diagnosis requires a positive test for the presence of C. difficile
toxins.
• Glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), produced by C. difficile, can be
detected in stool. However, it is not specific and can be produced
by nontoxigenic C. difficile.
• Enzyme immunoassay testing for toxin A and/or B has a variable
sensitivity and specificity, a turnaround time of about 24 hours and
correlates well with disease activity.
• Polymerase chain reaction testing has a high sensitivity
and specificity, a turnaround time of less than 4 hours, and
correlates less with disease activity, thus identifying patients
with colonization and active infection. Increasingly, combination
testing is being employed to improve diagnostic accuracy.
• Laboratory testing for C. difficile toxins should only be performed
on patients with at least three unformed stools per 24 hours, who
are not on laxatives, and is not useful as a test of cure.
• Pathologic findings can help to confirm the diagnosis.

Table 258.2  Treatment Recommendations for
Clostridioides difficile Infection in Children
CDI CLASSIFICATION

ANTIBIOTIC REGIMEN

First episode or first recurrence,*
nonsevere

Metronidazole 7.5 mg/kg/dose
(max 500 mg/dose) PO tid ×
10 days;
OR Vancomycin 10 mg/kg/dose
(max 125 mg/dose) PO qid ×
10 days

Second or subsequent†
recurrence, nonsevere

Vancomycin in a tapered and
pulsed regimen‡;
OR Vancomycin (dosing and
duration as above) followed
by rifaximin 10 mg/kg/dose
(max 400 mg/dose) PO tid ×
20 days§;
OR Fidaxomicin 16 mg/kg/dose
(max 200 mg/dose) PO bid ×
10 days;
OR Fecal microbiota
transplantation

Severe/fulminant|| (first or
recurrent¶ episode)

Vancomycin 10 mg/kg/dose (max
500 mg/dose) PO qid × 10 days
If critically ill, consider adding
metronidazole 7.5 mg/kg/dose
(max 500 mg/dose) IV tid × 10
days

From Semel JD. Clostridioides difficile colitis. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh
JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy 2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023:561.

use, but the absence of antibiotic exposure should not dissuade the
clinician from considering this diagnosis and ordering the appropriate test. Conversely, high carriage rates without illness among infants
should prompt careful consideration when testing and treating children <3 years old.
The standard test for toxin is the enzyme immunoassay (EIA), a
same-­day test for toxin A and/or toxin B with sufficient specificity (94–
100%) but less-­than-­ideal sensitivity (88–93%). Many laboratories use
nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) to supplement or supplant
EIA with the goal of improving sensitivity. The sensitivities of the real-­
time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for toxin A/B are superior
compared with EIA for toxin A/B (95% vs 35%, respectively), and the
specificity is equal (100%). However, some have questioned the clinical
significance of low copy number–positive tests. For example, positive
C. difficile PCR results occur with similar frequency in patients with
IBD with and without an IBD exacerbation. A positive result in a highly
sensitive PCR assay that detects low copy numbers of a toxin gene in
C. difficile may reflect colonization in a subset of patients (e.g., with
IBD), confounding clinical decision-­making in managing disease exacerbations. To address this, NAAT-­positive tests may be “confirmed” by
toxin assays. In addition, eliminating certain high carrier populations
from testing (e.g., children under 1 year of age) will increase the positive predictive value of laboratory testing. Because sensitivity is so high
with molecular tests, if the first test is negative, repeat testing during
the same episode of diarrhea is discouraged, as repeat testing in this
setting is more likely to result in another negative or a false-­positive
test than a true positive test. Because shedding of C. difficile in stool
can persist for several months after symptom resolution, tests of cure
are impractical and are not performed.
Culture for organism isolation is a sensitive test but is labor intensive,
taking several days. Culture alone is not specific because it does not differentiate between toxin-­producing and non–toxin-­producing strains.
Pseudomembranous nodules and characteristic plaques may be seen
in colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, but endoscopy is usually not performed to make the diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Initial treatment of CDI involves discontinuation of any nonvital antibiotic therapy and administration of fluid and electrolyte replacement.
For mild cases, this treatment may be curative. Drugs that decrease
intestinal motility should be avoided. Asymptomatic patients should
not be treated. Persistent symptoms or moderate to severe disease warrant antimicrobial therapy directed against C. difficile.
Oral metronidazole or vancomycin is the first-­line therapy for mild
to moderate CDI in children (Table 258.2). In adults, vancomycin
or fidaxomicin are the preferred first-­line therapies. For more severe

*For first recurrence, consider vancomycin if metronidazole was used to treat initial
episode.
†Recommend tapered and pulsed regimen if vancomycin was used for the initial
infection.
‡Tapered and pulsed regimen: vancomycin 10 mg/kg/dose (max 125 mg/dose) qid ×
10-­14 days, then 10 mg/kg/dose (max 125 mg/dose) bid × 1 wk, then 10 mg/kg/dose
(max 125 mg/dose) qd × 1 wk, and then 10 mg/kg/dose (max 125 mg/dose) every 2-­3
days for 2-­8 wk.
§Pediatric rifaximin dosing is not available and not FDA-­approved for children younger
than 12 yr.
||Definitions for severe and fulminant CDI are based on expert consensus for adult
patients and have not been validated. Severe: leukocytosis with a white blood
cell count of ≥15,000 cells/μL or a serum creatinine level >1.5 mg/dL. Fulminant:
hypotension or shock, ileus, megacolon.
¶If treating a recurrent episode that is severe/fulminant, consider extending vancomycin
in a pulsed, tapering fashion as indicated above§ or fecal microbiota transplantation
when clinically improved.
Data from McDonald LC, Gerding DN, Johnson S, et al. Clinical practice guidelines
for Clostridium difficile infection in adults and children: 2017 update by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of
America (SHEA). Clin Infect Dis. 2018; 66(7):e1–e48.

infection, oral vancomycin is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for CDI. Vancomycin exhibits ideal pharmacologic properties for treatment of this enteric pathogen because it is not
absorbed in the gut. Vancomycin is suggested as a first-­line agent for
severe disease, as manifested by hypotension, peripheral leukocytosis,
or severe pseudomembranous colitis. Fidaxomicin is approved for use
in children at least 6 months of age and is a narrow-­spectrum macrolide antibiotic with noninferior efficacy to vancomycin but superior
recurrence prevention. Because treatment of CDI continues to evolve,
adult-­based protocols (Table 258.3) may be relevant to older children
and adolescents.

PROGNOSIS AND RECURRENCE

The response rate to initial treatment of CDI can reach >95%. Studies
have demonstrated a variation in response rates based on the severity
of CDI and the treatment agent. Treatment failure and recurrence have
been increasing; the risk of subsequent reappearance increases with
each recurrence.
Recurrences occur in 5–20% of patients, are diagnosed clinically,
and generally occur within 4 weeks of treatment. Some recurrences
result from incomplete eradication of the original strain, and others are
caused by reinfection with a different strain. Treatment for the initial
recurrence involves retreatment with the original antibiotic course.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 258 u Clostridioides difficile Infection

1827

Table 258.3  Recommendations for the Treatment of C. difficile Infection in Adults

CLINICAL DEFINITION

SUPPORTIVE CLINICAL DATA

Initial
infection

Leukocytosis with white blood
cell count of ≤15,000 cells/mL
and serum creatinine level <1.5
mg/dL

Fulminant

Recurrence

Hypotension or shock, ileus,
megacolon

First recurrence,
nonsevere

Second or
subsequent
recurrence

RECOMMENDED
TREATMENT*

STRENGTH OF
RECOMMENDATION/QUALITY
OF EVIDENCE

Fidaxomicin 200 mg bid ×
10 days

Strong/high

Vancomycin 125 mg qid ×
10 days

Strong/high

Alternate if previous
agents are unavailable:
metronidazole 500 mg tid
PO × 10-­14 days

Weak/high

Vancomycin 500 mg qid PO
or by nasogastric tube

Strong/moderate (oral
vancomycin), weak/low (rectal
vancomycin), strong/moderate
If ileus, consider adding rectal
(intravenous metronidazole)
instillation of vancomycin;
intravenous metronidazole
(500 mg every 8 hr) should
be administered with oral
or rectal vancomycin,
particularly if ileus is present
Fidaxomicin 200 mg bid × 10
days, or bid × 5 days, then
qod for 20 days or

Weak/low

Use prolonged tapered and
pulsed vancomycin regimen
(if standard regimen was
used for initial episode) 125
mg qid for 10-­14 days, bid
for 1 wk, qd for 1 wk, and
then every 2 or 3 days for
2-­8 wk, or

Weak/low

Vancomycin 125 mg qid × 10
days (if metronidazole was
used for the initial episode)

Weak/moderate

Fidaxomicin 200 mg bid × 10
days, or bid × 5 days, then
qod for 20 days

Weak/low

Vancomycin in a tapered or
pulsed regimen or

Weak/low

Vancomycin 125 mg qid × 10
days, followed by rifaximin
400 mg tid × 20 days, or

Weak/low

Fecal microbiota
transplantation†

Strong/moderate

*All randomized trials have compared 10-­day treatment courses, but some patients (particularly those treated with metronidazole) may have delayed response to treatment, and
clinicians should consider extending treatment duration to 14 days in those circumstances.
†The opinion of the panel is that appropriate antibiotic treatments for at least two recurrences (i.e., three CDI episodes) should be tried before offering fecal microbiota
transplantation. For adult patients with a recurrent CDI episode within the last 6 months, current guidelines suggest using bezlotoxumab in addition to appropriate antibiotics as
the first approach.
PO, Orally (by mouth); qd, once daily; bid, twice daily; tid, 3 times daily; qid, 4 times daily; qod, every other day.
Adapted from McDonald LC, Gerding DN, Johnson S, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile infection in adults and children: 2017 update by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA). Clin Infect Dis. 2018;66(7):e1–e48, Table 1; and Johnson S, Lavergne V, Skinner AM,
et al. Clinical practice guideline by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA): 2021 focused update guidelines on
management of Clostridioides difficile infection in adults. Clin Infect Dis. 2021;73(5):e1029–e1044, Table 1.

Recurrences of CDI may be caused by a suboptimal immune
response, failure to kill organisms that have sporulated, or failure of
delivery of antibiotic to the site of infection in the case of ileus or toxic
megacolon. Subsequent treatment with pulsed or tapered vancomycin
decreases recurrence rates. In addition to this approach, other antibiotics (rifaximin or nitazoxanide), toxin-­binding polymers (Tolevamer),
and probiotics (Saccharomyces boulardii or Lactobacillus GG) have
been used as adjunctive therapy. For adult patients with a recurrent
CDI episode within the last 6 months, guidelines suggest using bezlotoxumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against C. difficile toxin

B, as a co-­intervention. Because treatment of CDI continues to evolve,
adult-­based protocols (see Table 258.3) may be applicable for treatment
of older children and adolescents.
Because failure to manifest an adequate antitoxin immune
response is associated with a higher frequency of recurrent CDI,
intravenous immune globulin has been used to treat recurrent disease. In the case of ileus or toxic megacolon, an enema of vancomycin may be used to place the antibiotic directly at the site of infection,
although most often intravenous therapy is first attempted in this
circumstance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1828 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has been used to address
the disruption in normal gut flora thought to allow colonization with
C. difficile (see Table 258.3). FMT involves the instillation of fecal material from a healthy donor into the patient’s GI tract by nasoenteric tube,
enema, capsules, or colonoscopy. Published FMT results in children
with recurrent CDI are limited to case reports and small case series.
There are few data to guide clinicians on the indications, route, efficacy,
and safety of FMT in children. Initial reports indicate an overall success rate of approximately 90% in patients with recurrent CDI. Current
approaches to FMT are not specific and involve complete reconstitution of the gut microbiome. The gut microbiota has been shown to
influence susceptibility to genetic and environmentally acquired conditions. Transplantation of healthy donor fecal material to patients
with CDI may reestablish the “normal” composition of the gut microbiota but has the theoretical concern of adding new, microbiome-­based
susceptibilities derived from the donor microbiome.
The FDA has approved an orally administered commercially available fecal microbiotic product for patients ≥18 years old, following
antibiotic therapy for recurrent CDI. The goal is to prevent recurrence
of CDI. Fecal-derived live bacteria from screened donors is administered once daily for 3 days.
It is important to recognize that postinfectious diarrhea may result
from other causes, such as postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome,
microscopic colitis, and IBD.

PREVENTION

The strategies for prevention of CDI include recognition of common
sites of acquisition (hospitals, childcare settings, extended-­care facilities); effective environmental cleaning (i.e., use of chlorinated cleaning
solutions); appropriate antibiotic (antibiotic stewardship) and PPI prescription practices; cohorting of infected patients; contact precautions;
and proper handwashing with soap and water. Probiotics may possibly
reduce the incidence of C. difficile–associated diarrhea.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 259

Other Anaerobic
Infections
Michael E. Russo
Anaerobic bacteria are among the most numerous organisms colonizing humans and are also present widely in the soil. Obligate
anaerobes are markedly or entirely intolerant of exposure to oxygen. Facultative anaerobes can survive in the presence of environmental oxygen but grow better in settings of reduced oxygen
tension. This chapter concentrates on obligate anaerobes and associated infections.
Infections with endogenous anaerobes usually occur adjacent to
mucosal surfaces, often as polymicrobial infections with aerobes. In
many of these polymicrobial infections, it is unclear how direct a
role anaerobes are playing in illness versus just being present by virtue of breached mucosal barriers. Traumatized areas that have been
devascularized with resultant low oxygen tension provide ideal sites
for anaerobic infection. Abscess formation can evolve over days
to weeks and generally involves both aerobes and anaerobes. An
example of such an infection is ruptured appendicitis leading to
secondary peritonitis and intrabdominal abscesses. Pure anaerobic infections from endogenous bacteria are much less common

(although certain relevant clinical syndromes such as Lemierre syndrome are discussed later).
The most common and clinically relevant anaerobic bacteria in pediatrics are listed in Table 259.1 and discussed further later in the chapter.
The taxonomy has undergone significant changes over the years, and
many species that would not have been easily identifiable may now
be identified in clinical specimens with the widespread use of matrix-­
assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-­TOF MS). Our understanding of anaerobic bacteria in infections is largely limited to easily culturable species. As many anaerobes
of the human microbiota remain unculturable, our understanding of
anaerobic infections will continue to evolve with culture-­independent
methods such as metagenomic sequencing.
Bacteroides fragilis and related species are the predominant anaerobes of the large intestine and thus are involved in complicated
intraabdominal infections. Prevotella spp., Porphyromonas spp., and
Fusobacterium spp. reside in the upper respiratory tract and intestine and are most frequently involved in complications of pharyngitis
and sinusitis or in aspiration pneumonia. The gram-­positive anaerobic cocci (GPAC) have undergone significant taxonomic changes in
recent years, with most prior Peptostreptococcus spp. being reclassified
into the genera of Finegoldia, Parvimonas, Anaerococcus, and Peptoniphilus. It is not clear yet how clinically relevant this reclassification
is Collectively, the GPAC are normal flora of the skin and upper respiratory, intestinal, and genital mucosa. They may be involved in complications of infections of any of these areas, but they are relatively less
virulent than other anaerobic bacteria, and their recovery in culture
may or may not be clinically relevant. The gram-­positive anaerobic
bacilli can be divided into spore forming (Clostridium spp.) and non–
spore-­forming (Cutibacterium acnes [formerly Propionibacterium
acnes] and Actinomyces spp.). C. acnes lives within hair follicles and
sebaceous glands and is an important cause of prosthetic infections,
particularly related to ventricular shunts. Some Actinomyces spp. are
obligate or facultative anaerobes and are discussed in Chapter 235.
Clostridium spp. cause disease by proliferation and often by production of toxins. Of the >60 species that have been identified, only a
few cause infections in humans. The most frequently implicated
Clostridium spp. are C. difficile (see Chapter 258), C. perfringens (discussed further later), C. botulinum (see Chapter 256), and C. tetani
(see Chapter 257).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Anaerobic infections occur in a variety of sites throughout the body,
with examples including complications of pharyngitis such as peritonsillar abscess and Lemierre syndrome (see Chapter 432), dental abscesses (see Chapter 358), complications of sinusitis such as
orbital cellulitis (see Chapter 674) and brain abscess (see Chapter
644), aspiration pneumonia (see Chapter 447) and lung abscess (see
Chapter 453), secondary peritonitis (see Chapter 419), appendicitis (see Chapter 391), necrotizing enterocolitis (see Chapter 136),
and pelvic inflammatory disease and tubo-­ovarian abscesses (see
Chapter 163).

Table 259.1  Clinically Relevant Anaerobic Bacteria in
Common Pediatric Infections
Gram-­positive cocci

Peptostreptococcus, Finegoldia,
Parvimonas, Anaerococcus,
and Peptoniphilus spp.

Gram-­positive, spore-­forming
rods

Clostridium spp.

Gram-­positive, non–spore-­
forming rods

Cutibacterium acnes
Some Actinomyces spp.

Gram-­negative bacilli

Bacteroides fragilis
Prevotella, Porphyromonas, and
Fusobacterium spp.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 259 u Other Anaerobic Infections
Anaerobic Bacteremia

Anaerobic bacteremia is relatively rare in children, and the yield
of routine anaerobic blood cultures in various settings and patient
populations continues to be debated. There is wide practice variation on the routine collection of anaerobic blood culture bottles, and
multiple studies have failed to consistently identify predictive risk
factors for anaerobic bacteremia in children. B. fragilis bacteremia
has been seen most frequently (albeit uncommonly) in two settings:
early-­onset sepsis in premature infants and sepsis in those with compromised lower gastrointestinal tract mucosa (perforation, surgery,
or chemotherapy-­
induced mucositis). Fusobacterium spp. bacteremia is typically seen in the setting of Lemierre syndrome: septic
thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein as a complication of
pharyngitis.

Myonecrosis (Gas Gangrene)

C. perfringens is the major etiologic cause of myonecrosis, a rapidly
progressive anaerobic soft tissue infection. Gas gangrene usually affects
muscles compromised by surgical or trauma sites that become contaminated with C. perfringens spores from soil or other foreign material.
Infection progresses rapidly (within 24 hours) with swelling, edema,
crepitus, and myonecrosis. Severe shock and multiorgan dysfunction
are common. A clue to the diagnosis of gas gangrene is pain out of proportion to the clinical appearance of the wound. Exudate from surgical
specimens reveals gram-­positive bacilli but few leukocytes. Early and
complete debridement with excision of necrotic tissue is key to controlling the infection. Repeated, frequent assessment of tissue viability in
the operating room is required; however, the prognosis is poor, and
morbidity and mortality are high. The role of adjunctive hyperbaric
oxygen therapy is uncertain.

Food Poisoning

C. perfringens can also produce an enterotoxin that causes food poisoning. This intoxication results in the acute onset of watery diarrhea
and crampy abdominal pain. Therapy is mainly supportive and consists of rehydration and electrolyte replacement if necessary. The illness resolves spontaneously within 24 hours of onset, and thus specific
etiologic diagnosis is rarely made unless a large outbreak is investigated
by public health authorities. Frequent sources of infection include meat
and other animal products served in group settings during which food
is allowed to sit for hours at temperatures warm enough to promote
growth of C. perfringens.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of anaerobic infection requires a high index of suspicion and the collection of appropriate and adequate specimens
for anaerobic culture (Table 259.2). Culture specimens should be
obtained in a manner that protects them from contamination with
mucosal bacteria. Aspirates of infected sites, abscess material, and

Table 259.2  Clues to the Presumptive Diagnosis of
Anaerobic Infections*
Infection contiguous to or near a mucosal surface colonized with
anaerobic bacteria (oropharynx, intestinal-­genitourinary tract)
Severe tissue necrosis, abscesses, gangrene, or fasciitis
Gas formation in tissues (crepitus on exam or gas visible on imaging)
Failure to culture organisms using conventional aerobic
microbiologic methods, despite the presence of visible organisms
on Gram stain
Toxin-­mediated syndromes: botulism, tetanus, gas gangrene, food
poisoning, pseudomembranous colitis
*Suspicion of anaerobic infection is critical before specimens are sampled for culture to
ensure optimal microbiologic techniques.

1829

biopsy specimens are appropriate for anaerobic culturing. Specimens
should be protected from atmospheric oxygen and transported to the
laboratory immediately. Anaerobic transport medium increases the
likelihood of recovery of obligate anaerobes. Gram staining is useful, because even if the organisms do not grow in culture, they can
be seen on the smear. Once growth has occurred, many clinically
relevant anaerobes may now be identified by MALDI-­TOF MS. 16S
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing at a reference laboratory
can identify less common bacteria.
Antimicrobial resistance among anaerobes has increased over
time, and the susceptibility of anaerobes to certain antibiotics has
become less predictable. A rapid and simple screening test for β-­
lactamase production and presumptive penicillin resistance can be
performed on some anaerobic gram-­negative bacilli. More detailed
susceptibility testing is usually only available at reference laboratories
and may be recommended for isolates recovered from sterile body
sites that are deemed clinically important and are known to have
variable or unique susceptibilities. Because anaerobic bacteria are
less routinely submitted for susceptibility testing, local antibiogram
data are frequently limited and extrapolated from larger national case
series.

TREATMENT

Treatment of anaerobic infections usually requires adequate drainage
and appropriate antimicrobial therapy. Anaerobes can be generally
lumped into groups of predicted susceptibility, but because most anaerobic infections are polymicrobial, the choice of agents is frequently
driven by the aerobic bacteria suspected or proven to be involved. The
specific dose, frequency, and duration vary widely by the specific clinical syndrome.

ANAEROBIC GRAM-­NEGATIVE BACILLI

Most B. fragilis produces a β-­lactamase that hydrolyzes penicillins but is
inhibited by most β-­lactamase inhibitors (clavulanate, sulbactam, and
tazobactam but not avibactam). They also produce a cephalosporinase
that hydrolyzes most cephalosporins but not cephamycins. Neither of
the enzymes hydrolyzes carbapenems. Hence, most isolates are susceptible to ampicillin-­sulbactam, amoxicillin-­clavulanate, piperacillin-­
tazobactam, cefoxitin, and carbapenems (imipenem, meropenem,
doripenem, and ertapenem). Notably, ceftazidime-­avibactam is the
exception to the reliability of β-­lactamase inhibitors and does not have
reliable B. fragilis activity. Prevotella, Porphyromonas, and Fusobacterium spp. are all generally less resistant than Bacteroides. They less
frequently produce a β-­lactamase, and many remain susceptible to
penicillin. Fusobacterium spp. are usually susceptible to cephalosporins such as ceftriaxone, but Prevotella and Porphyromonas have more
variable susceptibility.
Metronidazole is reliably active against nearly all anaerobic gram-­
negative bacilli. Clindamycin resistance in B. fragilis has increased
over the years, and thus clindamycin is no longer recommended for
empiric treatment, leading to the admonition against using clindamycin for infections “below the diaphragm.” The other anaerobic gram-­
negative bacilli are usually still susceptible to clindamycin. Because
of increasing resistance, moxifloxacin is no longer recommended as
first-­line therapy for infections involving anaerobic gram-­negative
bacilli.

ANAEROBIC GRAM-­POSITIVE ORGANISMS

Most non–spore-forming, positive bacilli and some GPAC are resistant
to metronidazole. Most are highly susceptible to penicillin but variably
susceptible to clindamycin. Treatment of clostridial infections varies
widely by the specific clinical syndrome and may or may not involve
antibiotics and/or specific antitoxins.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1830 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Section 7

Mycobacterial
Infections
Chapter 260

Principles of
Antimycobacterial
Therapy
Stacene R. Maroushek
The treatment of mycobacterial infection and disease can be challenging. Patients require therapy with multiple agents, the offending pathogens commonly exhibit complex drug resistance patterns, and patients
often have underlying conditions that affect drug choice and monitoring. Several of the drugs have not been well studied in children, and current recommendations are extrapolated from the experience in adults.
Single-­drug therapy of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and nontuberculous mycobacteria is not recommended because of the high likelihood
of developing antimicrobial resistance. Susceptibility testing of mycobacterial isolates often can aid in therapeutic decision-­making.

AGENTS USED AGAINST MYCOBACTERIUM
TUBERCULOSIS
Commonly Used Agents
Isoniazid

Isoniazid (INH) is a hydrazide form of isonicotinic acid and is bactericidal for rapidly growing M. tuberculosis. The primary target of
INH involves the INHA gene, which encodes the enoyl acyl carrier
protein (ACP) reductase needed for the last step of the mycolic acid
biosynthesis pathway of cell wall production. Resistance to INH occurs
after pathogenic variants in the INHA gene or in other genes encoding
enzymes that activate INH, such as katG.
INH is indicated for the treatment of M. tuberculosis, M. kansasii,
and M. bovis. The pediatric dosage is 10-­15 mg/kg/day orally (PO) in a
single dose, not to exceed 300 mg/day. The adult dosage is 5 mg/kg/day
PO in a single dose, not to exceed 300 mg/day. Alternative pediatric
dosing is 20-­30 mg/kg PO in a single dose, not to exceed 900 mg/dose,
given twice weekly under directly observed therapy (DOT), in which
patients are observed to ingest each dose of antituberculosis medication to maximize the likelihood of completing therapy. The duration
of treatment depends on the disease being treated (Table 260.1). INH
needs to be taken 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals because food
decreases absorption. It is available in liquid, tablet, intravenous (IV;
not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA]), and
intramuscular (IM) preparations.
Major adverse effects include hepatotoxicity in 1% of children and
approximately 3% of adults (increasing with age) and dose-­related
peripheral neuropathy. Pyridoxine can prevent the peripheral neuropathy and is indicated for breastfeeding infants and their mothers,
children and youth on milk-­or meat-­deficient diets, pregnant adolescents, and symptomatic HIV-­infected children. Minor adverse events
include rash, worsening of acne, epigastric pain with occasional nausea
and vomiting, decreased vitamin D levels, and dizziness. The liquid
formulation of INH contains sorbitol, which often causes diarrhea and
stomach upset.

INH is accompanied by significant drug-­drug interactions (Table
260.2). The metabolism of INH is by acetylation. Acetylation rates have
minimal effect on efficacy, but slow acetylators have an increased risk
for hepatotoxicity, especially when INH is used in combination with
rifampin. Routine baseline liver function testing or monthly monitoring is only indicated for persons with underlying hepatic disease or
those receiving concomitant hepatotoxic drugs, including other antimycobacterial agents, acetaminophen, or alcohol. Monthly clinic visits
while taking INH alone are encouraged to monitor adherence, adverse
effects, and worsening of infection.

Rifamycins

The rifamycins (rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentine) are a class of macrolide antibiotics developed from Streptomyces mediterranei. Rifampin
is a synthetic derivative of rifamycin B, and rifabutin is a derivative
of rifamycin S. Rifapentine is a cyclopentyl derivative. The rifamycins
inhibit the DNA-­dependent RNA polymerase of mycobacteria, resulting in decreased RNA synthesis. These agents are generally bactericidal at treatment doses, but they may be bacteriostatic at lower doses.
Resistance is from a pathogenic variant in the DNA-­dependent RNA
polymerase gene (rpoB) that is often induced by previous incomplete
therapy. Cross-­resistance between rifampin and rifabutin has been
demonstrated.
Rifampin is active against M. tuberculosis, M. leprae, M. kansasii, and M. avium complex. Rifampin is an integral drug in standard
combination treatment of active M. tuberculosis disease and can be
used as an alternative to INH in the treatment of latent tuberculosis infection in children who cannot tolerate INH. Rifabutin has a
similar spectrum, with increased activity against M. avium complex.
Rifapentine is undergoing pediatric clinical trials and appears to
have activity similar to the activity of rifampin. The pediatric dosage
of rifampin is 10-­15 mg/kg/day PO in a single dose, not to exceed
600 mg/day. The adult dosage of rifampin is 5-­10 mg/kg/day PO in
a single dose, not to exceed 600 mg/day. Commonly used rifampin
preparations include 150-­and 300-­mg capsules and a suspension that
is usually formulated at a concentration of 10 mg/mL. The shelf life
of rifampin suspension is short (approximately 4 weeks), so it should
not be compounded with other antimycobacterial agents. An IV form
of rifampin is also available for initial treatment of patients who cannot take oral preparations. Dosage adjustment is needed for patients
with liver failure. Other rifamycins (rifabutin and rifapentine) have
been poorly studied in children and are not recommended for pediatric use.
Rifampin can be associated with adverse effects such as transient
elevations of liver enzymes; gastrointestinal (GI) upset with cramps,
nausea, vomiting, and anorexia; headache; dizziness; and immunologically mediated fever and flulike symptoms. Thrombocytopenia and
hemolytic anemias can also occur. Rifabutin has a similar spectrum of
toxicities, except for an increased incidence of rash (4%) and neutropenia (2%). Rifapentine has fewer adverse effects but is associated with
hyperuricemia and cytopenias, especially lymphopenia and neutropenia. All rifamycins can turn urine and other secretions (tears, saliva,
stool, sputum) orange, which can stain contact lenses. Patients and
families should be warned about this common but otherwise innocuous adverse effect.
Rifamycins induce the hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzyme system and are associated with the increased metabolism and
decreased level of several drugs when administered concomitantly.
These drugs include digoxin, corticosteroids such as prednisone and
dexamethasone, dapsone, fluconazole, phenytoin, oral contraceptives,
warfarin, and many antiretroviral agents, especially protease inhibitors
and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Rifabutin has less
of an effect on lowering protease inhibitor levels.
The use of pyrazinamide in combination with rifampin for short-­
course latent tuberculosis therapy has been associated with serious
liver dysfunction and death. This combination has never been well
studied or recommended for pediatric patients and should not be
used.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 260 u Principles of Antimycobacterial Therapy

1831

Table 260.1  Recommended Usual Treatment Regimens for Drug-­Susceptible Tuberculosis in Infants, Children, and
Adolescents
INFECTION/DISEASE CATEGORY

REGIMEN

COMMENTS

LATENT MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION*
Isoniazid susceptible
12 wk of isoniazid plus rifapentine once a wk
or
4 mo of rifampin once a day
or

Continuous daily therapy is required. Intermittent
therapy even by DOT is not recommended.

9 mo of isoniazid once a day

If daily therapy is not possible, DOT twice a week
can be used for 9 mo.

Isoniazid resistant

4 mo of rifampin once a day

Continuous daily therapy is required. Intermittent
therapy even by DOT is not recommended.

Isoniazid-­rifampin resistant

Consult a tuberculosis specialist.

Moxifloxacin or levofloxacin with or without
ethambutol or pyrazinamide.

PULMONARY AND EXTRAPULMONARY INFECTION
Except meningitis†
2 mo of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and
ethambutol daily or twice weekly, followed
by 4 mo of isoniazid and rifampin‡ by DOT§
for drug-­susceptible M. tuberculosis

Some experts recommend a three-­drug initial
regimen (isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide)
if the risk of drug resistance is low. DOT is highly
desirable.
If hilar adenopathy only and the risk of drug
resistance is low, 6-­mo course of isoniazid and
rifampin is sufficient.
Drugs can be given 2 or 3 times/wk under DOT.

9-­12 mo of isoniazid and rifampin for drug-­
susceptible Mycobacterium bovis
Meningitis

2 mo of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide and
an aminoglycoside|| or ethionamide once
daily, followed by 7-­10 mo of isoniazid and
rifampin once daily or twice weekly (9-­12 mo
total) for drug-­susceptible M. tuberculosis
At least 12 mo of therapy without
pyrazinamide for drug-­susceptible M. bovis

For patients who may have acquired tuberculosis in
geographic areas where resistance to streptomycin
is common, kanamycin, amikacin, or capreomycin
can be used instead of streptomycin.

*Positive TST or IGRA result, no disease. See text for comments and additional acceptable/alternative regimens.
†Duration of therapy may be longer for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)–infected people, and additional drugs and dosing intervals may be indicated
‡Medications should be administered daily for the first 2 wk to 2 mo of treatment and then can be administered 2-­3 times/wk by DOT. (Twice-­weekly therapy is not recommended for

HIV-­infected people.)
§If initial chest radiograph shows pulmonary cavities and sputum culture after 2 mo of therapy remains positive, the continuation phase is extended to 7 mo, for a total treatment

duration of 9 mo.
||Streptomycin, kanamycin, amikacin, or capreomycin.

DOT, Directly observed therapy; IGRA, interferon-­γ release assay; TST, tuberculin skin test.
Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics: Red Book: 2018–2021 report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 31st ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: AAP, 2018: Table 3.85.

Table 260.2  Isoniazid Drug-­Drug Interactions
DRUG USED WITH ISONIAZID

EFFECTS

Acetaminophen, alcohol,
rifampin

Increased hepatotoxicity of
isoniazid or listed drugs

Aluminum salts (antacids)

Decreased absorption of
isoniazid

Carbamazepine, phenytoin,
theophylline, diazepam,
warfarin

Increased level, effect, or
toxicity of listed drugs due to
decreased metabolism

Itraconazole, ketoconazole, oral
hypoglycemic agents

Decreased level or effect of
listed drugs due to increased
metabolism

Cycloserine, ethionamide

Increased central nervous system
adverse effects of cycloserine
and ethionamide

Prednisolone

Increased isoniazid metabolism

No routine laboratory monitoring for rifamycins is indicated unless
the patient is symptomatic. In patients with signs of toxicity, complete
blood count (CBC) and kidney and liver function tests are indicated.

Pyrazinamide

Pyrazinamide (PZA) is a synthetic pyrazine analog of nicotinamide
that is bactericidal against intracellular M. tuberculosis organisms in
acidic environments, such as within macrophages or inflammatory
lesions. A bacteria-­specific enzyme (pyrazinamidase) converts PZA to
pyrazinoic acid, which leads to low pH levels not tolerated by M. tuberculosis. Resistance is poorly understood but can arise from bacterial
pyrazinamidase alterations.
PZA is indicated for the initial treatment phase of active tuberculosis in combination with other antimycobacterial agents. The pediatric
dosage is 30-40 mg/kg/day PO in a single dose, not to exceed 2,000 mg/
day. Twice-­weekly dosing with DOT only is with 50 mg/kg/day PO in
a single dose, not to exceed 4,000 mg/day. It is available in a 500-­mg
tablet and can be made into a suspension of 100 mg/mL.
Adverse effects include GI upset (e.g., nausea, vomiting, poor
appetite) in approximately 4% of children, dosage-­
dependent
hepatotoxicity, and elevated serum uric acid levels that can precipitate gout in susceptible adults. Approximately 10% of pediatric patients have elevated uric acid levels but with no associated
clinical sequelae. Minor reactions include arthralgias, fatigue, and,
rarely, fever.
Use of PZA in combination with rifampin for short-­course treatment of latent tuberculosis is associated with serious liver dysfunction
and death, and this combination should be avoided.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1832 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
No routine laboratory monitoring for PZA is required, but monthly
visits to reinforce the importance of therapy are desirable.

Ethambutol

Ethambutol is a synthetic form of ethylenedi-­imino-­di-­1-­butanol dihydrochloride that inhibits RNA synthesis needed for cell wall formation.
At standard dosages, ethambutol is bacteriostatic, but at dosages >25
mg/kg, it has bactericidal activity. The mechanism of resistance to ethambutol is unknown, but resistance develops rapidly when ethambutol
is used as a single agent against M. tuberculosis.
Ethambutol is indicated for the treatment of infections caused by
M. tuberculosis, M. kansasii, M. bovis, and M. avium complex. Ethambutol should only be used as part of a combination treatment regimen
for M. tuberculosis. Daily dosing is 15-­25 mg/kg PO in a single dose,
not to exceed 2,500 mg/day. Twice-­weekly dosing is with 50 mg/kg
PO in a single dose, not to exceed 2,500 mg/day. Dosage adjustment
is needed in renal insufficiency. Ethambutol is available in 100-­and
400-­mg tablets.
The major adverse effect with ethambutol is optic neuritis, and thus
ethambutol should generally be reserved for children old enough to
have visual acuity and color discrimination reliably monitored. Visual
changes are usually dosage dependent and reversible. Other adverse
events include headache, dizziness, confusion, hyperuricemia, GI
upset, peripheral neuropathy, hepatotoxicity, and cytopenias, especially neutropenia and thrombocytopenia.
Routine laboratory monitoring includes baseline and periodic visual
acuity and color discrimination testing, CBC, serum uric acid levels,
and kidney and liver function tests.

Less Commonly Used Agents
Aminoglycosides

The aminoglycosides used for mycobacterial infections include streptomycin, amikacin, kanamycin, and capreomycin. Streptomycin is
isolated from Streptomyces griseus and was the first drug used to treat
M. tuberculosis. Capreomycin, a cyclic polypeptide from Streptomyces
capreolus, and amikacin, a semisynthetic derivative of kanamycin, are
newer agents that are recommended when streptomycin is unavailable. Aminoglycosides act by binding irreversibly to the 30S subunit of
ribosomes and inhibiting subsequent protein synthesis. Streptomycin
exhibits concentration-­dependent bactericidal activity, and capreomycin is bacteriostatic. Resistance results from a pathogenic variant in the
binding site of the 30S ribosome, by decreased transport into cells, or
by inactivation by bacterial enzymes. Cross-­resistance between aminoglycosides has been demonstrated.
The aminoglycosides are indicated for the treatment of M. tuberculosis and M. avium complex. All are considered second-­line drugs
in the treatment of M. tuberculosis and should be used only when
resistance patterns are known. Aminoglycosides are poorly absorbed
orally and are administered by IM injection. Pediatric dosing ranges
for streptomycin are 20 mg/kg/day if given daily and 20-­40 mg/kg/day
if given twice weekly; dosing is IM in a single daily dose. Capreomycin,
amikacin, and kanamycin dosages are 15-­30 mg/kg/day IM in a single
dose, not to exceed 1 g/day. Dosage adjustment is necessary in renal
insufficiency.
Aminoglycosides have adverse effects on proximal renal tubules,
the cochlea, and the vestibular apparatus of the ear. Nephrotoxicity and
ototoxicity account for most of the significant adverse events. Rarely,
patients exhibit fever or rash with administration of aminoglycosides.
Concomitant use of other nephrotoxic or ototoxic agents should be
avoided, because adverse effects may be additive. An infrequent but
serious synergistic, dosage-­dependent aminoglycoside effect with nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade agents can result in respiratory
depression or paralysis.
Hearing and kidney function should be monitored at baseline and
periodically. Early signs of ototoxicity include tinnitus, vertigo, and
hearing loss. Ototoxicity appears to be irreversible, but early kidney damage may be reversible. As with other aminoglycosides, peak
and trough drug levels are helpful in dosing and managing early
toxicities.

Cycloserine

Cycloserine, derived from Streptomyces orchidaceous or Streptomyces
garyphalus, is a synthetic analog of the amino acid d-­alanine that interferes with bacterial cell wall synthesis through competitive inhibition
of d-­alanine components to be incorporated into the cell wall. It is bacteriostatic, and the mechanism of resistance is unknown.
Cycloserine is used to treat M. tuberculosis and M. bovis. The dosage
is 10-­20 mg/kg/day PO divided into two doses, not to exceed 1 g/day. It
is available in a 250-­mg capsule.
The major adverse effect is neurotoxicity with significant psychologic disturbance, including seizures, acute psychosis, headache, confusion, depression, and personality changes. The neurotoxic effects are
additive with ethionamide and INH. Cycloserine has also been associated with megaloblastic anemia. It must be dosage-­adjusted in patients
with kidney impairment and should be used with caution in patients
with underlying psychiatric illness.
Routine laboratory monitoring includes kidney and hepatic function, CBC, and cycloserine levels. Psychiatric symptoms are less common at blood levels <30 μg/mL.

Ethionamide

Ethionamide is structurally related to INH and is an ethyl derivative
of thioisonicotinamide that inhibits peptide synthesis by an unclear
mechanism thought to involve nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD) and NAD phosphate dehydrogenase disruptions. Ethionamide
is bacteriostatic at most therapeutic levels. Resistance develops quickly
if ethionamide is used as a single-­agent therapy, although the mechanism is unknown.
Ethionamide is used as an alternative to streptomycin or ethambutol
in the treatment of M. tuberculosis and has some activity against M.
kansasii and M. avium complex. A metabolite, ethionamide sulfoxide,
is bactericidal against M. leprae. Ethionamide has been shown to have
good central nervous system (CNS) penetration and has been used as a
fourth drug in combination with rifampin, INH, and PZA. The pediatric dosing is 15-­20 mg/kg/day PO in two divided doses, not to exceed 1
g/day. It is available as a 250-­mg tablet.
GI upset is common, and other adverse effects include neurologic
disturbances (anxiety, dizziness, peripheral neuropathy, seizures, acute
psychosis), hepatic enzyme elevations, hypothyroidism, hypoglycemia,
and hypersensitivity reaction with rash and fever. Ethionamide should
be used with caution in patients with underlying psychiatric or thyroid
disease. The psychiatric adverse effects can be potentiated with concomitant use of cycloserine.
In addition to close assessment of mood, routine monitoring
includes thyroid and liver function tests. In diabetic patients taking
ethionamide, blood glucose levels should be monitored.

Fluoroquinolones

The fluoroquinolones are fluorinated derivatives of the quinolone
class of antibiotics. Ciprofloxacin is a first-­generation fluoroquinolone, and levofloxacin is the more active l-­isomer of ofloxacin. Moxifloxacin and gatifloxacin are agents with emerging use in pediatric
mycobacterial disease. Fluoroquinolones are not indicated for use in
children <18 years old, but studies of their use in pediatric patients
continue to indicate that they may be used in special circumstances.
Fluoroquinolones are bactericidal and exert their effect by inhibition
of DNA gyrase. The alterations in DNA gyrase result in relaxation of
supercoiled DNA and breaks in double-­stranded DNA. The mechanism of resistance is not well defined but likely involves pathogenic
variants in the DNA gyrase.
Levofloxacin is an important second-­line drug in the treatment of
multidrug-­resistant (MDR) M. tuberculosis. Ciprofloxacin has activity
against M. fortuitum complex and against M. tuberculosis. The pediatric dosage of ciprofloxacin is 20-­30 mg/kg/day PO or IV, not to exceed
1.5 mg/day PO or 800 mg/day IV. The adult dosage of ciprofloxacin
is 500-­750 mg/dose PO in two divided doses or 200-­400 mg/dose IV
every 12 hours. Ciprofloxacin is available in 100-­, 250-­, 500-­, and 750-­
mg tablets and can be made in 5% (50 mg/mL) or 10% (100 mg/mL)
suspensions. The dosage of levofloxacin for children is 5-­10 mg/kg/day

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 260 u Principles of Antimycobacterial Therapy
given once daily either PO or IV, not to exceed 1,000 mg/day, and for
adults, 500-­1,000 mg/day PO or IV, not to exceed 1,000 mg/day. Levofloxacin is available in 250-­, 500-­, and 750-­mg tablets, and a 50 mg/mL
suspension can be extemporaneously compounded. The suspension
has a shelf life of only 8 weeks.
The most common adverse effect of fluoroquinolones is GI upset,
with nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, including pseudomembranous colitis. Other less common adverse effects include
bone marrow depression, CNS effects (e.g., lowered seizure threshold,
confusion, tremor, dizziness, headache), elevated liver transaminases,
photosensitivity, and arthropathies. The potential for arthropathies
(e.g., tendon ruptures, arthralgias, tendinitis) is the predominant reason that fluoroquinolones are not recommended for pediatric use. The
mechanism of injury appears to involve the disruption of extracellular matrix of cartilage and depletion of collagen, a particular concern
related to the bone and joint development of children.
Fluoroquinolones induce the CYP isoenzymes that can increase the
concentrations of dually administered theophylline and warfarin. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can potentiate the CNS
effects of fluoroquinolones and should be avoided while taking a fluoroquinolone. Both ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin should be dosage-­
adjusted in patients with significant renal dysfunction.
While taking fluoroquinolones, patients should be monitored
for hepatic and renal dysfunction, arthropathies, and hematologic
abnormalities.

Linezolid

Linezolid is a synthetic oxazolidinone derivative. This drug is not currently approved for use against mycobacterial infection in pediatric
or adult patients but has activity against some mycobacterial species.
Studies on efficacy of treatment of mycobacterial infections are under
way. Linezolid inhibits translation by binding to the 23S ribosomal
component of the 50S ribosome subunit, preventing coupling with the
70S subunit. Resistance is thought to be from a point a pathogenic variant at the binding site but is poorly studied because only a few cases of
resistance have been reported.
The approved indications for linezolid are for bacterial infections
other than mycobacteria, but studies reveal in vitro activity against
rapidly growing mycobacteria (M. fortuitum complex, M. chelonae, M.
abscessus), M. tuberculosis, and M. avium complex. The dosage for 0-­to
11-­year-­old children is 10 mg/kg/day PO or IV in divided doses every
8-­12 hours. For persons >12 years old, the dosage is 600 mg PO or IV
every 12 hours. Linezolid is available in 400-­and 600-­mg tablets and as
a 20-­mg/mL suspension.
Adverse effects of linezolid include GI upset (e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), CNS disturbances (e.g., dizziness, headache, insomnia,
peripheral neuropathy), lactic acidosis, fever, myelosuppression, and
pseudomembranous colitis. Linezolid is a weak inhibitor of monoamine oxidase A, and patients are advised to avoid foods with high
tyramine content. Linezolid should be used cautiously in patients with
preexisting myelosuppression.
In addition to monitoring for GI upset and CNS perturbations, routine laboratory monitoring includes CBC at least weekly.

Paraaminosalicylic Acid

Paraaminosalicylic acid (PAS) is a structural analog of paraaminobenzoic acid (PABA). It is bacteriostatic and acts by competitively inhibiting the synthesis of folic acid, similar to the action of sulfonamides.
Resistance mechanisms are poorly understood.
PAS acts against M. tuberculosis. The dosage is 150 mg/kg/day PO
in two or three divided doses. PAS is dispensed in 4-­g packets, and the
granules should be mixed with liquid and swallowed whole.
Common adverse effects include GI upset, and less common events
include hypokalemia, hematuria, albuminuria, crystalluria, and elevations of hepatic transaminases. PAS can decrease the absorption of
rifampin, and co-­
administration with ethionamide potentiates the
adverse effects of PAS.
In addition to monitoring for weight loss, routine laboratory monitoring includes liver and kidney function tests.

1833

Bedaquiline Fumarate

This oral diarylquinoline has been recommended for the treatment
of MDR tuberculosis. Bedaquiline fumarate should be used as part of
combination therapy and administered by direct observation. Although
approved for patients ≥18 years old, bedaquiline may be considered for
children on a case-­by-­case basis.
Serious adverse effects include hepatotoxicity and a prolonged QT
interval.

Delamanid

Delamanid is a dihydro-­
nitroimidazooxazole derivative recently
approved for use in the treatment of MDR tuberculosis. It acts by
inhibiting the synthesis of mycobacterial cell wall compounds such as
methoxymycolic acid and ketomycolic acid. Limited studies are available in the pediatric population, and delamanid should be used only in
conjunction with a tuberculosis specialist.
Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, dizziness, anxiety, shaking, and QT prolongation.

AGENTS USED AGAINST MYCOBACTERIUM
LEPRAE
Dapsone

Dapsone is a sulfone antibiotic with characteristics similar to sulfonamides.
Similar to other sulfonamides, dapsone acts as a competitive antagonist of
PABA, which is needed for the bacterial synthesis of folic acid. Dapsone
is bacteriostatic against M. leprae. Resistance is not well understood but is
thought to occur after alterations at the PABA-­binding site.
Dapsone is used in the treatment of M. leprae in combination with
other antileprosy agents (rifampin, clofazimine, ethionamide). The
pediatric dosage is 1-­2 mg/kg/day PO as a single dose, not to exceed
100 mg/day, for a duration of 3-­10 years. The adult dosage is 100 mg/
day PO as a single dose. Dapsone is available in 25-­and 100-­mg scored
tablets and as an oral suspension of 2 mg/mL. The dosage should be
adjusted in renal insufficiency.
Dapsone has many reported adverse effects, including dosage-­
related hemolytic anemia, especially in patients with glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, pancreatitis, renal
complications (acute tubular necrosis, acute renal failure, albuminuria), increased liver enzymes, psychosis, tinnitus, peripheral neuropathy, photosensitivity, and a hypersensitivity syndrome with fever, rash,
hepatic damage, and malaise. Treatment may produce a lepra reaction,
which is a nontoxic, paradoxical worsening of lepromatous leprosy
with the initiation of therapy. This hypersensitivity reaction is not an
indication to discontinue therapy. Dapsone should be used with caution in patients with G6PD deficiency or taking other folic acid antagonists. Dapsone levels can decrease with concomitant rifampin use and
can increase with concomitant clotrimazole use.
Routine laboratory monitoring includes CBC weekly during the first
month of therapy, weekly through 6 months of therapy, and then every
6 months thereafter. Other periodic assessments include kidney function with creatine levels, urinalysis, and liver function tests.

Clofazimine

Clofazimine is a synthetic phendimetrazine tartrate derivative that acts
by binding to the mycobacterial DNA at guanine sites. It has slow bactericidal activity against M. leprae. Mechanisms of resistance are not
well studied. No cross-­resistance between clofazimine and dapsone or
rifampin has been shown.
Clofazimine is indicated as part of a combination therapy for the
treatment of M. leprae. It appears there may be some activity against
other mycobacteria such as M. avium complex, although treatment
failures are common. The safety and efficacy of clofazimine are poorly
studied in children. The pediatric dosage is 1 mg/kg/day PO as a single dose, not to exceed 100 mg/day, in combination with dapsone and
rifampin for 2 years and then additionally as a single agent for >1 year.
The adult dosage is 100 mg/day PO. Clofazimine should be taken with
food to increase absorption.
The most common adverse effect is a dosage-­related, reversible, pink
to tan-­brown discoloration of the skin and conjunctiva. Other adverse

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1834 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
effects include a dry, itchy skin rash, headache, dizziness, abdominal
pain, diarrhea, vomiting, peripheral neuropathy, and elevated hepatic
transaminases.
Routine laboratory monitoring includes periodic liver function tests.

AGENTS USED AGAINST NONTUBERCULOUS
MYCOBACTERIA
Cefoxitin

Cefoxitin, a cephamycin derivative, is a second-­generation cephalosporin that, like other cephalosporins, inhibits cell wall synthesis by linking

with penicillin-­binding proteins to create an unstable bacterial cell wall.
Resistance develops by alterations in penicillin-­binding proteins.
Cefoxitin is often used in combination therapy for mycobacterial
disease (Table 260.3). Pediatric dosing is based on disease severity, with
a range of 80-­160 mg/kg/day divided every 4-­8 hours, not to exceed 12
g/day. Adult dosages are 1-­2 g/dose, not to exceed 12 g/day. Cefoxitin
is available in IV and IM formulations. Increased dosing intervals are
needed with renal insufficiency.
Adverse effects are primarily hematologic (eosinophilia, granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia), GI (nausea, vomiting,

Table 260.3  Treatment of Nontuberculous Mycobacteria Infections in Children
ORGANISM

DISEASE

SLOWLY GROWING SPECIES
Mycobacterium avium complex
(MAC); Mycobacterium
haemophilum;
Mycobacterium lentiflavum

INITIAL TREATMENT

Lymphadenitis

Complete excision of lymph nodes; if excision incomplete or disease
recurs, clarithromycin or azithromycin plus ethambutol and/or
rifampin (or rifabutin).

Pulmonary infection

Clarithromycin or azithromycin plus ethambutol with rifampin or
rifabutin (pulmonary resection in some patients who fail to respond
to drug therapy). For severe disease, an initial course of amikacin or
streptomycin often is included. Clinical data in adults with mild to
moderate disease support that 3-­times-­weekly therapy is as effective
as daily therapy, with less toxicity. For patients with advanced or
cavitary disease, drugs should be given daily.

Prosthetic valve endocarditis

Valve removal, prolonged antimicrobial therapy based on susceptibility
testing.

Disseminated

See text.

Pulmonary infection

Rifampin plus ethambutol with isoniazid daily. If rifampin resistance is
detected, a three-­drug regimen based on drug susceptibility testing
should be used.

Osteomyelitis

Surgical debridement and prolonged antimicrobial therapy using
rifampin plus ethambutol with isoniazid.

Mycobacterium marinum

Cutaneous infection

None, if minor; rifampin, TMP-­SMX, clarithromycin, or doxycycline*
for moderate disease; extensive lesions may require surgical
debridement. Susceptibility testing not routinely required.

Mycobacterium ulcerans

Cutaneous and bone infections

Daily intramuscular streptomycin and oral rifampin for 8 wk; excision
to remove necrotic tissue, if present; potential response to
thermotherapy.

RAPIDLY GROWING SPECIES
Mycobacterium fortuitum
group

Cutaneous infection

Initial therapy for serious disease is amikacin plus meropenem IV,
followed by clarithromycin, doxycycline,* TMP-­SMX, or ciprofloxacin
PO on the basis of in vitro susceptibility testing; may require surgical
excision. Up to 50% of isolates are resistant to cefoxitin.

Catheter infection

Catheter removal and amikacin plus meropenem IV; clarithromycin,
TMP-­SMX, or ciprofloxacin orally on the basis of in vitro susceptibility
testing.

Otitis media; cutaneous infection

There is no reliable antimicrobial regimen because of variability in
drug susceptibility. Clarithromycin plus an initial course of amikacin
plus cefoxitin or imipenem/meropenem; may require surgical
debridement on the basis of in vitro susceptibility testing (50% are
amikacin resistant).

Pulmonary infection (in cystic fibrosis)

Serious disease; clarithromycin, amikacin, and cefoxitin or imipenem/
meropenem on the basis of susceptibility testing; most isolates have
very low MIC to tigecycline; may require surgical resection.

Catheter infection, prosthetic valve
endocarditis

Catheter removal; debridement, removal of foreign material;
valve replacement; and tobramycin (initially) plus clarithromycin,
meropenem, and linezolid.

Disseminated cutaneous infection

Tobramycin and meropenem or linezolid (initially) plus clarithromycin.

Mycobacterium chimaera

Mycobacterium kansasii

Mycobacterium abscessus

Mycobacterium chelonae

*Doxycycline can be used for short durations (i.e., ≤21 days) without regard to patient age but is not recommended for longer treatment durations in children <8 yr old. Only 50% of
isolates of M. marinum are susceptible to doxycycline.
IV, Intravenously; MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration; PO, orally (by mouth); TMP-­SMX, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole.
From Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)
diarrhea with possible pseudomembranous colitis), and CNS related
(dizziness, vertigo). Potential additive adverse effects can occur when
cefoxitin is used with aminoglycosides.
Routine laboratory monitoring with long-­term use includes CBC
and liver and renal function tests.

Doxycycline

Doxycycline is in the tetracycline family of antibiotics and has limited use in pediatrics. As with other tetracyclines, doxycycline acts to
decrease protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosome and to transfer RNA. It can also cause alterations to the cytoplasmic membrane of
susceptible bacteria.
Doxycycline is used to treat M. fortuitum (see Table 260.3). Although
it can be used to treat M. marinum, adult treatment failures have
occurred. Pediatric dosing is based on age and weight. For children
>8 years old who weigh <45 kg, the dosage is 4.4 mg/kg/day divided
twice daily. Dosing for larger children and adults is 100 mg twice daily.
Doxycycline is available as 50-­and 100-­mg capsules or tablets and in
25-­mg/5 mL and 50-­mg/5 mL suspensions.
Doxycycline use in children is limited by a permanent tooth discoloration, which becomes worse with long-­term use. Other adverse
effects include photosensitivity, liver and kidney dysfunction, and
esophagitis, which can be minimized by dosing with large volumes of
liquid. Doxycycline can decrease the effectiveness of oral contraceptives. Rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin can decrease the concentration of doxycycline.
Routine laboratory monitoring with long-­term use includes kidney
and liver function tests as well as CBC.

Macrolides

Clarithromycin and azithromycin belong to the macrolide family of
antibiotics. Clarithromycin is a methoxy derivative of erythromycin. Macrolides act by binding the 50S subunit of ribosomes, subsequently inhibiting protein synthesis. Resistance mechanisms for
mycobacteria are not well understood but might involve binding
site alterations. Clarithromycin appears to have synergistic antimycobacterial activity when combined with rifamycins, ethambutol,
or clofazimine.
Clarithromycin is widely used for the prophylaxis and treatment
of M. avium complex disease and also has activity against M. abscessus, M. fortuitum, and M. marinum. Azithromycin has significantly
different pharmacokinetics compared with other macrolide agents
and has not been studied and is not indicated for mycobacterial
infections. The pediatric dosage of clarithromycin for primary
prophylaxis of M. avium complex infections is 7.5 mg/kg/dose PO
given twice daily, not to exceed 500 mg/day. This dosage is used for
recurrent M. avium complex disease in combination with ethambutol and rifampin. The adult dosage is 500 mg PO twice daily to be
used as a single agent for primary prophylaxis or as part of combination therapy with ethambutol and rifampin. Dosage adjustment is
needed for renal insufficiency but not liver failure. Clarithromycin
is available in 250-­and 500-­mg tablets and suspensions of 125 mg/5
mL and 250 mg/5 mL.
The primary adverse effect of clarithromycin is GI upset, including vomiting (6%), diarrhea (6%), and abdominal pain (3%). Other
adverse effects include taste disturbances, headache, and QT prolongation if used with inhaled anesthetics, clotrimazole, antiarrhythmic
agents, or azoles. Clarithromycin should be used cautiously in patients
with renal insufficiency or liver failure.
Routine laboratory monitoring with prolonged use of clarithromycin includes periodic liver enzyme tests. Diarrhea is an early sign of
pseudomembranous colitis.

Trimethoprim-­Sulfamethoxazole

Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) is formulated in a fixed
ratio of one part TMP to five parts SMX. SMX is a sulfonamide that
inhibits synthesis of dihydrofolic acid by competitively inhibiting
PABA, similar to dapsone. TMP blocks production of tetrahydrofolic

1835

acid and downstream biosynthesis of nucleic acids and protein by
reversibly binding to dihydrofolate reductase. The combination of the
two agents is synergistic and often bactericidal.
TMP-­SMX is often used in combination therapy for mycobacterial disease (see Table 260.3). Oral or IV pediatric dosage for serious
infections is TMP 15-­20 mg/kg/day divided every 6-­8 hours, and for
mild infections, TMP 6-­12 mg/kg/day divided every 12 hours. The
adult dosage is 160 mg TMP and 800 mg SMX every 12 hours. Dosage
reduction may be needed in renal insufficiency. TMP-­SMX is available
in single-­strength tablets (80/400 mg TMP-­SMX) and double-­strength
tablets (160/800 mg TMP-­SMX) and in a suspension of 40 mg TMP
and 200 mg SMX per 5 mL.
The most common adverse effect with TMP-­SMX is myelosuppression. It must be used with caution in patients with G6PD deficiency.
Other adverse effects include renal abnormalities, rash, aseptic meningitis, GI disturbances (e.g., pancreatitis, diarrhea), and prolonged
QT interval if co-­administered with inhaled anesthetics, azoles, or
macrolides.
Routine laboratory monitoring includes monthly CBC and periodic
electrolytes and creatinine to monitor renal function.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 261

Tuberculosis
(Mycobacterium
tuberculosis)
Lindsay H. Cameron and Jeffrey R. Starke
Mycobacterium tuberculosis has caused human disease for more than
4,000 years and is one of the most important infectious diseases worldwide. There are five closely related mycobacteria in the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex: M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, M. africanum, M.
microti, and M. canetti. M. tuberculosis is the most important cause
of tuberculosis (TB) disease in humans. The tubercle bacilli are non–
spore-­forming, nonmotile, pleomorphic, weakly gram-­positive curved
rods 1-­5 μm long, typically slender, and slightly bent. They can appear
beaded or clumped under microscopy. They are obligate aerobes that
grow in synthetic media containing glycerol as the carbon source and
ammonium salts as the nitrogen source (Löwenstein-­Jensen culture
media). These mycobacteria grow best at 37–41°C (98.6–105.8°F),
produce niacin, and lack pigmentation. A lipid-­rich cell wall accounts
for resistance to the bactericidal actions of antibody and complement.
A hallmark of all mycobacteria is acid fastness—the capacity to form
stable mycolate complexes with arylmethane dyes (crystal violet, carbolfuchsin, auramine, and rhodamine). They resist decoloration with
ethanol and hydrochloric or other acids.
M. tuberculosis grows slowly, with a generation time of 12-­24 hours.
Isolation from clinical specimens on solid synthetic media usually
takes 3-­6 weeks, and drug susceptibility testing requires an additional
2-­4 weeks. Growth can be detected in 1-­3 weeks in selective liquid
medium using radiolabeled nutrients (e.g., BACTEC radiometric system), and drug susceptibilities can be determined in an additional 3-­5
days. Once mycobacterial growth is detected, the species of mycobacteria present can be determined within hours using high-­pressure liquid chromatography analysis (identifying the mycolic acid fingerprint
of each species) or DNA probes/nucleic amplification tests (NAATs).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1836 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
NAATs are used to identify genes associated with M. tuberculosis drug
resistance and complement phenotypic drug susceptibility testing.
Results are available in hours, which expedites management decisions.
Phenotypic drug susceptibility testing is necessary to confirm susceptibility to each drug. Restriction fragment length polymorphism genetic
profiling of mycobacteria is a helpful tool to study the epidemiology of
TB strain relatedness in both outbreaks and routine epidemiology of
TB in a community.

CLINICAL STAGES

There are three major clinical stages of TB: exposure, infection, and
disease. Exposure means a child has had recent significant contact
(shared the air) with an adult or adolescent with infectious TB but
lacks proof of infection. In this stage, the tuberculin skin test (TST)
or interferon-­γ release assay (IGRA) result is negative, the chest
radiograph is normal, the physical examination is normal, and the
child lacks signs or symptoms of disease. However, the child may be
infected and develop TB disease rapidly, because there may not have
been enough time for the TST or IGRA to turn positive. Tuberculosis
infection (TBI) occurs when the individual inhales droplet nuclei
containing M. tuberculosis, which survive intracellularly within the
lung and associated lymphoid tissue. The hallmark of TBI is a positive
TST or IGRA result. In this stage the child has no signs or symptoms
and has a normal physical examination, and the chest radiograph
is either normal or reveals only granuloma or calcifications in the
lung parenchyma. Disease occurs when signs or symptoms or radiographic manifestations caused by M. tuberculosis become apparent.
Not all infected individuals have the same risk of developing disease.
An immunocompetent adult with untreated TBI has approximately
a 5–10% lifetime risk of developing disease. In contrast, an infected
child <1 year old has a 40% chance of developing TB disease within
9 months.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

TB remains a leading cause of death from an infectious disease worldwide. The global burden of TB is influenced by several factors, including the HIV pandemic; the development of multidrug-­resistant
(MDR) tuberculosis; the disproportionately low access of populations
in low-­resource settings worldwide to both diagnostic tests and effective medical therapy; and the COVID-­19 pandemic.
The World Health Organization (WHO) 2020 Global Tuberculosis
Report estimates that the COVID-­19 pandemic could have a significant

impact on access to essential TB services (human capital, financial),
which may increase the rates of TB-­associated morbidity and mortality. Many countries have had to allocate public health resources from
TB prevention efforts toward COVID-­19 prevention, including contact tracing and using GeneXpert machines for COVID-­19 testing. The
WHO predicts that this resource diversion from TB case-­finding, testing, treatment, and prevention may result in an increase of global TB-­
associated deaths by 0.2-­0.4 million per year.
Approximately 95% of TB cases occur in the developing world. In
2019, the 30 high-­TB-­burden countries accounted for 87% of incident
cases (Fig. 261.1). Two thirds of cases occurred in eight countries,
including India, Indonesia, China, the Philippines, Pakistan, Nigeria,
Bangladesh, and South Africa. An estimated 10 million incident cases
and 1.4 million TB-­associated deaths occurred worldwide in 2019. The
WHO 2020 Global Tuberculosis Report estimates that in 2019 there
were 1.2 million childhood incident cases and 230,000 TB-­associated
deaths among children, including 32,000 TB-­associated deaths among
children living with HIV.
The incidence of drug-­resistant TB has increased in some areas of
the world in both adults and children. In 2019, the WHO reported
a global total of 206,030 cases of multidrug-­or rifampicin-­resistant
TB, a 10% increase from 2018 (Fig. 261.2). Isoniazid (INH)–monoresistant TB is resistance to INH alone, rifampicin-­resistant TB (RR-­
TB) is resistance to at least rifampin, MDR-­TB is defined as resistance
to at least isoniazid and rifampin, and extensively drug-­resistant
tuberculosis TB (XDR-­TB) includes MDR-­TB plus resistance to any
fluoroquinolone and at least one of three injectable drugs (kanamycin, capreomycin, or amikacin). In 2014, the worldwide estimate for
MDR-­TB in children was 2.9% of all cases and 0.1% for XDR-­TB. The
highest incidence of MDR-­TB in children occurs in the Southeast
Asian, African, and Western Pacific regions; however, the proportion
of drug-­resistant cases is highest in countries belonging to the Russian Federation, where over 30% of children with TB have a drug-­
resistant organism.
In the United States, TB case rates decreased steadily during the
first half of the 20th century, long before the advent of antituberculosis
drugs, as a result of improved living conditions and likely genetic selection favoring persons resistant to developing disease. A resurgence of
TB in the late 1980s was associated primarily with the HIV epidemic,
transmission of the organism in congregate settings including healthcare institutions, disease occurring in recent immigrants, and poor
conduct of community TB control. Since 1992, the TB incidence in the

China
Bangladesh
Philippines

Number of
incident cases
Pakistan

100 000
500 000
1 000 000

Nigeria
India
Democratic Republic
of the Congo

Indonesia

2 000 000

Fig. 261.1 Countries that had at least 100,000 incident cases of TB in 2021. The countries that rank first to eighth in terms of numbers of cases

and that accounted for about two thirds of global cases in 2021 are labeled. (From the World Health Organization: Global Tuberculosis Report 2022.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022, Fig 12. License: CC BY-­NC-­SA 3.0 IGO.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

1837

Russian Federation

China
Philippines

Pakistan
Number
of cases

India

1000
10 000

Indonesia

100 000

South Africa

Fig. 261.2 Percentage of new TB cases with MDR-­/RR-­TB. The seven countries with the highest burden in terms of numbers of MDR/RR -­TB cases

and that accounted for two thirds of global MDR-­/RR-­TB cases in 2021 are labeled. (From the World Health Organization: Global Tuberculosis Report
2022. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022, Fig 17. License: CC BY-­NC-­SA 3.0 IGO.)

1
0.1

Fig. 261.3 Reported tuberculosis cases in the United States for 1993–

2019 (as of October 29, 2020). (From Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Trends in Tuberculosis, 2019. Atlanta: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; 2020.)

United States has decreased over time. In 2020, the case rate was at the
all-­time low of 2.2 per 100,000 persons (Fig. 261.3).
In 2017, the incidence rate of TB among children <15 years was 0.7
cases per 100,000 person-­years, a decline of 41% from 1993. The TB
incidence rates were highest in children less than 12 months of age (1.3
per 100,000 person-­years), followed by children age 1-­4 years (1.1 per
100,000 person-­years), and were lowest among children age 5-­14 years
(0.5 per 100,000 person-­years) (Fig. 261.4).
From 1993 to 2017, non-­United States–born children, children born
to non-­United States–born parents, and children of racial or ethnic
minority status were disproportionately affected by TB. Non-­United
States–born children accounted for approximately 25% of the total
number of childhood TB cases, the majority being from Mexico, followed by the Philippines, Somalia, Vietnam, Ethiopia, and Haiti (Fig.
261.5).
According to data reported to the National TB Surveillance System
from 2007 to 2017, among United States–born children, the incidence
rates of TB if both parents were non-­United States–born and if one
parent was non-­United States–born were eight and three times higher,
respectively, compared to United States–born children with both parents being United States–born. This is supported by prior research
that found that 75% of United States–born children with TB had some
international connection through a family member or previous travel
or residence in a TB-­endemic country. Similar to adults in the United

Age <1 year

17

15

20

20

13

11
20

Age 5–9 years

20

09

07

20

05

Age 1–4 years

20

03

20

01

20

20

99
19

19

97

0.01

95

Year

10

93

19

17

20

15

20

13

20

20

09

11
20

20

20

20

20

20

19

19

19

19

07

0

05

0

03

2

01

5,000

99

4

97

10,000

95

6

93

15,000

100

19

8

Incidence rate

1000

19

10
Number of cases

20,000

Cases per 100,000 Person-Years*

25,000
Number of cases

N=22,037

12
Cases per 100,000 persons

30,000

Age 10–14 years

Fig. 261.4 Reported pediatric tuberculosis (TB) cases in the United

States by age-­group for the years 1993-­2017. *Rates are presented on
a logarithmic scale. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB Prevention.
Pediatric Tuberculosis in United States, 1993–2017. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2018.)

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017
Mexico

Philippines

Somalia

Vietnam

Ethiopia

Haiti

Fig. 261.5 Top six countries of birth for non–United States–born*

pediatric TB cases for the years 1993-­2017. *Non-­United States–born
refers to persons born outside the United States or its territories or not
born to a US citizen. †Cases in United States–born children of non-­
United States–born parents are included in United States–born counts
and thus not displayed in this figure. (From Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and
TB Prevention. Pediatric Tuberculosis in United States, 1993–2017. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2018.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1838 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
States, TB among children of racial-­ethnic minority status occurs disproportionately. The incidence rates of TB among children of Native
Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, Asian, Native American or Native Alaskan, Black, and Hispanic children were 144, 44, 22, 19, and 18 times
higher, respectively, than among non-­Hispanic White children.
The rates of drug-­resistant TB in children in the United States
remain low. A total of 89 childhood cases of MDR-­TB were reported
in the United States in 2015; of those, 70.8% were non-­United States–
born. Among children with culture-­confirmed TB in the United States
in 2015, 15.2% had organisms with resistance to at least one first-­line
drug and 0.9% had MDR organisms.
Most children are infected with M. tuberculosis in their home by
someone close to them, but outbreaks of childhood TB also have
occurred in elementary and high schools, nursery schools, daycare
centers and homes, churches, school buses, and sports teams. Adults
living with HIV who have pulmonary TB can transmit M. tuberculosis to children, and children living with HIV are at increased risk for
developing TB after infection. Other specific groups are at high risk for
acquiring TBI and progressing to tuberculosis disease (Table 261.1).
Table 261.1  Groups at High Risk for Acquiring
Tuberculosis Infection and Developing
Disease in Countries with Low Incidence
RISK FACTORS FOR TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION
Children exposed to high-­risk adults
Foreign-­born persons from high-­prevalence countries
Homeless persons
Persons who inject drugs
Present and former residents or employees of correctional
institutions, homeless shelters, and nursing homes
Healthcare workers caring for high-­risk patients (if infection control is
not adequate)
RISK FACTORS FOR PROGRESSION OF TUBERCULOSIS
INFECTION TO TUBERCULOSIS DISEASE
Infants and children ≤4 yr old, especially those <2 yr old
Adolescents and young adults
Persons co-­infected with human immunodeficiency virus
Persons with skin test conversion in the past 1-­2 yr
Persons who are immunocompromised, especially in cases of
malignancy and solid organ transplantation, immunosuppressive
medical treatments including anti–tumor necrosis factor therapies,
diabetes mellitus, chronic renal failure, silicosis, and malnutrition
RISK FACTORS FOR DRUG-­RESISTANT TUBERCULOSIS
Personal or contact history of treatment for tuberculosis
Contacts of patients with drug-­resistant tuberculosis
Birth or residence in a country with a high rate of drug resistance
Poor response to standard therapy
Positive sputum smears (acid-­fast bacilli) or culture ≥2 mo after
initiating appropriate therapy

TRANSMISSION

Transmission of M. tuberculosis is usually by inhalation of airborne
mucus droplet nuclei, particles 1-­5 μm in diameter that contain M.
tuberculosis. Transmission rarely occurs by direct contact with an
infected discharge or a contaminated fomite. The chance of transmission
increases when the patient has a positive acid-­fast smear of sputum, an
extensive upper lobe infiltrate or cavity, copious production of thin sputum, and severe and forceful cough (although the absence of cough does
not eliminate the risk of TBI). Environmental factors such as poor air
circulation enhance transmission. Within several days to 2 weeks after
beginning adequate chemotherapy, most adults no longer transmit the
organism, but some patients remain infectious for many weeks. Young
children with TB rarely infect other children or adults; tubercle bacilli
are sparse in their endobronchial secretions, and cough is often absent
or lacks the tussive force required to suspend infectious particles of the
correct size. However, adolescents often present with adult-­type cavity
or endobronchial TB and can easily transmit the organism.
Airborne transmission of M. bovis and M. africanum also occurs
rarely. M. bovis can penetrate the gastrointestinal (GI) mucosa or
invade the lymphatic tissue of the oropharynx when large numbers
of the organism are ingested. Human infection with M. bovis is
rare in developed countries as a result of the pasteurization of milk
and effective TB control programs for cattle. Approximately 46%
of culture-­proven childhood TB cases from the San Diego, California, region since 1994 were caused by M. bovis, likely acquired by
children when visiting Mexico or another country or consuming
dairy products from countries with suboptimal veterinary TB control programs.
Zoonotic transmission is an uncommon source of M. tuberculosis
that has been reported in adults exposed to elephants and potentially
cattle.

PATHOGENESIS

The primary complex (or Ghon complex) of TB includes local infection at the portal of entry and the regional lymph nodes that drain
the area. The lung is the portal of entry in >98% of cases. The tubercle
bacilli multiply initially within alveoli and alveolar ducts. Most of the
bacilli are killed, but some survive within nonactivated macrophages,
which carry them through lymphatic vessels to the regional lymph
nodes. When the primary infection is in the lung, the hilar lymph
nodes usually are involved, although an upper lobe focus can drain
into paratracheal nodes. The tissue reaction in the lung parenchyma
and lymph nodes intensifies over the next 2-­12 weeks as the organisms
grow in number and tissue hypersensitivity develops. The parenchymal portion of the primary complex often heals completely by fibrosis
or calcification after undergoing caseous necrosis and encapsulation
(Fig. 261.6). Occasionally, this portion continues to enlarge, resulting
in focal pneumonitis and pleuritis. If caseation is intense, the center of
the lesion liquefies and empties into the associated bronchus, leaving a
residual cavity.

Fig. 261.6 Posteroanterior (A) and

A

B

lateral (B) chest radiographs of an adolescent showing a 7-­mm calcified granuloma in the left lower lobe (arrows).
(From Lighter J, Rigaud M. Diagnosing
childhood tuberculosis: traditional and
innovative modalities. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. 2009;39:55–
88.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

A

1839

B

Fig. 261.7 A 14-­yr-­old child with proven primary tuberculosis. Frontal
(A) and lateral (B) views of the chest show hyperinflation, prominent left
hilar lymphadenopathy, and alveolar consolidation involving the posterior segment of the left upper lobe and the superior segment of the
left lower lobe. (From Hilton SVW, Edwards DK, eds. Practical Pediatric
Radiology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003:334.)

Fig. 261.9 Right-­sided hilar lymphadenopathy and collapse-­consolidation

lesions of primary tuberculosis in a 4-­yr-­old child. (From Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH (eds). Red Book: 2021-2024 Report of the
Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy
of Pediatrics, 2021. p 805-806; with data from Furin J, Seddon J, Becerra
M, et al. Management of Multi-drug-Resistant Tuberculosis Children: A Field
Guide, 4th ed. Boston: The Sentinel Project for Pediatric Drug-Resistant
Tuberculosis, 2019. Available at: http://sentinel-project.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Updated_DRTB-Field-Guide-2019-V3.pdf)

Fig. 261.8 An 8-­yr-­old child with a history of cough. A single frontal view
of the chest shows marked right hilar and paratracheal lymphadenopathy
with alveolar disease involving the right middle and lower lung fields. This
was also a case of primary tuberculosis. (From Hilton SVW, Edwards DK, eds.
Practical Pediatric Radiology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003:335.)

The foci of infection in the regional lymph nodes develop some
fibrosis and encapsulation, but healing is usually less complete than
in the parenchymal lesion. Viable M. tuberculosis can persist for
decades within these foci. In most cases of initial TBI, the lymph nodes
remain normal in size. However, hilar and paratracheal lymph nodes
that enlarge significantly as part of the host inflammatory reaction
can encroach on a regional bronchus (Figs. 261.7 and 261.8). Partial obstruction of the bronchus caused by external compression can
cause hyperinflation in the distal lung segment. Complete obstruction
results in atelectasis. Inflamed caseous nodes can attach to the bronchial wall and erode through it, causing endobronchial TB or a fistula
tract. The caseum causes complete obstruction of the bronchus. The
resulting lesion is a combination of pneumonitis and atelectasis and
has been called a collapse-­consolidation lesion or segmental lesion
(Fig. 261.9).
During the development of the primary complex, tubercle bacilli are
carried to most tissues of the body through the blood and lymphatic
vessels. Although seeding of the organs of the reticuloendothelial system is common, bacterial replication is more likely to occur in organs
with conditions that favor their growth, such as the lung apices, brain,
kidneys, and bones. Disseminated tuberculosis occurs if the number
of circulating bacilli is large and the host’s cellular immune response
is inadequate. More often, the number of bacilli is small, leading to

clinically inapparent metastatic foci in many organs. These remote foci
usually become encapsulated, but they may be the origin of both extrapulmonary tuberculosis and reactivation pulmonary tuberculosis.
The time between initial infection and clinically apparent TB disease
is variable. Disseminated and meningeal TB are early manifestations,
often occurring within 2-­6 months of acquisition. Significant lymph
node or endobronchial TB usually appears within 3-­9 months. Lesions
of the bones and joints take several years to develop, whereas renal
lesions become evident decades after infection. Extrapulmonary manifestations are more common in children than in adults and develop in
25–35% of children with TB vs approximately 10% of immunocompetent adults.
Pulmonary TB that occurs >1 year after the primary infection is usually caused by endogenous regrowth of bacilli persisting in partially
encapsulated lesions. This reactivation TB is rare in young children
but is common among adolescents and young adults. The most common form is an infiltrate or cavity in the apex of the upper lobes, where
oxygen tension and blood flow are highest.
The risk for dissemination of M. tuberculosis is very high in persons
living with HIV. Reinfection also can occur in persons with advanced
HIV or AIDS. In immunocompetent persons, the response to the initial infection with M. tuberculosis usually provides protection against
reinfection when a new exposure occurs. However, exogenous reinfection has been reported to occur in adults and children without immune
compromise in highly endemic areas.

Immunity

Conditions that adversely affect cell-­mediated immunity predispose to
progression from TBI to disease. Rare specific genetic defects (Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease [MSMD]) associated with
deficient cell-­mediated immunity in response to mycobacteria include
interleukin (IL)-­12 receptor B1 deficiency TYK2 pathogenic gene variants; ∼15 other genes associated with primary immunodeficiencies
such as NEMO, STAT1, JAK1, and RORC; and complete and partial
interferon (IFN)-­γ receptor 1 chain deficiencies. TBI is associated with
a humoral antibody response, which plays a little known role in host
defense. Shortly after infection, tubercle bacilli replicate in both free
alveolar spaces and inactivated alveolar macrophages. Sulfatides in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1840 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
MI

Lysis

IFNJ

CD8
CTL

Lysis
Protection

IFNJ

Solid
granuloma

CD8
TM

CD8
Teff

CD8
TM

Latent
infection

M. tuberculosis
PRR

Exhaustion

Cross-priming

CD8

MI
MHC I

MI

PNG

T MI

MI

Protection

T
DC
MHC II

IL17

IFNJ

Th17

Th1

CD4
M. tuberculosis

MHC II

IL2 IFNJ TNF
Th1
TM

CD4

Caseous
granuloma

PRR

CD4
Teff
DC
MHC I
Th2

Treg
Suppression

Direct presentation

CD8
IL4

IL10
TGF

Active
disease

B

Fig. 261.10 Overview of the immune response in tuberculosis. Control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is mainly the result of productive teamwork

between T-­cell populations and macrophages (Mø). M. tuberculosis survives within macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs) inside the phagosomal
compartment. Gene products of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II are loaded with mycobacterial peptides that are presented to CD4
T cells. CD8 T-­cell stimulation requires loading of MHC I molecules by mycobacterial peptides in the cytosol, either by egression of mycobacterial
antigens into the cytosol or cross-­priming, by which macrophages release apoptotic bodies carrying mycobacterial peptides. These vesicles are
taken up by DCs and peptides presented. The CD4 T-­helper (Th) cells polarize into different subsets. DCs and macrophages express pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which sense molecular patterns on pathogens. Th1 cells produce interleukin (IL)-­2 for T-­cell activation, interferon-­γ (IFN-­γ), or
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) for macrophage activation. Th17 cells, which activate polymorphonuclear granulocytes (PNGs), contribute to the early
formation of protective immunity in the lung after vaccination. Th2 cells and regulatory T cells (Treg) counterregulate Th1-­mediated protection via
IL-­4, transforming growth factor-­β (TGF-­β), or IL-­10. CD8 T cells produce IFN-­γ and TNF, which activate macrophages. They also act as cytolytic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) by secreting perforin and granulysin, which lyse host cells and directly attack M. tuberculosis. These effector T cells (Teff) are
succeeded by memory T cells (TM). TM cells produce multiple cytokines, notably IL2, IFN-­γ, and TNF. During active containment in solid granuloma,
M. tuberculosis recesses into a dormant stage and is immune to attack. Exhaustion of T cells is mediated by interactions between T cells and DCs
through members of the programmed death 1 system. Treg cells secrete IL-­10 and TGF-­β, which suppress Th1. This process allows resuscitation of
M. tuberculosis, which leads to granuloma caseation and active disease. B, B cell. (From Kaufman SHE, Hussey G, Lambert PH. New vaccines for
tuberculosis. Lancet. 2010;375:2110–2118.)

mycobacterial cell wall inhibit fusion of the macrophage phagosome
and lysosomes, allowing the organisms to escape destruction by intracellular enzymes. Cell-­mediated immunity develops 2-­12 weeks after
infection, along with tissue hypersensitivity (Fig. 261.10). After bacilli
enter macrophages, lymphocytes that recognize mycobacterial antigens
proliferate and secrete lymphokines and other mediators that attract
other lymphocytes and macrophages to the area. Certain lymphokines
activate macrophages, causing them to develop high concentrations of
lytic enzymes that enhance their mycobactericidal capacity. A discrete
subset of regulator helper and suppressor lymphocytes modulates the
immune response. Development of specific cellular immunity prevents
progression of the initial infection in most persons.
The pathologic events in the initial TBI seem to depend on the balance among the mycobacterial antigen load; cell-­mediated immunity
(which enhances intracellular killing); and tissue hypersensitivity,
which promotes extracellular killing. When the antigen load is small
and the degree of tissue sensitivity is high, granuloma formation results
from the organization of lymphocytes, macrophages, and fibroblasts.
When both antigen load and degree of sensitivity are high, granuloma

formation is less organized. Tissue necrosis is incomplete, resulting in
formation of caseous material. When the degree of tissue sensitivity
is low, as often occurs in infants or immunocompromised persons,
the reaction is diffuse and the infection is not well contained, leading
to dissemination and local tissue destruction. Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) and other cytokines released by specific lymphocytes promote
cellular destruction and tissue damage in susceptible persons.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Primary Pulmonary Disease

The primary complex includes the parenchymal pulmonary focus
and the regional lymph nodes. Approximately 70% of lung foci are
subpleural, and localized pleurisy is common. The initial parenchymal
inflammation usually is not visible on chest radiograph, but a localized, nonspecific infiltrate may be seen before the development of tissue hypersensitivity. All lobar segments of the lung are at equal risk
for initial infection. Two or more primary foci are present in 25% of
cases. The hallmark of primary TB in the lung is the relatively large size
of the regional lymphadenitis compared with the relatively small size

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

1841

Fig. 261.11 Posteroanterior (A) and

A

lateral (B) chest radiographs of an infant with miliary tuberculosis. The
child’s mother had failed to complete
treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis
twice within 3 years of this child’s birth.

B

of the initial lung focus (see Figs. 261.7 and 261.8). As delayed-­type
hypersensitivity develops, the hilar lymph nodes continue to enlarge in
some children, especially infants, compressing the regional bronchus
and causing obstruction. The usual sequence is hilar lymphadenopathy,
focal hyperinflation, and then atelectasis. The resulting radiographic
shadows have been called collapse-­consolidation or segmental TB (see
Fig. 261.9). Rarely, inflamed caseous nodes attach to the endobronchial
wall and erode through it, causing endobronchial TB or a fistula tract.
The caseum causes complete obstruction of the bronchus, resulting in
extensive infiltrate and collapse. Enlargement of the subcarinal lymph
nodes can cause compression of the esophagus and, rarely, a bronchoesophageal fistula.
Most cases of tuberculous bronchial obstruction in children resolve
fully with appropriate treatment. Occasionally, there is residual calcification of the primary focus or regional lymph nodes. The appearance
of calcification implies that the lesion has been present for at least 6-­12
months. Healing of the segment can be complicated by scarring or contraction associated with cylindrical bronchiectasis, but this is rare.
Children can have lobar TB pneumonia without impressive hilar
lymphadenopathy. If the primary infection is progressively destructive,
liquefaction of the lung parenchyma can lead to formation of a thin-­
walled primary TB cavity. Rarely, bullous tuberculous lesions occur
in the lungs and lead to pneumothorax if they rupture. Erosion of a
parenchymal focus of TB into a blood or lymphatic vessel can result in
dissemination of the bacilli and a miliary pattern, with small nodules
evenly distributed on the chest radiograph (Fig. 261.11).
The symptoms and physical signs of primary pulmonary TB in children are surprisingly meager considering the degree of radiographic
changes often present. When active case finding is performed, up to
50% of infants and children with radiographically moderate to severe
pulmonary TB have no physical findings. Infants are more likely to
experience signs and symptoms. Nonproductive cough and mild dyspnea are the most common symptoms. Systemic complaints such as
fever, night sweats, anorexia, and decreased activity occur less often.
Some infants have difficulty gaining weight or develop a true failure-­to-­
thrive syndrome that often does not improve significantly until several
months of effective treatment have been taken. Pulmonary signs are
even less common. Some infants and young children with bronchial
obstruction have localized wheezing or decreased breath sounds that
may be accompanied by tachypnea or, rarely, respiratory distress. These
pulmonary symptoms and signs are occasionally alleviated by antibiotics, suggesting bacterial superinfection.

Progressive Primary Pulmonary Disease

A rare but serious complication of TB in a child occurs when the primary
focus enlarges steadily and develops a large caseous center. Liquefaction
can cause formation of a primary cavity associated with large numbers
of tubercle bacilli. The enlarging focus can slough necrotic debris into
the adjacent bronchus, leading to further intrapulmonary dissemination.

Significant signs or symptoms are common in locally progressive disease
in children. High fever, severe cough with sputum production, weight
loss, and night sweats are common. Physical signs include diminished
breath sounds, rales, and dullness or egophony over the cavity. The prognosis for full recovery is excellent with appropriate therapy.

Reactivation Tuberculosis

Pulmonary TB in adults usually represents endogenous reactivation of
a site of TBI established previously in the body. This form of TB is rare
in childhood but can occur in adolescence. Children with a healed TBI
acquired when they were <2 years old rarely develop chronic reactivation pulmonary disease, which is more common in those who acquire
the initial infection when they are >7 years old. The most common
pulmonary sites are the original parenchymal focus, lymph nodes, and
the apical seedings (Simon foci) established during the hematogenous
phase of the early infection. This form of TB disease usually remains
localized in the lungs, because the established immune response prevents further extrapulmonary spread. The most common radiographic
findings are extensive infiltrates and thick-­walled cavities in the upper
lobes.
Older children and adolescents with reactivation TB are more likely
to experience fever, anorexia, malaise, weight loss, night sweats, productive cough, hemoptysis, and chest pain than children with primary
pulmonary TB. However, physical examination findings usually are
minor or absent, even when cavities or large infiltrates are present.
Most signs and symptoms improve within several weeks of starting
effective treatment, although the cough can last for several months.
This form of TB may be highly contagious if there is significant sputum
production and cough. The prognosis for full recovery is excellent with
appropriate therapy.

Pleural Effusion

Tuberculous pleural effusions, which can be local or general, originate in the discharge of bacilli into the pleural space from a subpleural
pulmonary focus or caseated lymph node. Asymptomatic local pleural effusion is so common in primary TB that it is considered part of
the primary complex. Larger and clinically significant effusions occur
months to years after the primary infection. Tuberculous pleural effusion is uncommon in children <6 years old and rare in children <2
years old. Effusions are usually unilateral but can be bilateral. They are
rarely associated with a segmental pulmonary lesion and are uncommon in disseminated TB. Often the radiographic abnormality is more
extensive than would be suggested by physical findings or symptoms
(Fig. 261.12).
Clinical onset of tuberculous pleurisy is often sudden and characterized by low to high fever, shortness of breath, chest pain on deep
inspiration, and diminished breath sounds. The fever and other symptoms can last for several weeks after the start of antituberculosis chemotherapy. The TST is positive in 70–80% of cases. The prognosis is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1842 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

The most common form of cardiac TB is pericarditis. It is rare, occurring in 0.5–4% of TB cases in children. Pericarditis usually arises from
direct invasion or lymphatic drainage from subcarinal lymph nodes.
The presenting symptoms are nonspecific, including low-­grade fever,
malaise, and weight loss. Chest pain is unusual in children. A pericardial friction rub or distant heart sounds with pulsus paradoxus may be
present. The pericardial fluid is typically serofibrinous or hemorrhagic.
Acid-­fast smear of the fluid rarely reveals the organism, but cultures
are positive in 30–70% of cases. ADA levels are elevated in TB pericarditis. The culture yield from pericardial biopsy may be higher, and the
presence of granulomas often suggests the diagnosis. Partial or complete pericardiectomy may be required when constrictive pericarditis
develops.

into the bloodstream. Multiple organ involvement is common, leading
to hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, lymphadenitis in superficial or deep
nodes, and papulonecrotic tuberculids appearing on the skin. Bones
and joints or kidneys also can become involved. Meningitis occurs
only late in the course of the disease. Early pulmonary involvement
is surprisingly mild, but diffuse involvement becomes apparent with
prolonged infection.
The most clinically significant form of disseminated TB is miliary
disease, which occurs when massive numbers of tubercle bacilli are
released into the bloodstream, causing disease in two or more organs.
Miliary tuberculosis usually complicates the primary infection, occurring within 2-­6 months of the initial infection. Although this form of
disease is most common in infants and young children, it is also found
in adolescents and older adults, resulting from the breakdown of a previously healed primary pulmonary lesion. The clinical manifestations
of miliary TB are protean, depending on the number of organisms that
disseminate and where they lodge. Lesions are often larger and more
numerous in the lungs, spleen, liver, and bone marrow than in other
tissues. Because this form of TB is most common in infants and malnourished or immunosuppressed patients, the host’s immune incompetence likely plays a role in pathogenesis.
Rarely, the onset of miliary TB is explosive, and the patient can
become gravely ill in several days. More often, the onset is insidious,
with early systemic signs, including anorexia, weight loss, and low-­
grade fever. At this time, abnormal physical signs are usually absent.
Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly develop
within several weeks in approximately 50% of cases. The fever can then
become higher and more sustained, although the chest radiograph usually is normal and respiratory symptoms are minor or absent. Within
several more weeks, the lungs can become filled with tubercles, and
dyspnea, cough, rales, or wheezing occur. The lesions of miliary TB
are usually <2-­3 mm in diameter when first visible on chest radiograph
(see Fig. 261.11). The smaller lesions coalesce to form larger lesions and
sometimes extensive infiltrates. As the pulmonary disease progresses,
an alveolar air block syndrome can result in frank respiratory distress,
hypoxia, and pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum. Signs or symptoms of meningitis or peritonitis are found in 20–40% of patients with
advanced disease. Chronic or recurrent headache in a patient with
miliary TB usually indicates the presence of meningitis, whereas the
onset of abdominal pain or tenderness is a sign of tuberculous peritonitis. Cutaneous lesions include papulonecrotic tuberculids, nodules, or
purpura. Choroid tubercles occur in 13–87% of patients and are highly
specific for the diagnosis of miliary TB. Unfortunately, the TST is nonreactive in up to 40% of patients with disseminated TB.
Diagnosis of disseminated TB can be difficult, and a high index of
suspicion by the clinician is required. Often the patient presents with
fever of unknown origin (FUO). Early sputum or gastric aspirate cultures have a low sensitivity. Biopsy of the liver or bone marrow with
appropriate bacteriologic and histologic examinations more often
yields an early diagnosis. The most important clue is usually a history
of recent exposure to an adult with infectious TB.
The resolution of miliary TB is slow, even with proper therapy. Fever
usually declines within 2-­3 weeks of starting chemotherapy, but the
chest radiographic abnormalities might not resolve for many months.
Occasionally, corticosteroids hasten symptomatic relief, especially
when air block, peritonitis, or meningitis is present. The prognosis is
excellent with early diagnosis and adequate chemotherapy.

Lymphohematogenous (Disseminated) Disease

Upper Respiratory Tract Disease

Fig. 261.12 Pleural tuberculosis in 16-­yr-­old female.
excellent, but radiographic resolution often takes months. Scoliosis is a
rare complication from a long-­standing effusion.
Examination of pleural fluid and the pleural membrane is important
to establish the diagnosis of tuberculous pleurisy. The pleural fluid is
usually yellow and only occasionally tinged with blood. The specific
gravity is usually 1.012-­1.025, the protein level is usually 2-­4 g/dL, and
the glucose concentration may be low, although it is usually in the low-­
normal range (20-­40 mg/dL). Typically, there are several hundred to
several thousand white blood cells per microliter (WBCs/μL), with an
early predominance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) followed by a high percentage of lymphocytes. Acid-­fast smears of the
pleural fluid are rarely positive. Cultures of the fluid are positive in
<30% of cases. Measurement of adenosine deaminase (ADA) levels
may enhance the diagnosis of pleural TB. Biopsy of the pleural membrane is more likely to yield a positive acid-­fast stain or culture, and
granuloma formation can be demonstrated.

Pericardial Disease

Tubercle bacilli are disseminated to distant sites, including the liver,
spleen, skin, and lung apices, in all cases of TBI. Lymphohematogenous
spread is usually asymptomatic. Rare patients experience protracted
hematogenous TB caused by the intermittent release of tubercle bacilli
as a caseous focus erodes through the wall of a blood vessel in the lung.
The clinical picture subsequent to lymphohematogenous dissemination depends on the burden of organisms released from the primary
focus to distant sites and the adequacy of the host’s immune response.
Although the clinical picture may be acute, more often it is indolent and
prolonged, with spiking fever accompanying the release of organisms

TB of the upper respiratory tract is rare in developed countries but
is still observed in developing countries. Children with laryngeal TB
have a crouplike cough, sore throat, hoarseness, and dysphagia. Most
children with laryngeal TB have extensive upper lobe pulmonary disease, but occasional patients have primary laryngeal disease with a
normal chest radiograph. TB of the middle ear results from aspiration
of infected pulmonary secretions into the middle ear or from hematogenous dissemination in older children. The most common signs and
symptoms are painless unilateral otorrhea, tinnitus, decreased hearing,
facial paralysis, and a perforated tympanic membrane. Enlargement of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

1843

Fig. 261.15 Scrofula. Tuberculous lymphadenitis with fistula in 4-­yr-­old
male associated with scrofuloderma (arrows). (From Pereira C, Cascais
M, Felix M, Salgado M. Scrofula in a child. J Pediatr. 2017;189:235.)

Fig. 261.13 Scrofula. Axial CT image of the neck in 8-­yr-­old male

shows calcified right cervical lymphadenopathy (black arrow) and tonsillar swelling (white arrow). (From Lighter J, Rigaud M. Diagnosing childhood tuberculosis: traditional and innovative modalities. Curr Probl
Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. 2009;39:55–88.)

A

B

Fig. 261.14 Scrofula. A, Ulcerative lesion 3.2 × 2.1 cm with under-

mined edges and necrotic base with surrounding induration. B, Acid-­
fast bacilli. (From Sharawat IK. Scrofula. J Pediatr. 2017;189:236.)

lymph nodes in the preauricular or anterior cervical chains can accompany this infection. Diagnosis is difficult, because stains and cultures
of ear fluid are often negative, and histology of the affected tissue often
shows a nonspecific acute and chronic inflammation without granuloma formation.

Lymph Node Disease

TB of the superficial lymph nodes, often referred to as scrofula, is the
most common form of extrapulmonary TB in children (Figs. 261.13-­
261.15). Historically, scrofula was usually caused by drinking unpasteurized cow’s milk laden with M. bovis. Most current cases occur
within 6-­9 months of initial infection by M. tuberculosis, although some
cases appear years later. The tonsillar, anterior cervical, submandibular,
and supraclavicular nodes become involved secondary to extension of
a primary lesion of the upper lung fields or abdomen. Infected nodes
in the inguinal, epitrochlear, or axillary regions result from regional

lymphadenitis associated with TB of the skin or skeletal system. The
nodes usually enlarge gradually in the early stages of lymph node disease. They are discrete, nontender, and firm but not hard. The nodes
often feel fixed to underlying or overlying tissue. Disease is most often
unilateral, but bilateral involvement can occur because of the crossover drainage patterns of lymphatic vessels in the chest and lower neck.
As infection progresses, multiple nodes are infected, resulting in a mass
of matted nodes. Systemic signs and symptoms other than a low-­grade
fever are usually absent. The TST is usually reactive. The chest radiograph is often normal (in 70% of cases). The onset of illness is occasionally more acute, with rapid enlargement, tenderness, and fluctuance of
lymph nodes and with high fever. The initial presentation is rarely a
fluctuant mass with overlying cellulitis or skin discoloration.
Lymph node TB can resolve if left untreated but more often progresses to caseation and necrosis. The capsule of the node breaks down,
resulting in the spread of infection to adjacent nodes. Rupture of the
node usually results in a draining sinus tract that can require surgical removal. Tuberculous lymphadenitis can usually be diagnosed by
fine-­needle aspiration (FNA) of the node and responds well to antituberculosis therapy, although the lymph nodes do not return to normal
size for months or even years. Surgical removal is not usually necessary
and must be combined with antituberculosis medication, because the
lymph node disease is only one part of a systemic infection.
A definitive diagnosis of tuberculous adenitis usually requires histologic, bacteriologic, or molecular confirmation, which is best accomplished by FNA for culture, molecular testing, stain, and histology. If
FNA is not successful in establishing a diagnosis, excisional biopsy of
the involved node is indicated. Culture of lymph node tissue yields
the organism in only approximately 50% of cases. Many other conditions can be confused with tuberculous adenitis, including infection
caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), cat scratch disease
(Bartonella henselae), tularemia, brucellosis, toxoplasmosis, pyogenic
infection, or noninfectious causes, including tumor, branchial cleft
cyst, and cystic hygroma. The most common problem is distinguishing infection caused by M. tuberculosis from lymphadenitis caused by
NTM in geographic areas where NTM are common. Both conditions
are usually associated with a normal chest radiograph and a reactive
TST. An important clue to the diagnosis of tuberculous adenitis is an
epidemiologic link to an adult with infectious TB. In areas where both
diseases are common, culture or PCR testing of the involved tissue may
be necessary to establish the exact cause of the disease.

Central Nervous System Disease

TB of the central nervous system (CNS) is the most serious complication in children and is fatal without prompt and appropriate treatment.
Tuberculous meningitis usually arises from the formation of a metastatic caseous lesion in the cerebral cortex or meninges that develops

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1844 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
during the lymphohematogenous dissemination of the primary infection. This initial lesion increases in size and discharges small numbers
of tubercle bacilli into the subarachnoid space. The resulting gelatinous exudate infiltrates the corticomeningeal blood vessels, producing
inflammation, obstruction, and subsequent infarction of the cerebral
cortex. The brainstem is often the site of greatest involvement, which
accounts for the commonly associated dysfunction of cranial nerves
III, VI, and VII. The exudate also interferes with the normal flow of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in and out of the ventricular system at the
level of the basilar cisterns, leading to a communicating hydrocephalus. The combination of vasculitis, infarction, cerebral edema, and
hydrocephalus results in the severe damage that can occur gradually
or rapidly. Profound abnormalities in electrolyte metabolism from salt
wasting or the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) also contribute to the pathophysiology of tuberculous
meningitis.
Tuberculous meningitis complicates approximately 0.3% of
untreated TBIs in children. It is most common in children 6 months
to 4 years old. Occasionally, tuberculous meningitis occurs many years
after the infection, when rupture of one or more of the subependymal tubercles discharges tubercle bacilli into the subarachnoid space.
The clinical progression of tuberculous meningitis may be rapid or
gradual. Rapid progression tends to occur more often in infants and
young children, who can experience symptoms for only several days
before the onset of acute hydrocephalus, seizures, and cerebral edema.
More often, the signs and symptoms progress slowly over weeks and
are divided into three stages.
The first stage typically lasts 1-­2 weeks and is characterized by nonspecific symptoms such as fever, headache, irritability, drowsiness, and
malaise. Focal neurologic signs are absent, but infants can experience
a stagnation or loss of developmental milestones. The second stage
usually begins more abruptly. The most common features are lethargy,
nuchal rigidity, seizures, positive Kernig and Brudzinski signs, hypertonia, vomiting, cranial nerve palsies, and other focal neurologic signs.
The accelerating clinical illness usually correlates with the development of hydrocephalus, increased intracranial pressure, and vasculitis.
Some children have no evidence of meningeal irritation but can have
signs of encephalitis, such as disorientation, movement disorders, or
speech impairment. The third stage is marked by coma, hemiplegia or
paraplegia, hypertension, decerebrate posturing, deterioration of vital
signs, and eventually death.
The prognosis of tuberculous meningitis correlates most closely with
the clinical stage of illness at the time treatment is initiated. The majority of patients in the first stage have an excellent outcome, whereas
most patients in the third stage who survive have permanent disabilities, including blindness, deafness, paraplegia, diabetes insipidus, or
mental retardation. The prognosis for young infants is generally worse
than for older children. It is imperative that antituberculosis treatment be considered for any child who develops basilar meningitis and
hydrocephalus, cranial nerve palsy, or stroke with no other apparent
etiology. Often the key to the correct diagnosis is identifying an adult
who has infectious TB and is in contact with the child. Because of the
short incubation period of tuberculous meningitis, the illness has not
yet been diagnosed in the adult in many cases.
The diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis can be difficult early in its
course, requiring a high degree of suspicion on the part of the clinician.
The TST is nonreactive in up to 50% of cases, and 20–50% of children
have a normal chest radiograph. The most important laboratory test for
the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis is examination and culture of
the lumbar CSF. The CSF leukocyte count usually ranges from 10 to 500
cells/μL. PMNs may be present initially, but lymphocytes predominate
in the majority of cases. The CSF glucose is typically <40 mg/dL but
rarely <20 mg/dL. The protein level is elevated and may be extremely
high (400-­5,000 mg/dL) secondary to hydrocephalus and spinal block.
Although the lumbar CSF is grossly abnormal, ventricular CSF can
have normal chemistries and cell counts because this fluid is obtained
from a site proximal to the inflammation and obstruction. During early
stage one, the CSF can resemble that of viral aseptic meningitis, only to
progress to the more severe CSF profile over several weeks. The success

of the microscopic examination of acid-­fast–stained CSF and mycobacterial culture is related directly to the volume of the CSF sample.
Examinations or culture of small amounts of CSF are unlikely to demonstrate M. tuberculosis. It is recommended that serial collections of
large-­volume lumbar CSF (up to 15 mL) be obtained for acid-­fast stain
and culture. When 5-­10 mL of lumbar CSF can be obtained, the acid-­
fast stain of the CSF sediment is positive in up to 30% of cases and
the culture is positive in 50–70% of cases. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing of the CSF and ADA levels can improve the diagnosis.
Cultures of other body fluids can help confirm the diagnosis.
Radiographic studies can aid in the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis. CT or MRI of the brain of patients with tuberculous meningitis
may be normal during early stages of the disease. As the disease progresses, basilar enhancement and communicating hydrocephalus with
signs of cerebral edema or early focal ischemia are the most common
findings (Fig. 261.16). Some young children with tuberculous meningitis have one or several clinically silent tuberculomas, occurring most
often in the cerebral cortex or thalamic regions.
Another manifestation of CNS TB is the tuberculoma, a tumor-­
like mass resulting from aggregation of caseous tubercles that usually
manifests clinically as a brain tumor. Tuberculomas account for up to
30% of brain tumors in some areas of the world but are rare in North
America. In adults, tuberculomas are most often supratentorial, but in
children, they are often infratentorial, located at the base of the brain
near the cerebellum (Fig. 261.17). Lesions are most often singular but
may be multiple. The most common symptoms are headache, fever,
focal neurologic findings, and convulsions. The TST is usually reactive, but the chest radiograph is usually normal. Surgical excision is
sometimes necessary to distinguish tuberculoma from other causes
of brain tumor. However, surgical removal is not necessary because
most tuberculomas resolve with medical management. Corticosteroids are administered during the first few weeks of treatment or in the
immediate postoperative period to decrease cerebral edema. On CT
or MRI of the brain, tuberculomas usually appear as discrete lesions
with a significant amount of surrounding edema. Contrast medium
enhancement is often impressive and can result in a ringlike lesion.
Since the advent of CT, the paradoxical development of tuberculomas
in patients with tuberculous meningitis who are receiving ultimately
effective chemotherapy has been recognized. The cause and nature of
these tuberculomas are poorly understood, but they do not represent
failure of antimicrobial treatment. This phenomenon should be considered whenever a child with tuberculous meningitis deteriorates or
develops focal neurologic findings during treatment. Corticosteroids

A

B

Fig. 261.16 Tuberculous meningitis in a child. A and B, Postcontrast

CT images demonstrate intense enhancement in the suprasellar cistern,
sylvian cistern, and prepontine cistern. Dilation of the ventricular system
is seen, consistent with associated hydrocephalus. (From Lerner A, Rajamohan A, Shiroishi MS, et al. Cerebral infections and inflammation. In
Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig 10-­20.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

1845

Abdominal and Gastrointestinal Disease

Fig. 261.17 MRI of brain of 3-­yr-­old child showing multiple pontine
tuberculomas.

TB of the oral cavity or pharynx is quite unusual. The most common
lesion is a painless ulcer on the mucosa, palate, or tonsil with enlargement of the regional lymph nodes. TB of the parotid gland has been
reported rarely in endemic countries. TB of the esophagus is rare in
children but may be associated with a tracheoesophageal fistula in
infants. These forms of TB are usually associated with extensive pulmonary disease and swallowing of infectious respiratory secretions.
They can occur in the absence of pulmonary disease, by spread from
mediastinal or peritoneal lymph nodes.
Tuberculous peritonitis occurs most often in young males and is
uncommon in adolescents and rare in children. Generalized peritonitis can arise from subclinical or miliary hematogenous dissemination.
Localized peritonitis is caused by direct extension from an abdominal
lymph node, intestinal focus, or genitourinary TB. Rarely, the lymph
nodes, omentum, and peritoneum become matted and can be palpated
as a doughy, irregular, nontender mass. Abdominal pain or tenderness,
ascites, anorexia, and low-­grade fever are typical manifestations. The
TST is usually reactive. The diagnosis can be confirmed by paracentesis with appropriate stains and cultures, but this procedure must be
performed carefully to avoid entering a bowel that is adherent to the
omentum.
Tuberculous enteritis is caused by hematogenous dissemination or
by swallowing tubercle bacilli discharged from the patient’s own lungs.
The jejunum and ileum near Peyer patches and the appendix are the
most common sites of involvement. The typical findings are shallow
ulcers that cause pain, diarrhea or constipation, weight loss, and low-­
grade fever. Mesenteric adenitis usually complicates the infection. The
enlarged nodes can cause intestinal obstruction or erode through the
omentum to cause generalized peritonitis. The clinical presentation of
tuberculous enteritis is nonspecific, mimicking other infections and
conditions that cause diarrhea. The disease should be suspected in any
child with chronic GI complaints and a reactive TST or positive IGRA.
Biopsy, acid-­fast stain, and culture of the lesions are usually necessary
to confirm the diagnosis.

Genitourinary Disease

Fig. 261.18 Tuberculosis of the spine in a toddler. (From Feder HM
Jr, Rigos L, Teti K. Pott’s disease in a Connecticut toddler. Lancet.
2016;388:504–505.)

can alleviate the occasionally severe clinical signs and symptoms that
occur. These lesions can persist for months or years.

Cutaneous Disease

Cutaneous TB is rare in the United States but occurs worldwide and
accounts for 1–2% of tuberculosis (see Chapter 706).

Bone and Joint Disease

TB involving bone or joints is most likely to involve the vertebrae.
The classic manifestation of tuberculous spondylitis is progression
to Pott disease, in which destruction of the vertebral bodies leads
to gibbus deformity and kyphosis (Fig. 261.18) (see Chapter 720.4).
Skeletal tuberculosis is a late complication of TB and has become a
rare entity since the availability of antituberculosis therapy but is more
likely to occur in children than in adults. Tuberculous bone lesions can
resemble pyogenic and fungal infections or bone tumors. Multifocal
bone involvement can occur. A bone biopsy is essential to confirm the
diagnosis. Surgical intervention is generally not necessary for cure, and
the prognosis is excellent with adequate medical treatment. A sterile
polyarticular (large joint) arthritis may also be noted in patients with
active TB at another site.

Renal TB is rare in children because the incubation period is several
years or longer. Tubercle bacilli usually reach the kidney during lymphohematogenous dissemination. The organisms often can be recovered from the urine in cases of miliary TB and in some patients with
pulmonary TB in the absence of renal parenchymal disease. In true
renal TB, small caseous foci develop in the renal parenchyma and
release M. tuberculosis into the tubules. A large mass develops near the
renal cortex that discharges bacteria through a fistula into the renal pelvis. Infection then spreads locally to the ureters, prostate, or epididymis. Renal TB is often clinically silent in its early stages, marked only by
sterile pyuria and microscopic hematuria. Dysuria, flank or abdominal
pain, and gross hematuria develop as the disease progresses. Superinfection by other bacteria is common and can delay recognition of the
underlying TB. Hydronephrosis or ureteral strictures can complicate
the disease. Urine cultures for M. tuberculosis are positive in 80–90%
of cases, and acid-­fast stains of large volumes of urine sediment are
positive in 50–70% of cases. The TST is nonreactive in up to 20% of
patients. A pyelogram or CT scan often reveals mass lesions, dilation of
the proximal ureters, multiple small filling defects, and hydronephrosis
if ureteral stricture is present. Disease is most often unilateral.
Genital tract TB is uncommon in prepubescent males and females.
This condition usually originates from lymphohematogenous spread,
although it can be caused by direct spread from the intestinal tract or
bone. Adolescent females can develop genital tract TB during the primary infection. The fallopian tubes are most often involved (90–100%
of cases), followed by the endometrium (50%), ovaries (25%), and
cervix (5%). The most common symptoms are lower abdominal pain
and dysmenorrhea or amenorrhea. Systemic manifestations are usually
absent, and the chest radiograph is normal in the majority of cases.
The TST is usually reactive. Genital TB in adolescent males causes
epididymitis or orchitis. The condition usually manifests as a painless,
unilateral nodular swelling of the scrotum. Involvement of the glans

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1846 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
penis is extremely rare. Genital abnormalities and a positive TST in an
adolescent male or female suggest genital tract TB.

Pregnancy and the Newborn

Pulmonary and particularly extrapulmonary TB other than lymphadenitis in a pregnant woman is associated with increased risk for
prematurity, fetal growth retardation, low birthweight, and perinatal
mortality. Congenital TB is rare because the most common result of
female genital tract TB is infertility. Primary infection in the mother
just before or during pregnancy is more likely to cause congenital infection than is reactivation of a previous infection. Congenital
transmission usually occurs from a lesion in the placenta through the
umbilical vein, when tubercle bacilli infect the fetal liver, where a primary focus with periportal lymph node involvement can occur. Organisms pass through the liver into the main fetal circulation and infect
many organs. The bacilli in the lung usually remain dormant until after
birth, when oxygenation and pulmonary circulation increase significantly. Congenital TB can also be caused by aspiration or ingestion of
infected amniotic fluid. However, the most common route of infection
for the neonate is postnatal airborne transmission from an adult with
infectious pulmonary TB.

Perinatal Disease

Symptoms of congenital TB may be present at birth but usually begin
by the second or third week of life. The most common signs and symptoms are respiratory distress, fever, hepatic or splenic enlargement,
poor feeding, lethargy or irritability, lymphadenopathy, abdominal
distention, failure to thrive, ear drainage, and skin lesions. The clinical manifestations vary in relation to the site and size of the caseous
lesions. Many infants have an abnormal chest radiograph, most often
with a miliary pattern. Some infants with no pulmonary findings early
in the course of the disease later develop profound radiographic and
clinical abnormalities. Hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and
lung infiltrates are common. Generalized lymphadenopathy and meningitis occur in 30–50% of infants.
The clinical presentation of TB in newborns is similar to that
caused by bacterial sepsis and other congenital infections, such as
syphilis, toxoplasmosis, and cytomegalovirus. The diagnosis should
be suspected in an infant with signs and symptoms of bacterial or
congenital infection whose response to antibiotic and supportive
therapy is poor and in whom evaluation for other infections is unrevealing. The most important clue for rapid diagnosis of congenital TB
is a maternal or family history of TB. Often, the mother’s disease is
discovered only after the neonate’s diagnosis is suspected. The infant’s
TST is negative initially but can become positive in 1-­3 months. A
positive acid-­fast stain of an early morning gastric aspirate from a
newborn usually indicates TB. Direct acid-­fast stains on middle ear
discharge, bone marrow, tracheal aspirate, or tissue biopsy (especially
liver) can be useful. The CSF should be examined, cultured, and sent
for PCR testing. The mortality rate of congenital TB remains very
high because of delayed diagnosis. Many children have a complete
recovery if the diagnosis is made promptly and adequate chemotherapy is started.

Tuberculosis Disease in Children Living with HIV

In the United States, the rate of TB disease in children living with
untreated HIV is 30 times higher than in children without HIV. Establishing the diagnosis of TB in a child living with HIV may be difficult
because TST reactivity can be absent (also with a negative IGRA), culture confirmation is difficult, and the clinical features of TB are similar
to many other HIV-­related opportunistic infections and conditions. TB
in children living with HIV is often more severe, progressive, and likely
to occur in extrapulmonary sites. Radiographic findings are similar to
those in children with normal immune systems, but lobar disease and
lung cavitation are more common. Nonspecific respiratory symptoms,
fever, and weight loss are the most common complaints. Rates of drug-­
resistant TB tend to be higher in adults living with HIV and probably
are also higher in children living with HIV. Recurrent TB disease and
relapsed TB occur more frequently in children living with HIV. The

prognosis generally is good if TB disease is not far advanced at diagnosis and appropriate antituberculosis drugs are available.
The mortality rate of children living with HIV with TB is high, especially as the CD4 lymphocyte numbers decrease. In adults, the host
immune response to TBI appears to enhance HIV replication and
accelerate the immune suppression caused by HIV. Increased mortality rates are attributed to progressive HIV infection rather than TB.
Therefore children living with HIV with potential TB exposures and/
or recent TBI should be promptly evaluated and treated for TB. Conversely, all children with TB disease should be tested for HIV infection.
Children living with HIV who are given highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) are at high risk of developing immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). IRIS should be suspected in
patients who experience a worsening of TB symptoms while receiving
antituberculosis therapy (paradoxical IRIS) or who develop new-­onset
TB symptoms and radiographic findings after initiation of HAART
(unmasking IRIS). Factors suggesting IRIS are temporal association
(within 3 months of starting HAART), unusual clinical manifestations, unexpected clinical course, exclusion of alternative explanations,
evidence of preceding immune restoration (rise in CD4 lymphocyte
count), and decrease in HIV viral load. The most common clinical
manifestations of IRIS in children are fever, cough, new skin lesions,
enlarging lymph nodes in the thorax or neck, and appearance or
enlargement of tuberculomas in the brain, with or without accompanying meningitis. The treatment of TB-­associated IRIS in children living
with HIV often included steroids but should be undertaken by a clinician with specific expertise in TB treatment.

IMMUNE-­BASED TESTING (“TESTS OF
TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION”)
Tuberculin Skin Testing

The development of delayed-­type hypersensitivity in most persons
infected with the M. tuberculosis complex organisms makes the TST
a useful diagnostic tool. The Mantoux TST is the intradermal injection of 0.1 mL purified protein derivative stabilized with Tween 80. T
cells sensitized by prior infection are recruited to the skin, where they
release lymphokines that induce induration through local vasodilation,
edema, fibrin deposition, and recruitment of other inflammatory cells
to the area. The amount of induration in response to the test should
be measured by a trained person 48-­72 hours after administration. In
some patients, the onset of induration is >72 hours after placement;
this is also a positive result. Immediate hypersensitivity reactions to
tuberculin or other constituents of the preparation are short-­lived
(<24 hours) and not considered a positive result. Tuberculin sensitivity
develops 3 weeks to 3 months (most often in 4-­8 weeks) after inhalation of organisms.
Host-­
related factors, including very young age, malnutrition,
immunosuppression by disease or drugs, viral infections (measles,
mumps, varicella, influenza), vaccination with live-­virus vaccines,
and overwhelming TB, can depress the skin test reaction in a child
infected with M. tuberculosis. Corticosteroid therapy can decrease the
reaction to tuberculin, but the effect is variable; TST done at the time
of initiating corticosteroid therapy is usually reliable. Approximately
10% of immunocompetent children with TB disease (up to 50% of
those with meningitis or disseminated disease) do not react initially
to purified protein derivative; most become reactive after several
months of antituberculosis therapy. False-­positive reactions to tuberculin can be caused by cross-­sensitization to antigens of NTM, which
generally are more prevalent in the geographic environment as one
approaches the equator. These cross-­reactions are usually transient
over months to years and produce <10-­12 mm of induration, but
larger areas of induration can occur. Previous vaccination with bacille
Calmette-­Guérin (BCG) also can cause a reaction to a TST, especially
if a person has received two or more BCG vaccinations. Approximately 50% of the infants who receive a BCG vaccine never develop
a reactive TST, and the reactivity usually wanes in 2-­3 years in those
with initially positive skin test results. Older children and adults who
receive a BCG vaccine are more likely to develop tuberculin reactivity,
but most lose the reactivity by 5-­10 years after vaccination. However,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

1847

Table 261.2  Tuberculin Skin Test (TST) or Interferon-­γ
Release Assay (IGRA): Recommendations for
Infants, Children, and Adolescents*

Table 261.3  Definitions of Positive Tuberculin Skin
Test (TST) Results in Infants, Children, and
Adolescents*

CHILDREN FOR WHOM IMMEDIATE TST OR IGRA IS INDICATED†
Contacts of people with confirmed or suspected contagious
tuberculosis (contact investigation)
Children with radiographic or clinical findings suggesting
tuberculosis disease
Children immigrating from countries with endemic infection (e.g.,
Asia, Middle East, Africa, Latin America, countries from former
Soviet Union), including international adoptees
Children with travel histories to countries with endemic infection and
substantial contact with indigenous people from such countries‡
Children who should have annual TST or IGRA: Children infected
with human immunodeficiency virus

INDURATION ≥5 MM
Children in close contact with known or suspected contagious
people with tuberculosis disease
Children suspected to have tuberculosis disease:
• Findings on chest radiograph consistent with active or
previously tuberculosis disease
• Clinical evidence of tuberculosis disease†
Children receiving immunosuppressive therapy‡ or with
immunosuppressive conditions, including HIV infection

CHILDREN AT INCREASED RISK FOR PROGRESSION OF
TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION TO TUBERCULOSIS DISEASE
Children with other medical conditions, including diabetes mellitus,
chronic renal failure, malnutrition, and congenital or acquired
immunodeficiencies, and children receiving tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) antagonists deserve special consideration. Without recent
exposure, these children are not at increased risk of acquiring
tuberculosis infection. Underlying immune deficiencies associated
with these conditions theoretically would enhance the possibility
for progression to severe disease.
Initial histories of potential exposure to tuberculosis should be
included for all of these patients. If these histories or local
epidemiologic factors suggest a possibility of exposure, immediate
and periodic TST or IGRA should be considered.
An initial TST or IGRA should be performed before initiation of
immunosuppressive therapy, including prolonged corticosteroid
administration, organ transplantation, or use of TNF-­α
antagonists or blockers, or immunosuppressive therapy in any
child requiring these treatments.
*Bacille Calmette-­Guérin immunization is not a contraindication to a TST.
†Beginning as early as 3 mo of age.
‡If the child is well and has no history of exposure, the TST or IGRA should be delayed

up to 10 wk after return.
From Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024
Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American
Academy of Pediatrics; 2021:789.

some individuals maintain tuberculin reactivity from BCG vaccine
for many years. When present, skin test reactivity usually causes <10
mm of induration, although larger reactions occur in some persons.
The appropriate size of induration indicating a positive Mantoux TST
result varies with related epidemiologic and risk factors. In children
with no TB risk factors, skin test reactions are usually false-­positive
results. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) discourage routine testing of
all children and recommend targeted tuberculin testing of children
at risk identified through periodic screening questionnaires (Table
261.2). Possible exposure to an adult with or at high risk for infectious
pulmonary TB is the most crucial risk factor for children. Reaction size
limits for determining a positive TST result vary with the person’s risk
for infection (Table 261.3). In those at highest risk of progression to TB
disease, TST sensitivity is most important, whereas specificity is more
important for persons at low risk of progression.

Interferon-­γ Release Assay

Two blood tests—T-­SPOT.TB (Oxford Immunotec; Marlborough,
MA) and QuantiFERON-­TB Gold/Gold Plus (QFT, Qiagen; Germantown, MD) detect IFN-­γ generation by the patient’s T cells in
response to specific M. tuberculosis antigens (ESAT-­6, CFP-­10, and
TB7.7). The QFT test measures whole blood concentrations of IFN-­
γ, and the T-­SPOT.TB test measures the number of lymphocytes/
monocytes producing IFN-­γ. The test antigens are not present on
M. bovis–BCG (vaccine) and M. avium complex, the major group of
environmental mycobacteria, so one would expect higher specificity

INDURATION ≥10 MM
Children at increased risk of disseminated tuberculosis disease:
• Children <4 yr old
• Children with other medical conditions, including Hodgkin
disease, lymphoma, diabetes mellitus, chronic renal failure, or
malnutrition (see Table 261.2)
Children with increased exposure to tuberculosis disease:
• Children born in high-­prevalence regions of the world
• Children often exposed to adults with HIV infection, homeless,
users of illicit drugs, residents of nursing homes, incarcerated
or institutionalized, or migrant farm workers
• Children who travel to high-­prevalence regions of the world
INDURATION ≥15 MM
Children ≥4 yr old without any risk factors
*These definitions apply regardless of previous BCG immunization; erythema at TST
site does not indicate a positive test result. Tests should be read at 48-­72 hr after
placement.
†Evidence by physical examination or laboratory assessment that would include
tuberculosis in the working differential diagnosis (e.g., meningitis).
‡Including immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids or tumor necrosis factor-­α
antagonists.
BCG, Bacille Calmette-­Guérin; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
From Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024
Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American
Academy of Pediatrics; 2021:788.

compared with the TST and fewer false-­positive results. Both IGRAs
have internal positive and negative controls. Internal positive controls allow for detection of an anergic test response, which is useful
in children who are young and immunocompromised. Indeterminate
(QFT)/invalid (T-­SPOT.TB) responses occur when the test sample
is negative but the positive control has insufficient activity or if the
negative control has high background activity. Indeterminate/invalid
results are also caused by technical factors (e.g., insufficient shaking
of QFT tubes, delayed processing time). Most studies report indeterminate or invalid rates in children of 0–10%, which is influenced by
a child’s age and immune status. In children <2 years old, indeterminate rates can be as high as 8.1% vs 2.7% in older children, although
more recent studies generally report much lower rates. An indeterminate or invalid IGRA result is neither negative nor positive and cannot
be used to guide treatment decisions.
Some IGRAs cannot differentiate between TBI and TB disease. If
available, certain IGRA tests will test CD4 and CD8 T-­cell reactivity, which may help differentiate latent from active disease. Two clear
advantages of the IGRAs are the need for only one patient encounter
(vs two with TST) and the lack of cross-­reaction with BCG vaccination
and most other mycobacteria, thereby increasing test specificity for
TBI. Studies comparing IGRA and TST performance in children have
shown comparable sensitivity (85% in culture-­confirmed children)
between the two tests and superior IGRA specificity (95% vs 49%) in
BCG-­immunized, low-­risk children.
Neither the TST nor the IGRAs perform well in infants and young
children who are malnourished, severely immunocompromised, or
have disseminated TB disease. It is now standard to use an IGRA in the
evaluation of healthy young children ≥2 years of age, and most experts
use IGRAs in younger children who are at low risk of TB infection,
especially in those who have received a BCG vaccine. Both TST and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1848 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 261.4  Recommendations for Use of Tuberculin Skin
Test (TST) and Interferon-­γ Release Assay
(IGRA) in Children
TST preferred, IGRA acceptable:
• Children <2 yr of age*
IGRA preferred, TST acceptable:
• Children ≥2 yr of age who have received BCG vaccine
• Children ≥2 yr of age who are unlikely to return for TST reading
TST and IGRA should be considered when:
• The initial and repeat IGRAs are indeterminate or invalid
• The initial test (TST or IGRA) is negative and:
• Clinical suspicion for TB disease is moderate to high†
• The child has a TB risk factor and is at high risk of
progression and poor outcome (especially therapy with an
immunomodulating biologic agent, e.g., TNF-­α antagonist)†
• The initial TST is positive and:
• ≥2 yr old and history of BCG vaccination
• Additional evidence needed to increase adherence with
therapy
*Some experts do not use an IGRA for children younger than 2 yr because of a relative
lack of data for this age-­group and the high risk of progression to disease.
†Positive result of either test is considered significant in these groups.
BCG, Bacille Calmette-­Guérin; TB, tuberculosis, TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Adapted from Starke JR, AAP Committee of Infectious Diseases. Interferon-­γ release
assays for diagnosis of tuberculosis infection and disease in children. Pediatrics.
2014;134(6):e1763–1773.

IGRA testing should be considered in children whose initial TST or
IGRA result is negative for whom the risk of TB is high (to enhance the
sensitivity of the combination of the two tests).
Technical advantages of the IGRAs over the TST include the need
for a single patient encounter (vs two spaced in time with the TST),
the lack of cross-­reaction with BCG vaccination and most environmental mycobacteria, and eliminating the need for experience in
correctly interpreting the TST. IGRAs are also useful for those who
are unlikely to return for TST interpretation, those whose family is
reluctant to treat a child with TBI based on a TST result alone, and
those with a positive TST result in whom NTM disease is suspected
(Table 261.4).
Most studies have shown no consistent, significant difference
between the two commercially available IGRAs, and the CDC recommends no preference. Because of cost constraints, the WHO does not
endorse IGRA use in low-­and middle-­income countries, even in those
with a high prevalence of tuberculosis.

MYCOBACTERIAL SAMPLING, SUSCEPTIBILITY,
AND CULTURE

The most specific confirmation of pulmonary TB is isolation of M.
tuberculosis from a clinical sample. Sputum specimens for culture
should be collected from adolescents and older children who are able
to expectorate. Induced sputum with a jet nebulizer, inhaled saline,
and chest percussion followed by nasopharyngeal suctioning is effective in children as young as 1 year. Sputum induction provides samples
for both culture and acid-­fast bacilli (AFB) staining. The traditional
culture specimen in young children is the early morning gastric acid
obtained before the child has arisen and peristalsis has emptied the
stomach of the pooled respiratory secretions that have been swallowed
overnight. However, even under optimal conditions, three consecutive morning gastric aspirates yield the organisms in <50% of cases.
The culture yield from bronchoscopy is even lower, but this procedure
can demonstrate the presence of endobronchial disease or a fistula. To
improve the sensitivity of a diagnosis of TB in children, in high-­burden
TB settings, there is an increasing trend to collect nontraditional specimens, including stool, nasopharyngeal, and urine specimens. These
specimens are easier to obtain than respiratory specimens but less
sensitive in diagnosing TB in children compared to sputum or serial
gastric aspirate specimens. Their diagnostic utility is increased when
multiple specimens are collected in conjunction with traditional respiratory specimens. Negative cultures never exclude the diagnosis of TB

in a child. The presence of a positive TST or IGRA, an abnormal chest
radiograph consistent with TB, and history of recent exposure to an
adult with infectious TB is highly suggestive of the clinical diagnosis
of TB disease. If a likely adult source case has been identified, drug
susceptibility test results of the isolate from the adult source usually
can be used to determine the best therapeutic regimen for the child,
except in very high-­incidence areas, where the apparent source case
might not be the actual one. Cultures should be always obtained from
the child whenever the source case is unknown, there are multiple possible source cases, or the source case has possible or confirmed drug-­
resistant TB.
Confirmation of extrapulmonary TB is best achieved with a positive
culture or PCR testing. However, for many forms of TB, the culture
yield is only 25–50%, and probable diagnosis is by a combination of
clinical signs and symptoms, analysis of body fluids when possible,
radiographic or histopathologic evidence of TB, PCR testing, and elimination of other possible diagnoses.

Nucleic Acid Amplification Tests

The main NAAT studied in children with TB is PCR, which uses specific DNA sequences as markers for microorganisms. Compared with a
clinical diagnosis of pulmonary TB in children, the sensitivity of PCR
has varied from 25% to 83%, and specificity has varied from 80% to
100%. A negative PCR result never eliminates the diagnosis of TB, and
the diagnosis is not confirmed by a positive PCR result.
NAAT identifies genes associated with drug resistance and is used to
supplement culture-­based (phenotypic) methods for drug susceptibility testing. It also decreases the time to identification of drug resistance
from weeks to hours, which expedites the initiation of optimal therapy.
Culture-­based, phenotypic, drug susceptibility testing is necessary to
confirm susceptibility to each drug; the absence of resistance genes
is not always predictive of drug susceptibility. The interpretation of
molecular-­based drug susceptibility testing is constantly evolving, and
an expert in the management of pediatric TB should be involved when
drug resistance is suspected.
Gene Xpert MTB/RIF cartridge and Xpert MTB Ultra cartridge
(Xpert; Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA) are real-­time PCR assays for M.
tuberculosis that simultaneously detect rifampin resistance, which is
often used as a proxy for MDR-­TB. These assays use a self-­contained
cartridge system, which yields results from direct specimens in 2 hours
and is less operator dependent than traditional PCR detection methods.
Sensitivity and specificity of Xpert MTB/RIF have averaged 72–77%
and 99% in AFB sputum smear–negative adults and 98–99% and
99–100% in AFB sputum smear–positive adults, respectively. Pediatric
studies reveal that, compared to culture, the sensitivity and specificity
of Xpert MTB/RIF is 62% and 98% on induced or expectorated sputa
and 66% and 98% on gastric aspirates, respectively. For other specimen
types (nasopharyngeal aspirate and stool), Xpert MTB/RIF pooled sensitivity for pulmonary TB ranges between 46% and 73% with a pooled
specificity of 98% and 100%. Compared with smear microscopy, Xpert
improved the sensitivity of detecting pediatric TB cases by 36–44%.
For lymph node aspirates or biopsies, Xpert MTB/RIF compared with
culture had a sensitivity and specificity of 90%. Compared to culture,
Xpert MTB/RIF’s sensitivity and specificity to detect rifampin resistance in respiratory specimens collected from children with suspected
pulmonary TB are 86% and 98%, respectively.
Xpert Ultra is a next-­generation assay that has enhanced performance in children who often have paucibacillary or smear-­negative TB.
The pooled sensitivity of Ultra for detection of M. tuberculosis was 73%
in sputum samples, 64% in gastric aspirate samples, 53% in stool specimens, and 46% in nasopharyngeal samples. The pooled specificity was
98% in sputum samples, 98% in nasopharyngeal aspirate specimens,
98% in stool samples, and 95% in gastric aspirate samples. The WHO
recommends use of Xpert Ultra in sputum and nasopharyngeal specimens collected from children for the diagnosis of TB and rifampin
resistance, in addition to the use of Xpert MTB/RIF in sputum, gastric
aspirate, nasopharyngeal aspirate, and stool specimens. Although cartridges for the Xpert systems are expensive, they offer advantages in
rapid detection of MDR-­TB and are especially useful in settings lacking

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)
laboratory infrastructure. In many low-­resource settings, Xpert has
replaced smear microscopy; however, it has not replaced mycobacterial cultures and drug susceptibility studies.

TREATMENT

The basic principles of management of TB disease in children and adolescents are the same as in adults. Several drugs are used to effect a relatively rapid cure and prevent the emergence of secondary drug resistance
during therapy (Tables 261.5 to 261.8). The choice of regimen depends
on the extent of TB disease, the host, and the likelihood of drug resistance (see Chapter 260, Table 260.1). As recommended by the WHO
and AAP, the standard therapy of intrathoracic, presumed or confirmed
drug-­susceptible TB (pulmonary disease and/or hilar lymphadenopathy)
in children is a 4-­to 6-­month regimen of multidrug therapy. The initial treatment regimen includes isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and
ethambutol. The ethambutol can be discontinued once the organism is
known to be susceptible to the other first-­line drugs. Pyrazinamide is

1849

discontinued after 2 months, and isoniazid and rifampin are continued
for an additional 2-­4 months. Several clinical trials have shown that a
6-­month regimen yields a success rate approaching 100%, with an incidence of clinically significant adverse reactions of <2%. Data from the
SHINE trial (Shorter Treatment for Minimal Tuberculosis in Children)
found that a 4-­month treatment regimen in children age 0-­16 years
(≥3 kg) with nonsevere, smear negative, presumed drug-­susceptible
TB was noninferior to a 6-­month course. Based on the results of this
trial, the WHO supports the use of a 4-­month treatment regimen in
eligible children. Most experts recommend that all drug administration be either directly observed or electronically observed, meaning
that a healthcare worker watches when the medications are administered to/or taken by the patients. When in-­person directly observed
therapy (DOT) or video directly observed therapy (VDOT) is used,
intermittent (twice or thrice weekly) administration of drugs after an
initial period as short as 2 weeks of daily therapy is as effective for drug-­
susceptible TB in children as daily therapy for the entire course.

Table 261.5  Dosage Recommendations for the Treatment of TB in Adults and Children1
DOSE IN MG/KG (MAXIMUM DOSAGE IN PARENTHESES)
ADULTS/CHILDREN2

DAILY

1 TIME/WK3

2 TIMES/WK3

3 TIMES/WK3

Adults

5 mg/kg
(300 mg)

15 mg/kg
(900 mg)

15 mg/kg
(900 mg)

15 mg/kg
(900 mg)

Children

10– 15 mg/kg
(300 mg)

—

20– 30 mg/kg
(900 mg)

—

Adults

10 mg/kg
(600 mg)

—

10 mg/kg
(600 mg)

10 mg/kg
(600 mg)

Children

10– 20 mg/kg
(600 mg)

—

Adults

5 mg/kg
(300 mg)

—

Children ≥12 yr

Appropriate dosing for children unknown

Adults

—

40– 55 kg

DRUG
Isoniazid

Rifampin

Rifabutin

Rifapentine

10– 20 mg/kg
(600 mg)
5 mg/kg
(300 mg)

5 mg/kg
(300 mg)

10 mg/kg
(600 mg;
continuation
phase)

—

—

18.2– 25 mg/kg
(1000 mg)

—

36.4– 50 mg/kg
(2000 mg)

27.3– 37.5 mg/kg
(1500 mg)

56– 75 kg

20– 26.8 mg/kg
(1500 mg)

—

40– 53.6 mg/kg
(3000 mg)

33.3– 44.6
(2500 mg)

76– 90 kg

22.2– 26.3 mg/kg
(2000 mg)

—

44.4– 52.6 mg/kg
(4000 mg)

33.3– 39.5 mg/kg
(3000 mg)

30– 40 mg/kg
(2000 mg)

—

40– 55 kg

14.5– 20 mg/kg
(800 mg)

—

36.4– 50 mg/kg
(2000 mg)

21.8– 30 mg/kg
(1200 mg)

56– 75 kg

16– 21.4 mg/kg
(1200 mg)

—

37.3– 50 mg/kg
(2800 mg)

26.7– 35.7 mg/kg
(2000 mg)

76– 90 kg

17.8– 21.1 mg/kg
(1600 mg)

—

44.4– 52.6 mg/kg
(4000 mg)

26.7– 31.6 mg/kg
(2400 mg)

15– 20 mg/kg
(1000 mg)

—

50 mg/kg
(2500 mg)

—

Children
Pyrazinamide

Adults
(weight)

Children <40 kg
Ethambutol 4

Adults
(weight)

Children

50 mg/kg
(2000 kg)

1Although these regimens are broadly applicable, modifications may be needed for certain circumstances (patients on antiretroviral therapy [ART]). For more information, refer to

treatment of tuberculosis guidelines. MMWR 2003; 52 (No.RR-­11).
2For purposes of this document, adult dosing begins at age 15 years. Children weighing more than 40 kg should be dosed as adults. Adjust doses as the patient’s weight changes.
3All patients prescribed an intermittent regimen should be given DOT.
4Ethambutol should be used with caution in young children since it is difficult to monitor their vision. However, if they have TB that is resistant to INH or RIF, a dose of 15 mg/kg per

day can be used.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Core Curriculum on Tuberculosis: What the Clinician Should Know, 7th ed. Atlanta: CDC, 2021. Table 6.4. https://www.cdc.gov/tb/e
ducation/corecurr/pdf/chapter6.pdf

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1850 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 261.6 Common Adverse Reactions to TB Drugs
CAUSED BY

ADVERSE REACTION

SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

SIGNIFICANCE OF
REACTION*

Any drug

Allergic

• Skin rash

May be serious or minor

Ethambutol

Eye damage

• Blurred or changed vision
• Changed color vision

Serious

Isoniazid
Pyrazinamide
Rifampin

Hepatic toxicity

• Abdominal pain
• Abnormal liver function test results
• Dark urine
• Fatigue
• Fever for 3 or more days
• Flu­like symptoms
• Lack of appetite
• Nausea
• Vomiting
• Yellowish skin or eyes

Serious

Isoniazid

Nervous system damage

• Dizziness; tingling or numbness around the mouth

Serious

Peripheral neuropathy

• Tingling sensation in hands and feet

Serious

Stomach upset

• Stomach upset
• Vomiting
• Lack of appetite

May be serious or minor

Gout

• Abnormal uric acid level**
• Joint aches

Serious

Bleeding problems

• Easy bruising
• Slow blood clotting

Serious

Discoloration of body
fluids

• Orange urine, sweat, or tears
• Permanently stained soft contact lenses

Minor

Drug interactions

• Interferes with certain medications such as birth control pills,
birth control implants, and methadone treatment

May be serious or minor

Sensitivity to the sun

• Frequent sunburn

Minor

Pyrazinamide

Rifampin

*Patients should stop medication for serious adverse reactions and consult a clinician immediately. Patients can continue taking medication if they have minor adverse reactions.
**Asymptomatic elevated uric acid levels are expected with PZA treatment. Acute gouty arthritis, which is rare without preexisting gout, is a contraindication to PZA use.
EMB, ethambutol; INH, isoniazid; PZA, pyrazinamide; RIF,.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Core Curriculum on Tuberculosis: What the Clinician Should Know, 7th ed. Atlanta: CDC, 2021. Table 6.11. https://www.cdc.gov/tb/
education/corecurr/pdf/chapter6.pdf

Table 261.7  Commonly Used Drug Regimens and Dosages for Treatment in Pediatric Patients with TB Infection (TBI)
DRUGS

DOSAGE FORMS AND
AGE GROUP

ADMINISTRATION

DURATION
(MO)

AGE
RESTRICTION

COMMENTS

Isoniazid +
Rifapentine (3HP)

Age ≥12 yr
INH: 15 mg/kg rounded up to the
nearest 50 or 100 mg (max 900 mg)
Rifapentine (by weight):
10-­14 kg: 300 mg
14.1-­25 kg: 450 mg
25.1-­32 kg: 600 mg
32.1-­49.9 kg: 750 mg
≥50 kg: 900 mg
Age 2-­11 yr
INH: 25 mg/kg, rounded up to
the nearest 50 or 100 mg (max
900 mg)
Rifapentine (see above)

Weekly (DOT)

3

Not for children
<2 yr

Take with food, containing
fat if possible, pyridoxine
for selected patients
RFP has drug-drug
interactions

Rifampin (4R)

Adult: 10 mg/kg (max 600 mg)
Child: 15-­20 mg/kg (max 600 mg)

Daily (SAT)

4

None

Drug-­drug interactions

INH + Rifampin

Same daily doses as when the
drugs are used individually

Daily (SAT)

3

None

RIF has drug-­drug
interactions

INH

Adult: 5 mg/kg (max 300 mg)
Child 10-­15 mg/kg (max 300 mg)
Adult: 15 mg/kg (max 900 mg)
Child: 20-­30 mg/kg (max 900 mg)

Daily (SAT)

6 or 9

None

Seizures with overdose;
pyridoxine for selected
patients*

Twice weekly (DOT)

*Exclusively breastfed infants and for children and adolescents on meat-­and milk-­deficient diets; children with nutritional deficiencies, including all asymptomatic children living with
HIV infection; and pregnant adolescents and women.
From Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2021:805–806; and Nolt D, Starke JR. Tuberculosis infection in children and adolescents: testing and treatment. Pediatrics. 2021;148(6):e2021054663.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

1851

Table 261.8  Drug Grouping for the Treatment of MDR-­TB
GROUP

INSTRUCTIONS

DRUG

Group A

Include all three drugs (unless they cannot be used),
add delamanid if age >3 yr

Levofloxacin OR moxifloxacin
Bedaquiline
Linezolid

Group B

Add both drugs (unless they cannot be used)

Clofazimine
Cycloserine or terizidone

Group C

Add to complete regimen (of four to five agents)
Add when drugs from groups A or B cannot be used

Ethambutol
Delamanid
Pyrazinamide
Imipenem-­cilastatin
Meropenem
Amikacin OR streptomycin
Ethionamide OR prothionamide
p-­Aminosalicylic acid

Extrapulmonary tuberculosis is usually caused by small numbers of
mycobacteria. In general, the treatment for most forms of extrapulmonary TB in children, including cervical lymphadenopathy, is the same
as for pulmonary TB. Exceptions are bone and joint, disseminated, and
CNS TB, for which there are inadequate data to recommend 6 months of
therapy; these conditions are usually treated for 9-­12 months. Surgical
debridement in bone and joint disease and ventriculoperitoneal shunting in CNS disease may be necessary adjuncts to medical therapy.
The optimal treatment of TB in children living with HIV has not
been established. Adults living with HIV with TB disease can be treated
successfully with standard regimens that include isoniazid, rifampin,
pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. The total duration of therapy should be
6-­9 months or 6 months after culture of sputum becomes sterile, whichever is longer. Data for children are limited to relatively small series.
Most experts believe that children living with inadequately controlled
HIV who have drug-­susceptible TB should receive the standard four-­drug
regimen for the first 2 months followed by isoniazid and rifampin for
a total duration of at least 9 months. However, all treatment should be
daily, not intermittent. Children living with HIV appear to have more
frequent adverse reactions to antituberculosis drugs and must be monitored closely during therapy. Co-­administration of rifampin and some
antiretroviral agents results in subtherapeutic blood levels of protease
inhibitors and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and toxic
levels of rifampin. Concomitant administration of these drugs is not
recommended. Treatment of children living with HIV with TB is often
empirically based on epidemiologic and radiographic information
because the radiographic appearance of other pulmonary complications of HIV in children, such as lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis and
bacterial pneumonia, may be similar to that of TB. Therapy should be
considered when TB cannot be excluded.

Drug-­Resistant Tuberculosis

The incidence of drug-­resistant TB is increasing in many areas of the
world, including North America. There are two major types of drug
resistance. Primary resistance occurs when a person is infected with
M. tuberculosis that is already resistant to a particular drug. Secondary resistance occurs when drug-­resistant organisms emerge as the
dominant population during treatment. The major causes of secondary drug resistance are poor adherence to the medication by the
patient or inadequate treatment regimens prescribed by the physician. Nonadherence to one drug is more likely to lead to secondary
resistance than is failure to take all drugs. Secondary resistance is rare
in children because of the small size of their mycobacterial population. Consequently, most drug resistance in children is primary,
and patterns of drug resistance among children tend to mirror those
found among adults in the same population. The main predictors of
drug-­resistant TB among adults are history of previous antituberculosis treatment, co-­infection with HIV, and exposure to another adult
with infectious drug-­resistant TB.

Treatment of drug-­resistant TB is successful only when at least two
bactericidal drugs are given to which the infecting strain of M. tuberculosis is susceptible. When a child has possible drug-­resistant TB, usually at least four or five drugs should be administered initially until the
susceptibility pattern is determined and a more specific regimen can be
designed. The specific treatment plan must be individualized for each
patient according to the results of susceptibility testing on the isolates
from the child or the adult source case. Treatment duration of 9 months
with rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol is usually adequate for
isoniazid-­resistant TB in children. High-­dose isoniazid is often added
in those with low-­level isoniazid-­resistant TB. The recommendations
for the treatment of MDR-­TB have rapidly evolved in recent years.
In 2019, the WHO advocated for the use of all-­oral (injectable-­free)
regimens and reprioritized the order of the available oral drugs (Tables
261.8 and 261.9). Treatment regimens should prioritize administering
group A and B drugs in addition to delamanid for children older than
3 years of age. Bedaquiline can be used in those older than 6 years of
age. First-­line treatment includes an all-­oral regimen using three group
A drugs and at least one group B drug. If only one or two group A
medications are used, then group B drugs should be added to make
a regimen of four drugs. Group C drugs are only used if the isolate is
susceptible and when drugs from groups A and B cannot be used. The
WHO recommends treatment of those with severe MDR-­TB disease
for 12-­18 months; however, in children younger than 15 years with less
severe MDR-­TB disease, the treatment duration can be shortened to
9-­12 months. The WHO defines severe MDR-­TB disease as children
with cavities or bilateral parenchymal disease on chest radiography or
extrapulmonary forms of disease other than lymphadenopathy. Those
with severe malnutrition; advanced immunosuppression; or positive
smear, NAAT, or culture are also often treated with a longer course of
therapy.
The second-­line drugs require close monitoring for adverse effects
and toxicity (see Table 261.9). The prognosis of single-­drug–resistant
or MDR-­TB in children with nonsevere disease is good if the drug
resistance is identified early in the treatment, if appropriate drugs
are administered under DOT, if adverse reactions from the drugs are
minor, and if the child and family are in a supportive environment. The
treatment of drug-­resistant TB in children always should be undertaken by a clinician with specific expertise in TB treatment.

Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids are useful in treating some children with TB disease.
They are most beneficial when the host inflammatory reaction contributes significantly to tissue damage or impairment of organ function.
There is convincing evidence that corticosteroids decrease mortality
rates and long-­term neurologic sequelae in some patients with tuberculous meningitis by reducing vasculitis, inflammation, and ultimately intracranial pressure. Lowering the intracranial pressure limits
tissue damage and favors circulation of antituberculosis drugs through

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1852 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 261.9  Drugs Used for Treating Drug-­Resistant Tuberculosis in Infants, Children, and Adolescents*
DRUGS

DOSAGE, FORMS

DAILY DOSAGE (mg/kg)

MAXIMUM DOSE

ADVERSE REACTIONS

Amikacin†

Vials: 500 mg, 1 g

15-­20 (IV or IM administration)

1g

Auditory and vestibular toxic
effects, nephrotoxic effects

Amoxicllin-­
clavulanate

(Strength expressed in terms
of amoxicillin component)
Syrup: 50 mg/mL
80 mg/mL
120 mg/mL (ES 600)
Tablets:
500 mg
875 mg
1000 mg (XR tablet)

40 (amoxicillin component),
twice daily

4 g (amoxicillin)
500 mg (clavulanate)

Abdominal pain, diarrhea, rash

Bedaquiline

Tablets: 20 mg, 100 mg

Adults and children ≥5 yr, 15 to 600 mg/week
<30 kg weeks 1-2: 200 mg/
day; weeks 3-24: 100 mg 3x/
week
> 30 kg weeks 1-2: 400 mg/
day; weeks 3-24: 200 mg 3x/
week

QTc prolongation, reduced
levels with efavirenz co-­
administration

Clofazimine

Gelcaps:
50 mg
100 mg

2-­5 per day

100 mg

QTc prolongation, reversible
skin pigmentation

Cycloserine or
terizidone

Capsules: 250 mg

10-­20, given in 2 divided
doses

1g

Psychosis, personality changes,
seizures, rash

Delamanid

Tablets:
50 mg
100 mg

6–11 years: 50 mg 2x/day
12–17 years: 100 mg 2x/day

100 mg/dose

QTc prolongation,
adverse events with
hypoalbuminemia, avoid if
metronidazole allergic

Ethambutol

Tablets:
100 mg
400 mg

Children <40 kg: 15–25
Children ≥40 kg:
40-55 kg: 800 mg/ day PO
56-75 kg: 1200 mg/ day PO
76-90 kg: 1600 mg/ day PO

2.5 g

Optic neuritis (usually
reversible), decreased red-­
green color discrimination,
gastrointestinal tract
disturbances, hypersensitivity

Ethionamide

Tablets:
125 mg
250 mg

15-­20, given in 1–2 divided
doses

1g

GI tract disturbances,
hepatotoxic effects,
hypersensitivity reactions,
hypothyroidism

60-­100 per day, divided in 4
doses

4g

Anemia, thrombocytopenia,
eosinophilia, elevated liver
enzymes

Imipenem-­
cilastatin
Levofloxacin

Tablets:
250 mg
500 mg
750 mg
Oral solution: 25/mL
Vials: 25 mg/mL

Adults: 750-­1000 mg (daily)
Children: 15-­20 mg/kg daily

1g

Theoretic effect on growing
cartilage, joint pain, GI tract
disturbances, rash, headache,
restlessness, confusion

Linezolid

Tablets:
400 mg
600 mg
Syrup: 20 mg/mL

Children <16 kg: 15 mg/kg
once daily
Children >16 kg: 10-­12 mg/
kg/day once daily

600 mg if ≥12 yr
300 mg if <12 yr

Bone marrow suppression,
peripheral neuropathy,
lactic acidosis, potential
overlapping toxicity
with nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors

Moxifloxacin

Tablets: 400 mg
IV solution: 400 mg/250 mL in
0.8% saline

Adults/adolescents: 400 mg
Children: 10-­15 mg/kg daily

400 mg; maximum
doses of 600-800
mg per day are used
for higher MIC or in
malabsorption

Arthropathy, arthritis

p-­Aminosalicylic
acid (PAS)

Packets: 3 g

200-­300 (2-­4 times a day)

10 g

GI tract disturbances,
hypersensitivity, hepatotoxic
effects

Prothionamide

Tablets:
250 mg
500 mg

15-­20 (divided twice daily)

1g

GI tract disturbances,
hepatotoxic effects,
hypersensitivity reactions,
hypothyroidism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 261 u Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

1853

Table 261.9  Drugs Used for Treating Drug-­Resistant Tuberculosis in Infants, Children, and Adolescents*—cont’d
DRUGS

DOSAGE, FORMS

DAILY DOSAGE (mg/kg)

MAXIMUM DOSE

ADVERSE REACTIONS

Pyrazinamide

Scored tablets: 500 mg

30-­40

2g

Hepatotoxic effects,
hyperuricemia, arthralgias,
gastrointestinal tract upset

Streptomycin†

Vials:
1g
4g

20-­40 (IM administration)

1g

Auditory and vestibular toxic
effects, nephrotoxic effects,
rash

*These drugs should be used in consultation with a specialist in tuberculosis.
†Dose adjustment in renal insufficiency.

GI, Gastrointestinal; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
From Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2021:805–806; and Furin J, Seddon J, Becerra M, et al. Management of Multi-­drug-­Resistant Tuberculosis Children: A Field Guide, 4th ed. Boston: The Sentinel Project for
Pediatric Drug-­Resistant Tuberculosis; 2019. Available at: http://sentinel-­project.org/wp-­content/uploads/2019/02/Updated_DRTB-­Field-­Guide-­2019-­V3.pdf

the brain and meninges. Short courses of corticosteroids also may be
effective for children with endobronchial tuberculosis that causes
respiratory distress, localized emphysema, or segmental pulmonary
lesions. Several randomized clinical trials have shown that corticosteroids can help relieve symptoms and constriction associated with
acute tuberculous pericardial effusion. Corticosteroids can cause dramatic improvement in symptoms in some patients with tuberculous
pleural effusion and shift of the mediastinum. However, the long-­term
course of the disease is probably unaffected. Some children with severe
miliary tuberculosis have dramatic improvement with corticosteroid
therapy if the inflammatory reaction is so severe that alveolocapillary
block is present. There is no convincing evidence to support a specific
corticosteroid preparation. The most common regimen is prednisone
1-­2 mg/kg/day in one to two divided doses orally for 4-­6 weeks followed by a taper.

Supportive Care

Children receiving TB treatment should be followed carefully to promote adherence to therapy, to monitor for toxic reactions to medications, and to ensure that the TB is being adequately treated. Adequate
nutrition is important. Patients should be seen at monthly intervals
and should be given just enough medication to last until the next
visit. Anticipatory guidance with regard to the administration of
medications to children is crucial. The physician should foresee difficulties that the family might have in introducing several new medications in inconvenient dosage forms to a young child. The clinician
must report all cases of suspected TB in a child to the local health
department to be sure that the child and family receive appropriate
care and evaluation.
Nonadherence to TB treatment is the major problem. The patient
and family must know what is expected of them through verbal and
written instructions in their primary language. Approximately 30–50%
of patients taking long-­term treatment are significantly nonadherent
with self-­administered medications, and clinicians are usually not able
to determine in advance which patients will be nonadherent. Preferably, DOT should be instituted by the local health department.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection

The following aspects of the natural history and treatment of TBI, often
referred to as latent TB infection, in children must be considered in the
formulation of recommendations about therapy:
1.	Infants and children <5 years old with TBI who have been infected
recently.
2.	The risk for progression to disease is high.
3.	Untreated infants with TBI have up to a 40% chance of development
of TB disease.
4.	The risk for progression decreases gradually through childhood until adolescence, when the risk increases.
5.	Infants and young children are more likely to have life-­threatening
forms of TB, including meningitis and disseminated disease.
6.	Children with TBI have more years at risk for development of disease than adults.

Because of these factors and the excellent safety profile of isoniazid,
rifampin, and rifapentine in children, there is a tendency to err on the
side of overtreatment in infants, young children, and adolescents.
The main TBI treatment regimens used in children are summarized
in Table 261.7. The regimens include 6-­9 months of isoniazid (daily
or twice weekly by DOT), 3 months of daily rifampin and isoniazid,
4 months of daily rifampin, and once-­weekly isoniazid and rifapentine (3HP) for 12 total doses. Because of improved treatment completion rates and noninferiority, the rifamycin-­based, shorter treatment
regimens are often favored over isoniazid monotherapy. The main
indication for the use of isoniazid is if the child is at risk of drug-­drug
interactions with rifamycins.
Isoniazid therapy for TBI appears to be more effective for children
than for adults, with several large clinical trials demonstrating a risk
reduction of 70–90%. The risk of isoniazid-­related hepatitis is minimal in infants, children, and adolescents, who tolerate the drug better than adults. Analysis of data from several studies demonstrates
that the efficacy decreased significantly if isoniazid was taken for <9
months. However, the international standard is 6 months of treatment with isoniazid because of resource considerations. Isoniazid
given twice weekly has been used extensively to treat TBI in children,
especially schoolchildren and close contacts of case patients. DOT
or VDOT should be considered when it is unlikely that the child
and family will adhere to daily self-­administration or if the child is
at increased risk for rapid development of disease (newborns and
infants, recent contacts, immunocompromised children). For healthy
children taking isoniazid but no other potentially hepatotoxic drugs,
routine biochemical monitoring and supplementation with pyridoxine are not necessary. Rifampin alone for 4 months is now frequently
used for the treatment of TBI in infants, children, and adolescents.
This regimen is most often used when a shorter, self-­administered
treatment regimen is preferred, when isoniazid cannot be tolerated, or the child has had contact with a source case infected with
an isoniazid-­resistant but rifamycin-­susceptible organism. If a child
is identified with TBI during a contact investigation or if the cost of
rifampin is prohibitive for families, administration of the medication through VDOT programs offered by health departments should
be considered. Rifapentine is a rifamycin with a very long half-­life,
allowing for weekly administration in conjunction with high-­dose
isoniazid. Studies have demonstrated that 12 doses of once-­weekly
isoniazid and rifapentine (3HP) are as effective for treating TBI and
as safe as 9 months of daily isoniazid in children as young as 2 years.
This is becoming the preferred regimen for the treatment of TBI in
age-­eligible children who are exposed to a contact with presumed
pan-­susceptible TB. Given the risk of selecting for drug-­resistant
isolates by missing intermittent doses of rifamycins, this treatment
regimen currently is recommended only with DOT under the supervision of local health departments. The main reason children or adolescents are unable to complete this regimen is the inability to crush
the tablets and the high pill burden. In these situations, the children
are often transitioned to an alternative treatment regimen. A 3-­month
daily regimen of rifampin and isoniazid has been used throughout

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1854 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Europe. Although this regimen has not been used regularly in the
United States, experts believe it is favorable in children less than 5
years of age in whom the pill burden of 3HP is difficult. Studies have
revealed that the shorter treatment regimens for TBI in children are
equally efficacious as 9 months of isoniazid and are associated with
superior treatment completion rates.
For children with MDR-­TB, the regimen will depend on the drug-­
susceptibility profile of the contract case’s organism; an expert in TB
should be consulted. There are data that support the use of levofloxacin
or moxifloxacin for treatment of MDR-­TBI.
Few controlled studies have been published regarding the efficacy of
any form of treatment for TBI in children living with HIV. A 9-­month
course of daily isoniazid is recommended. Most experts recommend
that routine monitoring of serum hepatic enzyme concentrations be
performed and pyridoxine be given when children living with HIV
are treated with isoniazid. The optimal duration of rifampin therapy
in children living with HIV with TBI is not known, but many experts
recommend at least a 6-­month course.
Isoniazid or rifampin should be given to children <5 years old who
have a negative TST or IGRA result but who have a known recent
exposure to an adult with potentially contagious TB disease. This practice is often referred to as window prophylaxis. By the time delayed
hypersensitivity develops (2-­3 months), an untreated child already
may have developed severe TB. For these children, TST or IGRA is
repeated 8-­10 weeks after contact with the source case for TB has been
broken (broken contact is defined as physical separation or adequate
initial treatment of the source case). If the second test result is positive, the child should complete a treatment course for TBI (either 9
months of isoniazid or 4 months of rifampin). There is a benefit to
using rifampin over isoniazid for window prophylaxis (unless contraindicated because of drug-­drug interactions or prohibitive because
of cost). By the time of the second test result (8-­10 weeks later), if
positive, the child receiving rifampin has approximately 2 months of
therapy to complete compared to 7 months of isoniazid. Alternatively,
if a new, shorter TBI treatment course is started after the second test
result becomes positive (either 4 months of rifampin [if isoniazid was
given as window prophylaxis], 12 weekly doses of isoniazid and rifapentine, or 3 months of isoniazid and rifampin), the treatment start
date is day 1 of the new regimen. If the second test result is negative,
TBI treatment can be stopped.

PREVENTION

The highest priority of any TB control program should be case finding and treatment, which interrupt transmission of infection between
close contacts. All children and adults with symptoms suggestive of TB
disease and those in close contact with an adult with suspected infectious pulmonary TB should be tested for TBI (by TST or IGRA) and
examined as soon as possible. On average, 30–50% of household contacts to infectious cases are also infected, and 1% of contacts already
have overt disease. This scheme relies on effective and adequate public
health response and resources. Children, particularly young infants,
should receive high priority during contact investigations because their
risk for infection is high and they are more likely to rapidly develop
severe forms of TB.
Mass testing of large groups of children for TBI is an inefficient
process. When large groups of children at low risk for TB are tested,
the vast majority of TST reactions are actually false-­positive reactions
because of biologic variability or cross-­sensitization with NTM. However, testing of high-­risk groups of adults or children should be encouraged because most of these persons with positive TST or IGRA results
have TBI. Testing should take place only if effective mechanisms are in
place to ensure adequate evaluation, follow-­up, and treatment of the
persons who test positive.

Bacille Calmette-­Guérin Vaccination

The only available vaccine against TB is the BCG vaccine. The original vaccine organism was a strain of M. bovis attenuated by subculture every 3 weeks for 13 years. This strain was distributed to dozens

of laboratories that continued to subculture the organism on different
media under various conditions. The result has been production of
many BCG vaccines that differ widely in morphology, growth characteristics, sensitizing potency, and animal virulence.
The administration route and dosing schedule for the BCG vaccines are important variables for efficacy. The preferred route of
administration is intradermal injection with a syringe and needle
because it is the only method that permits accurate measurement of
an individual dose.
The BCG vaccines are extremely safe in immunocompetent hosts.
Local ulceration and regional suppurative adenitis occur in 0.1–1%
of vaccine recipients. Local lesions do not suggest underlying host
immune defects and do not affect the level of protection afforded by the
vaccine. Most reactions are mild and usually resolve spontaneously, but
chemotherapy is needed occasionally. Surgical excision of a suppurative draining node is rarely necessary and should be avoided if possible.
Osteitis is a rare complication of BCG vaccination that appears to be
related to certain strains of the vaccine that are no longer in wide use.
Systemic complaints such as fever, convulsions, loss of appetite, and
irritability are extraordinarily rare after BCG vaccination. Profoundly
immunocompromised patients can develop disseminated BCG infection after vaccination. Children living with HIV appear to have rates
of local adverse reactions to BCG vaccines that are comparable with
rates in immunocompetent children. However, the incidence in these
children of disseminated infection months to years after vaccination is
currently unknown.
Recommended vaccine schedules vary widely among countries. The
official WHO recommendation is a single dose administered during
infancy in populations where the risk for TB is high. However, infants
with known or suspected HIV infection should not receive a BCG vaccination. In some countries, repeat vaccination is universal, although no
clinical trials support this practice. In others, it is based on either TST
or the absence of a typical scar. The optimal age for BCG administration and dosing schedule are unknown because adequate comparative
trials have not been performed.
Although dozens of BCG trials have been reported in various human
populations, the most useful data have come from several controlled
trials. The results of these studies have been disparate. Some demonstrated substantial protection from BCG vaccines, but others showed
no efficacy at all. A meta-­analysis of published BCG vaccination trials
suggested that BCG is 50% effective in preventing pulmonary TB in
adults and children. The protective effect for disseminated and meningeal TB appears to be slightly higher, with BCG preventing 50–80% of
cases. A variety of explanations for the varied responses to BCG vaccines have been proposed, including methodologic and statistical variations within the trials, interaction with NTM that either enhances or
decreases the protection afforded by BCG, different potencies among
the various BCG vaccines, and genetic factors for BCG response within
the study populations. BCG vaccination administered during infancy
has little effect on the ultimate incidence of TB in adults, suggesting
waning protection with time.
BCG vaccination has worked well in some situations but poorly
in others. Clearly, BCG vaccination has had little effect on the ultimate control of TB throughout the world, because >5 billion doses
have been administered, but TB remains epidemic in most regions.
BCG vaccination does not substantially influence the chain of
transmission, because cases of contagious pulmonary TB in adults
that can be prevented by BCG vaccination constitute a small fraction of the sources of infection in a population. The best use of BCG
vaccination is to prevent life-­threatening forms of TB in infants and
young children.
BCG vaccination has never been adopted as part of the strategy
for TB control in the United States. Widespread use of the vaccine
would render subsequent TSTs less useful. However, BCG vaccination can contribute to TB control in select population groups. BCG
is recommended for TST-­negative, HIV-­negative infants and children who are at high risk for intimate and prolonged exposure to
persistently untreated or ineffectively treated adults with infectious

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 262 u Hansen Disease (Mycobacterium leprae)
pulmonary TB and who cannot be removed from the source of
infection or placed on long-­term preventive therapy. It also is recommended for those who are continuously exposed to persons with
TB who have bacilli that are resistant to isoniazid and rifampin.
Any child receiving BCG vaccination should have a documented
negative TST before receiving the vaccine. After receiving the vaccine, the child should be separated from the possible sources of
infection until it can be demonstrated that the child has had a vaccine response, as evidenced by tuberculin reactivity, which usually
develops within 1-­3 months.

1855

Chapter 262

Hansen Disease
(Mycobacterium leprae)
Cristina Tomatis Souverbielle and
Asuncion Mejias

Prevention of Perinatal Tuberculosis

The most effective way of preventing TB infection and disease in the
neonate or young infant is through appropriate testing and treatment
of the mother and other family members. High-­risk pregnant women
should be tested with TST or IGRA, and those with a positive test result
should receive a chest radiograph with appropriate abdominal shielding. If the mother has a negative chest radiograph and is clinically well,
no separation of the infant and mother is needed after delivery. The
child needs no special evaluation or treatment if the child remains
asymptomatic. Other household members should undergo testing for
TBI and further evaluation as indicated.
If the mother has suspected TB at the time of delivery, the newborn should be separated from the mother until the chest radiograph
is obtained. If the mother’s chest radiograph is abnormal, separation
should be maintained until the mother has been evaluated thoroughly, including examination of the sputum. If the mother’s chest
radiograph is abnormal but the history, physical examination, sputum examination, and evaluation of the radiograph show no evidence of current active TB, it is reasonable to assume that the infant
is at low risk for infection. The mother should receive appropriate
TB treatment, and she and her infant should receive careful follow­up care.
If the mother’s chest radiograph or AFB sputum smear shows evidence of current TB disease, additional steps are necessary to protect
the infant. Isoniazid therapy for newborns has been so effective that
separation of the mother and infant is no longer considered mandatory. Separation should occur only if the mother is ill enough to
require hospitalization, has been or is expected to become nonadherent to treatment, or has suspected drug-­resistant TB. Isoniazid treatment for the infant should be continued until the mother is sputum
culture negative for ≥3 months. At that time, a TST should be placed
on the child. If the test is positive, isoniazid is continued for a total
duration of 9-­12 months; if the TST is negative, isoniazid can be discontinued. Once the mother and child are taking adequate therapy, it
is usually safe for the mother to breastfeed, because the medications,
although found in milk, are present in low concentrations. If isoniazid
resistance is suspected or the mother’s adherence to medication is in
question, continued separation of the infant from the mother should
be considered. The duration of separation must be at least as long as is
necessary to render the mother noninfectious. A TB expert should be
consulted if the young infant has potential exposure to the mother or
another adult with TB disease caused by an isoniazid-­resistant strain
of M. tuberculosis.
Although isoniazid is not thought to be teratogenic, the treatment of
pregnant women who have asymptomatic TBI is often deferred until
after delivery. However, symptomatic pregnant women or those with
radiographic evidence of TB disease should be appropriately evaluated. Because pulmonary TB is harmful to both the mother and the
fetus and represents a great danger to the infant after delivery, TB in
pregnant women always should be treated. The most common regimen for drug-­susceptible TB is isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol.
The aminoglycosides and ethionamide should be avoided because of
their teratogenic effect. The safety of pyrazinamide in pregnancy has
not been established.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Leprosy (Hansen disease [HD]) is a heterogeneous, curable infection
caused by Mycobacterium leprae that primarily affects the upper airway, skin, and peripheral nerves. Disease manifestations are mainly
determined by the host’s immunologic response to infection, resulting
in a wide clinical spectrum. The majority of exposed individuals never
develop clinical disease. HD is currently the accepted designation of
leprosy, and contrary to popular folklore, HD is not highly transmissible and is treatable. In addition, the associated morbidity and disability can be prevented with early diagnosis and appropriate treatment.

MICROBIOLOGY

M. leprae is an obligate, intracellular, acid-­fast, gram-­positive bacillus
of the family Mycobacteriaceae measuring 1-­8 μm in length. It grows
optimally at 27–33°C (80.6–91.4°F) yet cannot be cultured in vitro. The
bacillus multiplies slowly, with a doubling time of 11-­13 days. It is the
only bacterium known to infect Schwann cells of peripheral nerves.
Identification of acid-­fast bacilli (AFB) in peripheral nerves is pathognomonic of leprosy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The prevalence of leprosy is variable, with most cases being identified in tropical and subtropical areas. The World Health Organization
(WHO) goal to eliminate leprosy as a public health problem, defined
as a reduction in its prevalence to less than 1 case per 10,000 population, was achieved at the global level in 2000. Despite an overall decline
in reported prevalence, HD continues to afflict more than 2 million
people worldwide. In 2022, 174,059 new cases were reported globally,
with most cases occurring in Southeast Asia (mostly India), Africa, and
South America (mostly Brazil). Of those, 5.92% occurred in children
<15 years. In 2018, the WHO reviewed the available evidence on key
issues related to the elimination of leprosy and developed a guidance
WHO Guidelines for the Diagnosis, Treatment and Prevention of Leprosy. More recently, the WHO released Towards Zero Leprosy – Global
Leprosy (Hansen’s Disease) Strategy 2021-­2030, which was aligned
with the 2021-­2030 road map for neglected tropical diseases during
the same period.
Since 1984, HD has been a notifiable disease in the United States,
with about 14,000 cases recorded since then. Since the 1990s, an average of 175 new cases are reported annually. Of the 159 new U.S. cases
reported in 2020, 69% were identified in Texas, Louisiana, Hawaii, California, Florida, and New York. Most new cases (∼75%) in the United
States were identified among immigrants from HD-­endemic countries
or in citizens who have worked abroad in endemic areas. However,
over one third of U.S. cases are autochthonous and do not report contact with foreign countries or people with leprosy.
The likelihood of developing HD is determined by several variables:
age (with two incidence peaks: 10-­14 years and 30 years), gender (male/
female ratio 2:1, with no differences observed in children), genetics,
immune status, type of leprosy (with higher risk in those exposed to
patients with multibacillary disease), and possibly through exposure
to armadillos. Whole genome sequencing has allowed identification
of genes and polymorphisms associated with increased susceptibility to leprosy and found that approximately 5% of people are genetically susceptible to M. leprae infection. HD in immunocompromised

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1856 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
hosts has been reported in solid organ and bone marrow transplant
recipients and patients receiving tumor necrosis factor (TNF)–blocking monoclonal antibodies. Patients with HIV infection do not appear
to be at increased risk of acquiring leprosy, increased disease severity,
or poor response to treatment. However, clinicians should be aware
that concomitant HIV infection and leprosy can result in worsening of
symptoms of leprosy during HIV treatment as a result of an immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome.
The exact mechanism of transmission is not fully understood but
is thought to occur primarily by the respiratory route. Natural infection occurs in humans and armadillos, which are the only recognized
nonhuman reservoir. The risk of transmission from armadillos to
humans seems low, and again, the mechanism is not fully understood.
The incubation period between natural infection and overt clinical disease in humans ranges from 3 months to 20 years, with a mean of 4
years for tuberculoid leprosy and 10 years for lepromatous leprosy.
Up to 107 viable bacilli per day can be shed in respiratory secretions of
patients with multibacillary leprosy. The relative risk for developing
disease in household contacts is 8-­to 10-­fold for lepromatous disease
and 2-­to 4-­fold for the tuberculoid form. Transmissions by breast milk,
the transplacental route, and through broken skin have been reported.
Environmental factors and subclinically infected humans may also
play a role in disease transmission. The infectivity of patients with HD
becomes negligible within 24 hours of the first administration of effective therapy.

PATHOGENESIS

In the skin, M. leprae shows affinity for keratinocytes, macrophages,
and histiocytes, and in peripheral nerves, the organism can be found
in the Schwann cells. The mechanism of mycobacterial dissemination
from the respiratory tract to the skin and nerves is thought to occur
hematogenously but has not been completely elucidated. M. leprae
induces demyelination and binds to the laminin-­2 glycoprotein present in the basal lamina of Schwann cells in peripheral nerves, where
it replicates slowly over several years. Infection stimulates the dedifferentiation of Schwann cells to immature cells through the activation of the Erk1/2 pathway. This reprogramming of Schwann cells
seems to be linked to disease dissemination. In addition to the direct
nerve invasion, the immune response to infection also contributes
to nerve damage. Schwann cells express human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) class II molecules and present mycobacterial peptides to the
HLA class II restricted CD4+ T cells, which initiate an inflammatory
response. These events explain the nerve damage seen in paucibacillary disease and in reversal reactions. Swelling within the perineurium leads to ischemia, further nerve damage, and eventually fibrosis
and axonal death.

DISEASE CLASSIFICATION

Disease classification is important to determine potentially infectious cases and prognosis. Based on the cellular immune response and
disease dissemination, two classification schemes for leprosy are frequently used: the Ridley-­Jopling scale and the WHO classification:
A.	The Ridley-­Jopling scale is used in the United States and describes
the five types of leprosy, according to clinical spectrum of disease,
bacillary load, and findings on histopathology.
1.	Tuberculoid form: Patients usually have a vigorous and specific
cellular immune response to M. leprae antigens and have a small
number of skin lesions, generally one to three well-­demarcated
macules or plaques with elevated borders (Fig. 262.1) and reduced or absent sensation. The lesions are infiltrated by T-­helper
1 (Th1) cells producing abundant interferon (IFN)-­γ and TNF-­
α, forming well-­demarcated granulomas, with few, if any, bacilli
found within the lesions.
2.	Borderline tuberculoid form
3.	Borderline form
4.	Borderline lepromatous
5.	Lepromatous form: Patients have an absence of specific cellular
immunity to M. leprae (but intact immunity to Mycobacterium

Fig. 262.1 Tuberculous leprosy in a patient who has a single skin lesion with a raised border and flattened center.

tuberculosis) and present the most severe form of disease. They
manifest clinically apparent infiltration of peripheral nerves and
skin lesions (usually many lesions and not all hypoesthetic or anesthetic), with a high load of bacilli in the absence of an effective
cell-­mediated immune response. Skin biopsies reveal extensive
infiltration of the skin and nerves, containing messenger RNA
for Th2 cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-­4 and IL-­10, poorly
formed granulomas, and uncontrolled proliferation of bacilli
within foamy macrophages. A large amount of circulating antibody to M. leprae is present but does not confer protective immunity. Over time, patients with the lepromatous form develop
a systemic disease with symmetric peripheral nerve involvement
and a diffuse infiltrative dermopathy that includes thickening of
the facial skin and hair loss of the eyelashes and eyebrows (madarosis), leading to the classic presentation of the leonine facies.
They also have involvement of the nasal mucosa causing nasal
congestion and epistaxis.
6.	The majority of patients will present with a borderline form.
From borderline tuberculoid to borderline lepromatous forms,
there is a progressive reduction in cellular immune responses,
an increase in bacillary load, more frequent hypopigmented
skin lesions and nerve involvement, and higher antibody titers
(Fig. 262.2). Patients with the extreme forms of the disease (tuberculoid and lepromatous) are considered to have stable cell-­
mediated immunity, because their disease manifestations do
not change much over time. In contrast, patients with borderline disease have unstable cell-­mediated immunity and demonstrate changes in their clinical manifestations over time toward
the polar forms (downgrade) or present sudden reversal reactions (upgrade). Indeterminate leprosy is the earliest form of the
disease and is seen most frequently in young children. Patients
usually have a single hypopigmented macule with poorly defined
borders, without erythema or induration. Anesthesia is minimal
or absent, especially if the lesion is on the face. The diagnosis is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 262 u Hansen Disease (Mycobacterium leprae)

1857

Fig. 262.3 Thickened, superficial peroneal nerve of leprosy.
Fig. 262.2 Borderline leprosy in a patient who has numerous hypopigmented lesions with poorly defined borders.

usually one of exclusion in the setting of a contact investigation.
Tissue biopsies show diagnostic evidence of leprosy but do not
meet sufficient criteria for classification. Up to 50–75% of these
lesions will heal spontaneously, and the rest will progress to another form of leprosy.
B.	The WHO classification can be used when histologic evaluation
and confirmatory diagnosis is unavailable, a common scenario in
the field. This simplified scheme is based on the number of skin lesions:
1.	Paucibacillary (1-­5 patches)
2.	Multibacillary (>5 patches)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The host immune response determines the clinical spectrum of leprosy. Skin and serologic studies suggest that up to 90% of infected
people develop immunity after exposure, without manifesting clinical disease. In genetically susceptible individuals with sufficient exposure to become infected, the cellular host’s immunologic response to
infection and unique tropism for peripheral nerves determine the
wide spectrum of clinical (and histologic) manifestations. Regardless of the disease subtype, HD affects the skin and peripheral nerves.
Leprosy lesions usually do not itch or hurt. Polymorphisms in vitamin D and its receptor have been proposed to play a role in the manifestations of leprosy.

Skin Involvement

The most common skin lesions are macules or plaques with unclear
outer limits, with or without neurologic symptoms. Diffuse infiltrative lesions and subcutaneous nodules are less common. Initial
lesions are insidious hypopigmented macules, although they may
appear erythematous on pale skin. Lesions may involve any area of
the body, are more pronounced in cooler areas (e.g., earlobes, nose),
and occur less frequently in the scalp, axillae, or perineum. Approximately 70% of skin lesions have reduced sensation; the degree of
hypoesthesia depends on the location and size of the lesion and the
degree of Th1 immune response. Examination of the skin should
ideally be performed in natural sunlight and include testing for
hypoesthesia to light touch, pinprick, temperature, and anhidrosis.
Studies in endemic areas in children <15 years old have shown a
predominance of paucibacillary forms, with a predominance of
single lesions.

Nerve Involvement

Peripheral nerves are most frequently affected early in the disease
and should be palpated for thickness and tenderness (Fig. 262.3), as
well as evaluated for both motor and sensory function, particularly
temperature and light touch. The posterior tibial nerve (medial
malleolus) is the most common nerve affected, followed by the

ulnar (elbow), median (wrist), lateral popliteal (fibular neck), and
facial nerves. The skin lesions overlying a nerve trunk distribution
predict the involvement of nerves in the vicinity. There is a pure
neuritic form of leprosy, usually occurring in India and Nepal, in
which patients present with asymmetric neuropathy but lack skin
lesions.

Other Organ Involvement

Ocular involvement leading to vision loss results from both direct
bacillary invasion of the eye and optic nerve damage. Lagophthalmos
occurs when there is destruction of the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII),
and trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) destruction causes anesthesia of
the cornea and conjunctiva, leading to abrasions. Facial skin lesions are
associated with a 10-­fold higher risk of facial nerve damage. Systemic
involvement of other organs is seen mainly in patients with lepromatous leprosy, where a high bacillary burden leads to infiltration of the
nasal mucosa, bones, and testes. Renal involvement and amyloidosis
are rare findings.

Immunologic Reactions

Leprosy reactions are acute clinical exacerbations reflecting disturbances of the immunologic balance to M. leprae infection and occurring in 30–50% of all leprosy patients. These sudden changes occur
in patients with borderline and lepromatous leprosy, typically during
the initial years after infection (sometimes as the initial presentation),
but can occur before, during, or after completion of treatment. There
are two main types of leprosy reactions, which require immediate
treatment to prevent long-­term complications. In children <15 years
old, leprosy reactions range from 1% to 30% and are mainly type 1
reactions.
Type 1 reactions (also known as reversal reactions) occur in
one third of patients with borderline disease. These reactions are
characterized by acute edema and increased erythema, warmth, and
painful inflammation of preexisting cutaneous plaques or nodules,
with acute swelling and tenderness of peripheral nerves that can
quickly progress to cause nerve abscesses and necrosis. There may
be a peripheral lymphocytosis and an increased cytokine response,
but systemic symptoms are uncommon and appear to be associated
with an increase in Th1-­mediated reactivity to mycobacterial antigens. Increased serum concentrations of CXCL10 have been found
in type 1 reactions. Rapid and sustained reversal of the inflammatory process using corticosteroids is essential to prevent continued
nerve damage.
Type 2 reactions, or erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL), occur
in borderline lepromatous and lepromatous forms, as these patients
have the highest levels of M. leprae antigens and antibodies, most
often in the first 2 years after starting therapy. ENL is distinguished
from reversal reactions by the development of new painful, erythematous subcutaneous nodules with an accompanying systemic
inflammatory response. ENL is accompanied by high circulating
concentrations of TNF-­α. Patients develop high fever and signs

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1858 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
of systemic toxicity, and in severe cases, ENL can be life threatening, presenting with features similar to septic shock. Deposition
of extravascular immune complexes leads to neutrophil infiltration and activation of complement in the skin and other organs.
Tender, erythematous dermal papules or nodules (resembling
erythema nodosum) occur in clusters, typically on extensor surfaces of the lower extremities and face. Immune complex deposition also contributes to migrating polyarthralgias, painful swelling
of lymph nodes and spleen, iridocyclitis, vasculitis, orchitis, and,
rarely, nephritis. Patients may present with a single acute episode,
a relapsing form comprising multiple acute episodes, or a chronic
continuous form. Management of type 2 reactions is usually more
complicated because of recurrence and systemic involvement.
Lucio phenomenon (erythema necroticans) is an uncommon but
potentially fatal reaction distinct from type 1 or 2 reactions and occurs
in patients with untreated lepromatous leprosy and in patients whose
ancestry is from Mexico. It is a necrotizing vasculitis caused by M. leprae directly invading the endothelium. Clinically, patients develop violaceous or hemorrhagic plaques, followed by ulcerations in the absence
of systemic complaints. Secondary bacterial infections are common.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of HD requires high clinical suspicion and should be
considered in any patient with a hypoesthetic or anesthetic skin
lesion that does not respond to standard treatment, especially if
there is a history of travel or residence in an endemic region or a history of contact with leprosy patients or armadillos. There are no reliable tests to diagnose subclinical leprosy. Full-­thickness skin biopsy
and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are the main laboratory tests
to aid in the diagnosis. Patients are considered to have HD if they
have one or more of the three cardinal signs: loss of sensation in
a localized skin lesion (pale or erythematous), thickened peripheral
nerve with loss of sensation and/or weakness of muscles enervated
by that nerve, or the presence of AFB on biopsy. The positive predictive value for the diagnosis of leprosy in patients meeting all three
criteria is 98%.
To confirm the diagnosis and determine the extent of nerve involvement and the type of infiltrate, a full-­thickness skin biopsy from the
most active lesion should be performed. M. leprae is best identified
in tissue using the Fite stain. Lesions from patients with the lepromatous form reveal numerous AFB in clumps (globi), whereas patients
with the tuberculoid form rarely have mycobacteria identified, but the
diagnosis can be made by demonstration of well-­formed noncaseating
granulomas and nerve involvement. The presence of neural inflammation differentiates leprosy from other granulomatous disorders.
Mycobacterial culture of lesions should be performed to exclude M.

tuberculosis and nontuberculous cutaneous infections. If no resources
are available, slit-­skin (skin smear) biopsies represent an alternative.
Slit-­skin smears have high specificity but low sensitivity; only 30% of
adults and 10–30% of children <15 years old are smear positive (usually patients with the lepromatous form). The bacterial index can range
from 0 (no bacilli in 100 oil-­immersion fields), as generally seen in
paucibacillary disease, to 6+ (>1,000 bacilli/field), as can be seen in
multibacillary disease.
Diagnostic and histopathologic consultation in the United States is
available through the National Hansen’s Disease Program (NHDP;
http://www.hrsa.gov/hansens or 800-­642-­2477). Specimens (formalin
or paraffin embedded) can be sent to the NHDP for pathologic analysis
free of charge. A PCR test for M. leprae is not readily available in clinical practice but may be performed at the NHDP. In nonendemic areas,
PCR may be useful for diagnosis when AFB are discernible in tissue
but clinical and histopathologic features are not typical. M. leprae DNA
is detectable by PCR in 95% of lepromatous disease and 55% of tuberculoid lepra. PCR has also allowed detection of the organism in nasal
secretions from asymptomatic people. Molecular testing for mutations
causing drug resistance is also available through the NHDP and is usually used in the setting of relapse.
Antibodies to M. leprae are present in 90% of patients with untreated
lepromatous disease, 40–50% of patients with paucibacillary disease,
and 1–5% of healthy controls. However, serologic testing is insensitive
and is not used for diagnosis.

TREATMENT

The primary goal of treatment is early antimicrobial therapy to prevent
permanent neuropathy. Leprosy is curable. Effective treatment requires
multidrug therapy (MDT) with dapsone, clofazimine, and rifampin.
Combination therapy is employed to prevent antimicrobial resistance.
In the United States, clinical providers considering a diagnosis and
treatment of a patient with HD should obtain consultation from the
NHDP. The recommended combination MDT can be obtained free of
charge from the NHDP (Table 262.1) and in other countries through
the WHO (Table 262.2). Compared with the WHO, the NHDP advocates for a longer duration of treatment and daily rather than monthly
administration of rifampin because shorter antimicrobial regimens
have been associated with a greater risk of relapse. The recommended
duration by the WHO for tuberculoid disease is 6 months and for lepromatous disease is 12 months. Since 2018, the WHO has advocated
for a three-­drug regimen for all leprosy forms; however, NHDP guidelines recommend two drugs (dapsone and rifampin) for the treatment
of paucibacillary disease.
Before starting combination MDT, patients should be tested for
glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, have a baseline

Table 262.1  NHDP-­Recommended Multidrug Therapy Regimens for Hansen Disease in the United States
TYPE OF LEPROSY

PATIENT POPULATION

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

DURATION OF THERAPY

Multibacillary (LL, BL, BB)

Adult

Dapsone 100 mg/day and
rifampin* 600 mg/day and
clofazimine 50 mg/day

24 mo

Pediatric†

Dapsone 1 mg/kg/day and
rifampin 10-­20 mg/kg/day and
clofazimine 1 mg/kg/day‡

Adult

Dapsone 100 mg/day and
rifampin 600 mg/day

Pediatric†

Dapsone 1 mg/kg/day and
rifampin 10-­20 mg/kg/day

Paucibacillary (TT, BT)

12 mo

*Rifampin is taken monthly if the patient is on prednisone.
†Daily pediatric mg/kg dose should not exceed the adult daily maximum.
‡Clofazimine is only available through NHDP Investigational New Drug (IND) program; minimum formulation is 50 mg, and capsules should not be cut. Alternative dosing includes
clofazimine 2 mg/kg every other day
NHDP, National Hansen’s Disease Program; BB, borderline; BL, borderline lepromatous; BT, borderline tuberculoid; LL, lepromatous; TT, tuberculoid.
NHDP multidrug therapy is daily and of longer duration than WHO-­recommended regimen. All drugs are administered orally. For immunologically compromised or elderly patients,
these protocols may be modified. Consultation with the NHDP is advised.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 262 u Hansen Disease (Mycobacterium leprae)

1859

Table 262.2  WHO-­Recommended Multidrug Therapy (MDT) Regimens for Hansen Disease
TYPE OF LEPROSY

PATIENT POPULATION

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

DURATION OF THERAPY

Multibacillary (LL, BL, BB)

Adult

Rifampicin 600 mg once monthly
and dapsone 100 mg/day and
clofazimine 300 mg once monthly
and 50 mg/day

12 mo

Pediatric*

Rifampicin 450 mg once monthly
and dapsone 50 mg/day and
clofazimine 150 mg once monthly
and 50 mg every other day

Adult

Rifampicin 600 mg once monthly
and dapsone 100 mg/day and
clofazimine 300 mg once monthly
and 50 mg/day

Pediatric*

Rifampicin 450 mg once monthly
and dapsone 50 mg/day and
clofazimine 150 mg once monthly
and 50 mg every other day

Paucibacillary (TT, BT)

6 mo

*In children <10 yr old, or <than 40Kg, MDT dosages should be in mg/kg, not to exceed the adult daily maximum: rifampicin 10 mg/kg once monthly, dapsone 2 mg/kg/day, and
clofazimine100 mg once a month, 50 mg twice weekly.
WHO, World Health Organization; BB, borderline; BL, borderline lepromatous; BT, borderline tuberculoid; LL, lepromatous; TT, tuberculoid.

complete blood cell count and liver function testing, and be evaluated for evidence of active tuberculosis, in which monotherapy with
rifampin should be avoided. Response to therapy is seen clinically as
flattening or disappearance of skin lesions and improvement in nerve
function, usually within 1-­2 months after initiating MDT. Complete
resolution or improvement may take 6-­12 months, depending on the
severity of infection. Most skin lesions heal without scarring. Identification of biomarkers for the optimal identification and management of
leprosy continue to be under study. CXCL10 (IP-­10) has been identified as a potential marker to help monitor treatment efficacy in patients
with multibacillary disease, as higher levels of CXCL-­10 are important
for the control of bacillary load.
Alternative agents to treat HD include minocycline, clarithromycin, and some fluoroquinolones (levofloxacin, ofloxacin, moxifloxacin). Given limited data, these alternative antimicrobials are used in
selected cases of intolerance to the routine combination MDT regimen
or for documented resistance. It is important to note that some patients
who have been adequately treated for HD may later show evidence of
chronic reversal reactions and late neuropathies, but these are bacillus
negative and thus should not be considered relapses. Neuritis must be
treated promptly to minimize nerve injury and disability. Treatment
with corticosteroids appears to improve nerve function in two thirds
of patients.
Bone marrow suppression and hepatotoxicity have been reported
and should be monitored every 3 months during therapy. A screening
urinalysis should be performed annually. Other reactions, such as methemoglobinemia and hypersensitivity reactions to dapsone, are rare.
An ophthalmologic evaluation should routinely be performed in all
patients with HD because ocular complications can occur. Given the
proclivity for testicular invasion in multibacillary leprosy with resultant testicular dysfunction and infertility, males should be screened for
elevated follicle-­stimulating hormone or luteinizing hormone concentrations and decreased testosterone levels.
After completion of MDT, annual follow-­up for ≥5 years for paucibacillary and ≥10 years for multibacillary disease is warranted. Relapse
of the disease after completion of MDT is rare (0.01–1.4%) and must be
distinguished from the more common leprosy immunologic reactions.
Patients who have a bacillary index of ≥4 pre-­MDT or ≥3 at the completion of MDT have the highest risk of relapse (approximately 20%).
When relapse occurs, it is usually within 5-­10 years of MDT completion and a result of reactivation of drug-­susceptible mycobacteria. Thus
patients who are expected to relapse are generally treated with the same
MDT regimen. Resistance to all three drugs has been documented,

although it rarely occurs with combination therapy. There is no role
for routine baseline resistance testing, but the NHDP can provide it if
needed.

Leprosy Reactions

Immunologic reactions can occur before, during, and years after treatment and should be treated aggressively to prevent peripheral nerve
damage. In general, antimycobacterial drugs should be continued.
Fatigue, malaise, or fever can be present, and the inflammation associated with these reactions can cause severe nerve injury. Prompt therapy
with corticosteroids with or without other antiinflammatory agents,
adequate analgesia, and physical support are essential for patients with
active neuritis to prevent nerve damage. If corticosteroids are indicated for a prolonged time, the frequency of rifampicin administration should be decreased from daily to monthly administration (to
avoid drug interactions). In 2020, to aid with the management of leprosy reactions, the WHO published the technical guide: Leprosy/Hansen Disease: Management of Reactions and Prevention of Disabilities.
For severe type 1 reactions, prednisone is recommended, 1 mg/
kg/day orally (40-­60 mg) with a slow taper (decreasing by 5 mg every
2-­4 weeks after evidence of improvement over 3-­6 months) in addition
to standard MDT. If there is evidence of peripheral nerve deterioration, higher doses and longer tapers may be needed. Nerve function
improves after corticosteroid treatment in 30–80% of patients who did
not have preexisting neuritis. In patients not responding to corticosteroids, cyclosporine may be used as a second-­line agent.
For severe type 2 reactions, prednisone is routinely used at 1 mg/
kg/day for 12 weeks. However, given the recurrence and chronicity of
ENL, corticosteroid-­sparing agents should be considered to avoid
complications associated with their prolonged use. Thalidomide (100-­
400 mg/daily for 48-­72 hours, tapering over 2 weeks to 100 mg/daily)
is effective in treating these types of reactions. Given the teratogenicity
of thalidomide (contraindicated for children <12 years old and women
of childbearing age), the drug is only available through a restrictive
distribution program approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Clofazimine (300 mg/day for several months, tapering
to <100 mg/day, within a year) alone or in combination with corticosteroids, has also been useful in managing patients with chronic ENL
and is generally used until all signs of the reaction have abated. Other
immunosuppressive drugs have been used to treat type 2 reactions
with inconsistent results, including cyclosporine, mycophenolate, and
methotrexate. Lucio phenomenon is managed similarly to ENL and
treatment of underlying infections.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1860 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
LONG-­TERM COMPLICATIONS

Leprosy is a leading cause of permanent physical disability among communicable diseases worldwide. The major chronic complications and
deformities of leprosy are caused by nerve injury. Nerve impairment
may be purely sensory, motor, or autonomic or may be a combination.
The prognosis for arresting progression of tissue and nerve damage is
good if therapy is started early, but recovery of lost sensory and motor
function is variable and frequently incomplete. Nerve function impairment can occur before diagnosis, during MDT, or after MDT and can
develop without overt signs of skin or nerve inflammation (silent neuropathy). Patients at highest risk of nerve impairment are those with
multibacillary leprosy and preexisting nerve damage. These patients
should undergo regular monthly surveillance during therapy and for
at least 2 years from the time of diagnosis. In children, deformities can
occur in 3–10% of cases and mainly in those with nerve enlargement.
Other factors contributing to risk of deformities include increasing age
in children, delay in accessing medical care, multiple skin lesions, multibacillary disease, smear positivity, multiple nerve involvement, and
leprosy reaction at presentation.

PREVENTION

In addition to treating active leprosy cases, control measures for HD
include the management of contacts of index patients. In endemic
countries, close monitoring of household contacts of HD patients,
particularly HD patients with multibacillary disease, is warranted to
ensure that early treatment can be implemented if evidence of early
HD develops. These household contacts should be examined at baseline and then yearly for 5 years. In nonendemic areas, disease presenting in the contacts of patients with HD is rare. A single dose of
bacille Calmette-­Guérin (BCG) vaccine has variable protective efficacy
against leprosy, ranging from 10% to 80%; an additional dose results in
increased protection. Any suspected or newly diagnosed case of leprosy in the United States should be reported to local and state public
health departments, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), and NHDP. There are no leprosy vaccines available or recommended for use in the United States. In the hospital setting, standard
precautions should be implemented. Hand hygiene is recommended
for all people in contact with a patient with lepromatous leprosy. The
use of chemoprophylaxis with a single dose of rifampin (SDR) within
endemic areas is recommended by the WHO, but not the NHDP, for
adults and children ≥2 years in contact with leprosy patients. Because
leprosy is a highly stigmatized disease, caution must be exercised
when implementing SDR in contacts, particularly for those outside the
patient’s family.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 263

Nontuberculous
Mycobacteria
Ericka V. Hayes
Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), also referred to as atypical
mycobacteria and mycobacteria other than tuberculosis (MOTT),
are all members of the genus Mycobacterium and include species other
than Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex and Mycobacterium leprae.
The NTM constitute a highly diverse group of bacteria that differ from
M. tuberculosis complex bacteria in their pathogenicity, interhuman
transmissibility, nutritional requirements, ability to produce pigments,

enzymatic activity, and drug susceptibility. In contrast to the M. tuberculosis complex, NTM are acquired from environmental sources and
not by person-­to-­person spread, although the latter is under debate,
especially in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Their omnipresence
in the environment means that the clinical relevance of NTM isolation from clinical specimens is sometimes unclear; a positive culture
might reflect occasional presence or contamination rather than true
NTM disease. NTM are associated with pediatric lymphadenitis, otomastoiditis, serious lung infections, and, rarely, disseminated disease.
Treatment is long-­term and cumbersome and often requires adjunctive surgical intervention. Comprehensive guidelines on diagnosis and
treatment are provided by the American Thoracic Society (ATS) and
British Thoracic Society (BTS).

ETIOLOGY

NTM are ubiquitous in the environment all over the world, existing
as saprophytes in soil and water (including municipal water supplies,
tap water, hot tubs, and shower heads), environmental niches that are
the supposed sources of human infections. With the introduction of
molecular identification tools such as 16S recombinant DNA gene
sequencing, the number of identified NTM species has grown to more
than 150; the clinical relevance (i.e., percentage of isolates that are causative agents of true NTM disease, rather than occasional contaminants)
differs significantly by species.
Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC; i.e., M. avium, Mycobacterium intracellulare, and several closely related but rarer species) and
Mycobacterium kansasii are most often isolated from clinical samples,
yet the isolation frequency of these species differs significantly by geographic area. MAC bacteria have been frequently isolated from natural
and synthetic environments, and cases of MAC disease have been successfully linked to home exposure to shower and tap water. Although
the designation M. avium suggests that human infections are acquired
from birds (Latin avium), molecular typing has established that M.
avium strains that cause pediatric lymphadenitis and adult pulmonary disease represent the M. avium hominis suis subgrouping, mainly
found in humans and pigs and not in birds.
Some NTM have well-­defined ecologic niches that help explain
infection patterns. The natural reservoir for Mycobacterium marinum
is fish and other cold-­blooded animals, and the fish tank granuloma,
a localized skin infection caused by M. marinum, follows skin injury
in an aquatic environment. Mycobacterium fortuitum complex bacteria
and Mycobacterium chelonae are ubiquitous in water and have caused
clusters of nosocomial surgical wound and venous catheter–related
infections. Mycobacterium ulcerans is associated with severe, chronic
skin infections (Buruli ulcer disease) and is endemic mainly in West
Africa and Australia, although other foci exist. Its incidence is highest in children <15 years old. M. ulcerans had been detected in environmental samples by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and has been
recovered by culture from a water strider (an insect of the Gerris genus)
from Benin.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Humans are exposed to NTM on a daily basis. In rural U.S. counties,
where M. avium is common in swamps, the prevalence of asymptomatic infections with M. avium complex, as measured by skin
test sensitization, approaches 70% by adulthood. Still, the incidence
and prevalence of the various NTM disease types remain largely
unknown, especially for pediatric NTM disease. In Australian children, the overall incidence of NTM infection is 0.84 per 100,000,
with lymphadenitis accounting for two thirds of cases. The incidence
of pediatric NTM disease in the Netherlands is estimated at 0.77
infections per 100,000 children per year, with lymphadenitis making
up 92% of all infections.
In comparison, estimations of the prevalence of NTM from respiratory samples in adults are 5-­15 per 100,000 persons per year, with
important differences between countries or regions. Because pulmonary NTM disease progresses slowly, over years rather than months,
and usually takes several years to cure, the prevalence of pulmonary
NTM disease is much higher than incidence rates would suggest.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 263 u Nontuberculous Mycobacteria
The paradigm that NTM disease is a rare entity limited to resourcerich countries is changing. In recent studies in African countries with
a high prevalence of HIV infection, it has been found that NTM might
play a much larger role as a cause of tuberculosis-­like disease of children and adults than previously assumed and thus confuse the diagnosis of tuberculosis.
Although it is generally believed that NTM infections are contracted
from environmental sources, whole genome sequence analysis of
Mycobacterium abscessus strains of patients in a CF clinic in the United
Kingdom supports the possibility of nosocomial horizontal transmission among CF patients.

PATHOGENESIS

The histologic appearances of lesions caused by M. tuberculosis and
NTM are often indistinguishable. The classic pathologic lesion consists
of caseating granulomas. Compared with M. tuberculosis infections,
NTM infections are more likely to result in granulomas that are noncaseating, poorly defined (nonpalisading), irregular or serpiginous, or
even absent, with only chronic inflammatory changes observed. The
histology likely reflects the immune status of the patient.
In patients with AIDS and disseminated NTM infection, the inflammatory reaction is usually scant, and tissues are filled with large

1861

numbers of histiocytes packed with acid-­fast bacilli (AFB). These disseminated NTM infections typically occur only after the number of
CD4 T lymphocytes has fallen below 50/μL in children ≥6 years, below
75/μL in children 2 to <6 years, below 500/μL in children 1 to <2 years,
and below 750/μL in children <1 year, suggesting that specific T-­cell
products or activities are required for immunity to mycobacteria.
The pivotal roles of interferon (IFN)-­γ, interleukin (IL)-­12, and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α in disease pathogenesis are demonstrated by the high incidence of mostly disseminated NTM disease in
children with IFN-­γ and IL-­12 pathway deficiencies and in persons
treated with agents that neutralize TNF-­α.
Observed differences in pathogenicity, clinical relevance, and
spectrum of clinical disease associated with the various NTM species emphasize the importance of bacterial factors in the pathogenesis of NTM disease, although exact virulence factors remain largely
unknown.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Lymphadenitis of the superior anterior cervical or submandibular
lymph nodes is the most common manifestation of NTM infection
in children (Table 263.1). Preauricular, posterior cervical, axillary,
and inguinal nodes are involved occasionally. Lymphadenitis is most

Table 263.1  Major Clinical Syndromes Associated with Nontuberculous Mycobacterial Infection
SYNDROME

MOST COMMON CAUSES

LESS FREQUENT CAUSES*

Chronic nodular disease (adults with
bronchiectasis; cystic fibrosis)

MAC (M. intracellulare, M. avium),
M. kansasii, M. abscessus

M. xenopi, M. malmoense, M. szulgai, M. smegmatis,
M. celatum, M. simiae, M. goodii, M. asiaticum,
M. heckeshornense, M. branderi, M. lentiflavum, M. triplex,
M. fortuitum, M. arupense, M. abscessus subsp. bolletii,
M. phocaicum, M. aubagnense, M. florentinum, M. abscessus
subsp. massiliense, M. nebraskense, M. saskatchewanense,
M. seoulense, M. senuense, M. paraseoulense, M. europaeum,
M. sherrisii, M. kyorinense, M. noviomagense, M. mantenii,
M. shinjukuense, M. koreense, M. heraklionense,
M. parascrofulaceum, M. arosiense

Cervical or other lymphadenitis
(especially children)

MAC

M. scrofulaceum, M. malmoense (northern Europe),
M. abscessus, M. fortuitum, M. lentiflavum,
M. tusciae, M. palustre, M. interjectum, M. elephantis,
M. heidelbergense, M. parmense, M. bohemicum,
M. haemophilum, M. europaeum, M. florentinum, M. triplex,
M. asiaticum, M. kansasii, M. heckeshornense

Skin and soft tissue disease

M. fortuitum group, M. chelonae,
M. abscessus, M. marinum, M. ulcerans
(Australia, tropical countries only)

M. kansasii, M. haemophilum, M. porcinum, M. smegmatis,
M. genavense, M. lacus, M. novocastrense, M. houstonense,
M. goodii, M. immunogenum, M. mageritense, M. abscessus
subsp. massiliense, M. arupense, M. monacense,
M. bohemicum, M. branderi, M. shigaense, M. szulgai,
M. asiaticum, M. xenopi, M. kumamotense, M. setense,
M. montefiorense (eels), M. pseudoshottsii (fish), M. shottsii (fish)

Skeletal (bone, joint, tendon)
infection

M. marinum, MAC, M. kansasii,
M. fortuitum group, M. abscessus,
M. chelonae

M. haemophilum, M. scrofulaceum, M. heckeshornense,
M. smegmatis, M. terrae/chromogenicum complex,
M. wolinskyi, M. goodii, M. arupense, M. xenopi, M. triplex,
M. lacus, M. arosiense

Disseminated infection

M. genavense, M. haemophilum, M. xenopi

HIV-­seropositive host

M. avium, M. kansasii

M. marinum, M. simiae, M. intracellulare, M. scrofulaceum,
M. fortuitum, M. conspicuum, M. celatum, M. lentiflavum,
M. triplex, M. colombiense, M. sherrisii, M. heckeshornense

HIV-­seronegative host

M. abscessus, M. chelonae

M. marinum, M. kansasii, M. haemophilum, M. chimaera,
M. conspicuum, M. shottsii (fish), M. pseudoshottsii (fish)

Catheter-­related infections

M. fortuitum, M. abscessus, M. chelonae

M. mucogenicum, M. immunogenum, M. mageritense,
M. septicum, M. porcinum, M. bacteremicum, M. brumae

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (metal
workers; hot tub users)

M. immunogenum, M. avium

*The available information is sparse for selected pathogens such as M. xenopi, M. malmoense, M. szulgai, M. celatum, and M. asiaticum and the newly described species.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; MAC, Mycobacterium avium complex.
From Brown-­Elliott BA, Wallace RJ Jr. Infections caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria other than Mycobacterium avium complex. In Bennett JF, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell,
Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 254-­1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1862 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Fig. 263.1 Enlarging cervical lymph node infected with Mycobacterium avium complex infection. The node is firm, painless, freely movable, and not erythematous.

Fig. 263.2 Suppurating cervical lymph node infected with Mycobacterium avium complex.

common in children 1-­5 years of age and has been related to soil
exposure (e.g., playing in sandboxes) and teething, although exact
predisposing conditions have not been identified. Given the constant
environmental exposure to NTM, the occurrence of these infections
might also reflect an atypical immune response of a subset of the
infected children during or after their first contact with NTM. However, in healthy children with isolated NTM lymphadenitis, immunodeficiency is quite rare.
Affected children usually lack constitutional symptoms and present
with a unilateral, subacute, and slowly enlarging lymph node or group
of closely approximated nodes >1.5 cm in diameter that are firm, painless, freely movable, and not erythematous (Fig. 263.1). The involved
nodes occasionally resolve without progression, but most undergo
rapid suppuration after several weeks (Fig. 263.2). The center of the
node becomes fluctuant, and the overlying skin thins and becomes
erythematous and often even violaceous. Eventually, the nodes rupture
and can form cutaneous sinus tracts that can drain persistently, reminiscent of scrofula from tuberculosis (Fig. 263.3).
In the United States and Western Europe, MAC accounts for approximately 80% of NTM lymphadenitis in children. M. kansasii accounts
for most other cases of lymphadenitis in the United States. M. malmoense and M. haemophilum have also been described as causative
agents of lymphadenitis. M. malmoense is most common in Northwestern Europe. For M. haemophilum, underestimation of its importance is likely because the bacteria require specific culture conditions
(hemin-­enriched media, low incubation temperatures). On the basis of
PCR analysis of lymph node samples from lymphadenitis cases in The
Netherlands, M. haemophilum is the second most common cause of
this infection, after MAC. One study suggests that children with MAC

Fig. 263.3 Ruptured cervical lymph node infected with Mycobacterium avium complex, which resembles the classic scrofula of tuberculosis.

lymphadenitis are significantly younger than those infected by M. haemophilum, possibly related to age-­specific environmental exposures.
Mycobacterium lentiflavum is also an emerging NTM associated with
lymphadenitis.
Cutaneous disease caused by NTM is rare in children (see Table
263.1). Infection usually follows percutaneous inoculation with fresh
or salt water contaminated by M. marinum. Within 2-­6 weeks after
exposure, an erythematous papule develops at the site of minor abrasions on the elbows, knees, or feet (swimming pool granuloma) and
on the hands and fingers of fish tank owners, mostly inflicted during
tank cleaning (fish tank granuloma). These lesions are usually nontender and enlarge over 3-­5 weeks to form violaceous plaques. Nodules
or pustules can develop and occasionally will ulcerate, resulting in a
serosanguineous discharge. The lesions sometimes resemble sporotrichosis, with satellite lesions near the site of entry, extending along the
superficial lymphatics. Lymphadenopathy is usually absent. Although
most infections remain localized to the skin, penetrating M. marinum infections can result in tenosynovitis, bursitis, osteomyelitis, or
arthritis.
M. ulcerans infection is the third most common mycobacterial infection in immunocompetent patients, after M. tuberculosis and M. leprae
infection, and causes cutaneous disease in children living in tropical
regions of Africa, South America, Asia, and parts of Australia. In some
communities in West Africa, up to 16% of people have been affected.
Children <15 years old are particularly affected in rural tropical counties, accounting for 48% of infected individuals in Africa. Infection follows percutaneous inoculation from minor trauma, such as pricks and
cuts from plants or insect bites. After an incubation period of approximately 3 months, lesions appear as an erythematous nodule, usually on
the legs or arms. The lesion undergoes central necrosis and ulceration.
The lesion, often called a Buruli ulcer after the region in Uganda where
a large case series was reported, has a characteristic undermined edge,
expands over several weeks, and can result in extensive, deep soft tissue destruction or bone involvement (Fig. 263.4). Lesions are typically
painless, and constitutional symptoms are unusual. Lesions might heal
slowly over 6-­9 months or might continue to spread, leading to deformities, contractures, and disability. Depending on the location of the
ulcer, these can be significantly disfiguring.
Skin and soft tissue infections caused by rapidly growing mycobacteria, such as M. fortuitum, M. chelonae, or M. abscessus, are
rare in children and usually follow percutaneous inoculation from
puncture or surgical wounds, minor abrasions, or tattooing. There
has been a large outbreak of M. fortuitum furunculosis related to
nail salon footbaths. Clinical disease usually arises after a 4-­to
6-­
week incubation period and manifests as localized cellulitis,
painful nodules, or a draining abscess. M. haemophilum can cause
painful subcutaneous nodules, which often ulcerate and suppurate in immunocompromised patients, particularly after kidney
transplantation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 263 u Nontuberculous Mycobacteria

A

B

C

1863

D

Fig. 263.4 Buruli ulcer lesions in patients from West Africa (A and B) and Japan (C and D). (A, B from Röltgen K, Pluschke G. Buruli ulcer: history and
disease burden. In: Pluschke G, Röltgen K, eds. Buruli Ulcer. Cham: Springer; 2019; C, D courtesy Dr Mikio Ohtsuka, Fukushima Medical University.)

Fig. 263.5 CT images of the middle

A

B

NTM are an uncommon cause of catheter-­associated infections but
are becoming increasingly recognized in this respect. Infections caused
by M. fortuitum, M. chelonae, or M. abscessus can manifest as bacteremia or localized catheter tunnel infections.
Otomastoiditis, or chronic otitis media, is a rare extrapulmonary
NTM disease type that specifically affects children with tympanostomy
tubes and a history of topical antibiotic or steroid use. M. abscessus is
the most common causative agent, followed by MAC (see Table 263.1).
Patients present with painless, chronic otorrhea resistant to antibiotic
therapy. CT can reveal destruction of the mastoid bone with mucosal
swelling (Fig. 263.5).
Delayed or unsuccessful treatment can result in permanent
hearing loss. In unusual circumstances, NTM cause other bone
and joint infections that are indistinguishable from those produced by M. tuberculosis or other bacterial agents. Such infections usually result from operative incision or accidental puncture
wounds. M. fortuitum infections from puncture wounds of the
foot resemble infections caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Staphylococcus aureus.
Pulmonary infections are the most common form of NTM illness
in adults but are rare in children. MAC bacteria, the most commonly
identified organisms (see Table 263.1), are capable of causing acute
pneumonitis, chronic cough, or wheezing associated with paratracheal
or peribronchial lymphadenitis and airway compression in normal
children. Associated constitutional symptoms such as fever, anorexia,
and weight loss occur in 60% of these children. Chest radiographic
findings are similar to those for primary tuberculosis, with unilateral
infiltrates and hilar lymphadenopathy (Fig. 263.6). Pleural effusion is

ear of 6-­yr-­old child infected with Mycobacterium abscessus, demonstrating
extensive bone destruction in the right
mastoid and associated right-­
sided
mucosal swelling. A, Bone tissue window setting. B, Soft tissue window setting.

Fig. 263.6 Chest radiograph of 2-­yr-­old child infected with Mycobac-

terium avium complex, demonstrating a left upper lobe infiltrate and
left hilar lymphadenopathy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1864 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
uncommon. Rare cases of progression to endobronchial granulation
tissue have been reported.
Pulmonary infections usually occur in adults with underlying
chronic lung disease. The onset is insidious and consists of cough and
fatigue, progressing to weight loss, night sweats, low-­grade fever, and
generalized malaise in severe cases. Thin-­walled cavities with minimal surrounding parenchymal infiltrates are characteristic, but radiographic findings can resemble those of tuberculosis. A separate disease
manifestation occurs typically in postmenopausal women and is radiologically characterized by bronchiectasis and nodular lesions, often
affecting the middle lobe and lingula (Lady Windemere’s syndrome).
Chronic pulmonary infections specifically affect children with CF
and are generally caused by M. abscessus or MAC. M. abscessus primarily affects children, and MAC is most common among adults. The
percentage of CF patients with at least one sputum culture positive for
NTM is 6–8.1% overall and increases with age; in CF patients <12 years
old, a prevalence of 3.9% has been reported. The strong representation of M. abscessus in these patients is remarkable, because this bacterium is an uncommon isolate in other categories of patients. There
are indications that NTM infections in CF patients further accelerate
the decline in lung function; antimycobacterial therapy can result in
weight gain and improved lung function in affected patients.
Disseminated disease is usually associated with MAC infection and
occurs in immunocompromised children. The first category of patients
with disseminated disease includes persons with mutations in genes
coding for the interferon-­γ receptor (IFNGR) or the IL-­12 receptor or
for IL-­12 production. Patients with complete IFNGR deficiency have
severe, difficult-­to-­treat disease. Those with partial IFNGR deficiency
or IL-­12 pathway mutations have milder disease that can respond to
IFN-­γ and antimycobacterial therapy. Multifocal osteomyelitis is
particularly prevalent in persons with the IFNGR1 818del4 mutation.
Recurrences, even years after a course of treatment, and multiple infections are well documented. The second category of patients affected
by disseminated disease is patients with AIDS. Disseminated NTM
disease in patients with AIDS usually appears when CD4 cell counts
are <50/μL for children ≥6 years , <75/μL in children 2 to <6 years,
<500/μL in children 1 to <2 years, and <750/μL in children <1 year.
The most recent estimate of the incidence of disseminated NTM disease is 0.14-­0.2 episodes per 100 person-­years, a 10-­fold decrease from
its incidence before combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) was
available.
Colonization of the respiratory or gastrointestinal (GI) tract probably precedes disseminated MAC infections, but screening studies of
respiratory secretions or stool samples are not useful to predict dissemination. Continuous high-­grade bacteremia is common, and multiple
organs are infected, typically including the lymph nodes, liver, spleen,
bone marrow, and GI tract. The thyroid, pancreas, adrenal gland, kidney, muscle, and brain can also be involved. The most common signs
and symptoms of disseminated MAC infections in patients with AIDS
are fever, night sweats, chills, anorexia, marked weight loss, wasting,
weakness, generalized lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly.
Jaundice, elevated alkaline phosphatase or lactate dehydrogenase levels, anemia, and neutropenia can occur. Imaging studies usually demonstrate massive lymphadenopathy of hilar, mediastinal, mesenteric, or
retroperitoneal nodes. Successful treatment of disseminated infection
in children with AIDS requires immune reconstitution and cART in
addition to specific NTM therapy. The survival in children with AIDS
has improved considerably with the availability of cART.
Disseminated disease in children without any apparent immunodeficiency is exceedingly rare.

DIAGNOSIS

For infections of lymph nodes, skin, bone, and soft tissues, isolation of
the causative NTM bacteria by Mycobacterium culture, preferably with
histologic confirmation of granulomatous inflammation, normally
suffices for diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of NTM lymphadenitis includes acute bacterial lymphadenitis, tuberculosis, cat scratch
disease (Bartonella henselae infection), mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, tularemia, and malignancies, especially lymphomas.

Table 263.2  American Thoracic Society Clinical and
Microbiologic Criteria for Diagnosis of
Nontuberculous Mycobacteria (NTM)
Pulmonary Disease
CLINICAL*

PULMONARY OR SYSTEMIC SYMPTOMS

Radiologic*

Nodular or cavitary opacities on chest
radiograph or a high-­resolution computed
tomography (HRCT) scan that shows
bronchiectasis with multiple small nodules

AND

Appropriate exclusion of other diagnoses

Microbiologic

1.	Positive culture results from at least two
separate expectorated sputum samples.
If the results are nondiagnostic, consider
repeat sputum AFB smears and cultures.
or
2.	Positive culture results from at least one
bronchial wash or lavage.
or
3.	Transbronchial or other lung biopsy
with mycobacterial histologic features
(granulomatous inflammation or AFB)
and positive culture for NTM or biopsy
showing mycobacterial histologic features
(granulomatous inflammation or AFB) and
one or more sputum or bronchial washings
that are culture-positive for NTM.

*Note: Both clinical and radiologic criteria are required.
AFB, Acid-­fast bacilli.
From Daley CL, Iaccarino JM, Lange C, et al. Treatment of nontuberculous
mycobacterial pulmonary disease: an official ATS/ERS/ESCMID/IDSA Clinical Practice
Guideline [published correction appears in Clin Infect Dis. 2020 Dec 31;71(11):3023].
Clin Infect Dis. 2020;71(4):e1–e36.

Differentiation between NTM and M. tuberculosis may be difficult, but
children with NTM lymphadenitis usually have a Mantoux tuberculin skin test reaction of <15 mm induration, unilateral anterior cervical node involvement, a normal chest radiograph, and no history of
exposure to tuberculosis. Definitive diagnosis requires excision of the
involved nodes for culture and histology. Fine-­needle aspiration for
PCR and culture can enable earlier diagnosis, before excisional biopsy.
The diagnosis of pulmonary NTM infection in children is difficult
because many species of NTM, including MAC, are omnipresent in
our environment and can contaminate clinical samples or be present
but not causative of disease. As a result, isolation of these bacteria from
nonsterile specimens (respiratory and digestive tract) does not necessarily reflect true disease. To determine the clinical relevance of isolation of NTM, the ATS/BTS diagnostic criteria are an important support
(Table 263.2). These criteria take into consideration clinical features
and radiologic, pathologic, and microbiologic findings. Their hallmark
is the need for multiple positive cultures yielding the same NTM species to make a definitive diagnosis of pulmonary NTM disease, though
a single culture from bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)/bronchial lavage is
acceptable in patients who meet clinical and radiologic criteria. In children, definitive diagnosis often requires invasive procedures such as
bronchoscopy and pulmonary or endobronchial biopsy; in CF patients,
more aggressive sample pretreatment in the clinical microbiology laboratory is necessary to prevent overgrowth by other species, especially
Pseudomonas. The chance of NTM isolation being clinically relevant
differs significantly by species; some species are more likely causative
agents of true pulmonary disease (M. avium, M. kansasii, M. abscessus,
M. malmoense), whereas others are more likely contaminants (M. gordonae, M. fortuitum, M. chelonae).
Blood cultures are 90–95% sensitive in AIDS patients with disseminated infection. MAC may be detected within 7-­10 days of inoculation in almost all patients by automated blood culture systems. In
adults, some studies have shown that liver biopsy cultures and stains
are more sensitive than blood culture or bone marrow biopsy workup.
Commercially available DNA probes differentiate NTM from M.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 263 u Nontuberculous Mycobacteria
tuberculosis. If DNA probes cannot identify the causative mycobacteria, DNA sequencing of bacterial housekeeping genes can yield a clue
to the identity of these NTM. Identification of histiocytes containing
numerous AFB from bone marrow and other biopsy tissues provides a
rapid presumptive diagnosis of disseminated mycobacterial infection.

TREATMENT

Therapy for NTM infections is long-­term and cumbersome; expert
consultation is advised. Therapy involves medical, surgical, or often
combined treatment (see Chapter 260, Table 260.3). Isolation of the
infecting strain followed by drug-­susceptibility testing is ideal, because
it provides a baseline for drug susceptibility. Important discrepancies
exist between in vitro drug susceptibility and in vivo response to treatment, explained in part by synergism, mainly among first-­line antituberculosis drugs. In vitro, slow growers (M. kansasii, M. marinum, M.
xenopi, M. ulcerans, M. malmoense) are usually susceptible to the first-­
line antituberculosis drugs rifampin and ethambutol; MAC bacteria
are often resistant to these drugs alone but susceptible to the combination and have variable susceptibility to other antibiotics, most importantly the macrolides. Rapid growers (M. fortuitum, M. chelonae, M.
abscessus) are highly resistant to antituberculosis drugs and often have
inducible macrolide-­resistance mechanisms. Susceptibility to macrolides, aminoglycosides, carbapenems, tetracyclines, and glycylcyclines
are most relevant for therapy guidance. In all NTM infections, multidrug therapy (MDT) is essential to avoid development of resistance.
The preferred treatment of NTM lymphadenitis is complete surgical excision. Clinical trials revealed that surgery is more effective
than antibiotic treatment (see Table 260.3). Nodes should be removed
while still firm and encapsulated. Excision is more difficult if extensive
caseation with extension to surrounding tissue has occurred, and complications of facial nerve damage or relapse of infection are more likely
in such cases. Incomplete surgical excision is not advised, because
chronic drainage can develop. If there are concerns or risk factors for
possible M. tuberculosis infection, therapy with isoniazid, rifampin,
ethambutol, and pyrazinamide should be administered until cultures
confirm the cause to be NTM (see Chapter 261). If surgery of NTM
lymphadenitis cannot be performed, or removal of infected tissue is
incomplete, or recurrence or chronic drainage develops, a 3-­month
trial of antibiotic therapy should be considered. Clarithromycin or
azithromycin combined with rifampin or ethambutol are the most
common therapy regimens reported for MAC lymphadenitis (see
Table 260.3). Suppuration may still occur on appropriate antibiotic
therapy. In immunocompetent patients, an observational approach
to NTM lymphadenitis can be chosen without antibiotic therapy,
although resolution will take up to 12 months.
Posttraumatic cutaneous NTM lesions in immunocompetent
patients usually heal spontaneously after incision and drainage without
other therapy. M. marinum is susceptible to rifampin, amikacin, ethambutol, sulfonamides, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, and tetracycline.
Therapy with a combination of these drugs, particularly clarithromycin and ethambutol, may be given until 1 month after the lesion has
disappeared. Corticosteroid injections should not be used. Superficial
infections with M. fortuitum or M. chelonae usually resolve after surgical incision and open drainage, but deep-­seated or catheter-­related
infections require removal of infected central lines and therapy with
parenteral amikacin plus cefoxitin, ciprofloxacin, or clarithromycin.
Some localized forms of M. ulcerans skin disease (Buruli ulcer)
can heal spontaneously; for most forms, excisional surgery with primary closure or skin grafting is recommended. The combination of
rifampin (10 mg/kg once daily) and clarithromycin (7.5 mg/kg twice
daily) for 8 weeks results in excellent outcomes and is now the recommended treatment for early limited Buruli ulcer. Another agent
that shows great promise is telacebec (also known as Q203), a novel
first-­in-­class antituberculosis drug targeting cellular energy production
through inhibition of the mycobacterial cytochrome bc1 complex; animal studies have demonstrated significant potency against M. ulcerans,
possibly allowing for shorter courses of treatment. In January 2021, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration granted orphan drug designation
(ODD) to telacebec for Buruli ulcer treatment. Physiotherapy after
surgery is essential to prevent contractures and functional disabilities.

1865

For patients who meet diagnostic criteria for pulmonary NTM
infections (see Table 263.2), treatment rather than observation is recommended, particularly with persistently positive sputum smears
and/or cavitary lung disease. Although treatment offers possibility of
cure, there can be significant adverse effects of treatment and low cure
rates for some forms of infection. Patients who require treatment for
NTM pulmonary disease should have isolates sent for susceptibility
testing, with the caveat that this testing is helpful for NTM for antibiotics where there is a well-­documented correlation between in vitro
activity and microbiologic response to therapy. Drugs for which this
correlation exist include macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin)
and amikacin for MAC and M. abscessus and rifampin for M. kansasii.
For macrolide-­susceptible MAC pulmonary disease, treatment with
three drugs for at least 12 months after culture conversion is recommended, generally azithromycin, rifampin, and ethambutol. For
macrolide-­resistant isolates, parenteral amikacin is often used, as MAC
isolates are usually susceptible in vitro to this agent.
Macrolides are a mainstay in the treatment of M. abscessus pulmonary disease. However, macrolide resistance can develop via chromosomal mutation or through induction of the erm(41) gene. For
M. abscessus disease caused by strains without inducible or chromosomal macrolide resistance, a macrolide-­containing treatment
regimen is recommended, typically with at least three active drugs.
If macrolide resistance (chromosomal or inducible) is present, at
least four active drugs are recommended. Treatment regimens for
M. abscessus are complex, usually with oral plus parental drugs.
Regimens typically include two to three oral agents, which may
include azithromycin, clofazimine, or linezolid, and at least one
parenteral agent, with options including amikacin, imipenem,
and tigecycline. In CF patients, inhaled agents may also have a
role. Choice of treatment regimens and duration of therapy should
be guided by expert consultation. For select patients, surgical resection of severely diseased lung in addition to medical therapy may be
indicated.
For M. kansasii pulmonary disease, susceptibility-­based treatment
for rifampin is recommended over empirical therapy. The recommended treatment regimen for rifampin-­susceptible M. kansasii infections is rifampin, ethambutol, and either isoniazid or a macrolide for at
least 12 months. Fluoroquinolones also have good activity against M.
kanasasii but are reserved for rifampin-­resistant M. kansasii infection
treatment and for patients who have intolerance to one of the first-­line
antibiotics.
Patients with disseminated MAC and IL-­12 pathway defects or
IFNGR deficiency should be treated for at least 12 months with clarithromycin or azithromycin combined with rifampin or rifabutin and
ethambutol. In vitro susceptibility testing for macrolides is important to guide therapy. Once the clinical illness has resolved, lifelong
daily prophylaxis with azithromycin or clarithromycin is advisable to
prevent recurrent disease. The use of IFN adjunctive therapy is determined by the specific genetic defect.
In children with AIDS, prophylaxis with azithromycin or clarithromycin is indicated to prevent infection with MAC. Although few pediatric studies exist, the U.S. Public Health Service recommends either
azithromycin (20 mg/kg once weekly PO, maximum 1,200 mg/dose or
5 mg/kg once daily PO, maximum 250 mg/dose in patients intolerant
of the larger dose) or clarithromycin (7.5 mg/kg/dose twice daily PO;
maximum 500 mg/dose) for HIV-­infected children with significant
immune deficiency, as defined by the CD4 count (children ≥6 years
old, CD4 count <50 cells/μL; 2 to <6 years old, <75/μL; 1 to <2 years
old, <500/μL; <1 year old, <750/μL). Rifabutin may also be used. Primary prophylaxis may be safely discontinued in children >2 years old
receiving stable highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for >6
months and experiencing sustained (>3 months) CD4 cell recovery
well above the age-­specific target for initiation of prophylaxis: >100
cells/μL for children ≥6 years old and >200/μL for children 2-­5 years
old. For children <2 years old, no specific recommendations for discontinuing MAC prophylaxis exist.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1866 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Section 8

Spirochetal Infections

Cases

60,000

45,000

MSM

30,000

Women

15,000

MSW
MSU

Chapter 264

Syphilis (Treponema
pallidum)
Alice I. Sato and H. Dele Davies

Syphilis is a chronic systemic sexually or vertically (mother to child)
transmitted infection that can be easily treated if detected early but
manifests with protean clinical symptoms and significant morbidity if
left unchecked. (Please note that the terms mother and maternal are
used to designate the birthing parent throughout this chapter and are
not intended to exclude other birthing parents.)

ETIOLOGY

0
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Year

Fig 264.1 Primary and secondary syphilis – Reported cases by sex

and sex of sex partners 2017–2021. Note: Over the 5-­yr period, 0.2% of
cases were missing sex and were not included. MSM, Gay, bisexual, and
other men who have sex with men; MSU, Men with unknown sex of sex
partners; MSW, men who have sex with women only. (From Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted disease surveillance. National overview of STDs, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/std/stat
istics/2021/overview.htm)
P&S Syphilis rate*

CS Cases
3,000

18

2,400

15
12

1,800

9
1,200

6

600

Syphilis is caused by Treponema pallidum, a delicate, tightly spiraled,
motile spirochete with finely tapered ends belonging to the family Spirochaetaceae. The pathogenic members of this genus include T. pallidum
subspecies pallidum (venereal syphilis), T. pallidum subspecies pertenue
(yaws), T. pallidum subspecies endemicum (bejel or endemic syphilis),
and T. pallidum subspecies carateum (pinta). Because these microorganisms stain poorly and are below the detection limits of conventional
light microscopy, detection in clinical specimens requires dark-­field,
phase-­contrast microscopy or direct immunofluorescent or silver staining. T. pallidum has only recently been successfully grown in vitro via
co-culture with mammalian tissue culture cells, and a method has now
been described for inoculation of fresh and frozen needle aspirates from
primary experimental syphilis lesions onto culture plates but remains to
be developed for clinical use. Use of nucleic acid amplification testing by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may have a role in diagnosis, particularly in seronegative patients or those with discrepant serology results.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Acquired syphilis is transmitted almost exclusively by sexual contact,
including vaginal, anal, and oral exposure. Less common modes of transmission include transfusion of contaminated blood or direct contact
with infected tissues. Syphilis in men who have sex with men (MSM)
may be acquired in the absence of visible lesions. DNA-­based T. pallidum
testing has identified organisms in oral rinse or swab samples and in anal
canal swabs, urine, semen, and peripheral blood; the risk is highest in
secondary and early latent syphilis. The incubation period for acquired
primary syphilis is about 3 weeks (range 10-­90 days). After an epidemic
resurgence of primary and secondary syphilis in the United States that
peaked in 1989, the annual rate declined 90% to the lowest-­ever rate by
2000. The total number of cases of primary and secondary syphilis has
subsequently rebounded since 2000 (Fig. 264.1). MSM have been disproportionately impacted: ∼46% of cases in 2021. Rates of primary and
secondary syphilis in women remain lower than in men yet still have
increased 55% during 2021. Cases of congenital syphilis reached an historic low in 2005 but have subsequently increased annually since 2013,
reflecting the rates among women. In 2021, the US national congenital
syphilis rate was 77.9 cases per 100,000 live births, representing a 30.5%
increase from 2020 and a 219.3% increase from 2017 (Fig. 264.2); syphilitic still births also increased over this period. The increase occurs across
every region and all races and ethnicities, but marked disparities exist,

3
0

0
2012

2015
CS cases

Year

2018

2021

Female (15–44 years) P&S syphilis rate*

Fig. 264.2 Congenital syphilis — Reported cases by year of birth

and rates of reported cases of primary and secondary syphilis among
women age 15-­44 years, United States, 2012–2021. *Per 100,000. CS,
Congenital syphilis; P&S syphilis, Primary and secondary syphilis. (From
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted disease surveillance. National overview of STDs, 2021. https://www.cdc.g
ov/std/statistics/2021/overview.htm)

with minority groups, gay and bisexual men, and youth most affected.
The COVID-­19 pandemic disrupted screening programs and access to
care, and increased cases are expected.
Congenital syphilis results from transplacental transmission of spirochetes or occasionally by intrapartum contact with infectious lesions or
possibly involved mucosa without obvious lesions. Women with primary
and secondary syphilis and spirochetemia are more likely to transmit
infection to the fetus than are women with latent infection. Transmission can occur at any stage of pregnancy, resulting in early fetal loss, preterm or low birthweight infants, stillbirths, neonatal deaths, or infants
born with congenital disease. The incidence of congenital infection in
offspring of untreated or inadequately treated infected women remains
highest during the first 4 years after acquisition of primary infection,
secondary infection, and early latent disease. Maternal (parental) factors
associated with congenital syphilis include limited access to healthcare,
late or no prenatal care, drug use, multiple sex partners, unprotected sexual contact, incarceration, work in the sex trade, and inadequate treatment of syphilis during pregnancy. Congenital syphilis may be seen in
the context of untreated, inadequately treated, or undocumented treatment before or during pregnancy. In addition, the mother may have been
treated appropriately but did not have an adequate serologic response
to therapy and the infant was inadequately evaluated, or the infant had
documented congenital syphilis. Confirmed cases of both acquired and
congenital syphilis must be reported to the local health department.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

Many persons infected with syphilis are asymptomatic for years, or do
not recognize the early signs of disease, or do not seek or have access

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 264 u Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)
to treatment. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
recommends testing all pregnant persons and selective testing of
adolescents, based on lesions or risk factors (those with other sexually transmitted diseases including HIV, MSM, incarcerated individuals, or persons who exchange sex for money or drugs). CDC/MMWR
sexually transmitted infection (STI) guidelines should be consulted to
ensure that all appropriate screening is performed. All 50 states and
the District of Columbia explicitly allow minors to consent for STI
services, though as of 2022, 18 states allow (but do not require) physicians to notify parents of STI services provided to a minor (https://
www.cdc.gov/hiv/policies/law/states/minors.html). Periods of active
clinical disease alternate with periods of latency (Fig. 264.3). Primary
syphilis is characterized by a chancre and regional lymphadenitis. A
painless papule (which may be overlooked) appears at the site of entry
(usually the genitalia) 2-­6 weeks after inoculation and develops into a
clean, painless but highly contagious ulcer with raised borders (chancre) containing abundant T. pallidum. Extragenital chancres can occur
at other sites of primary entry and pose a diagnostic challenge. Oral
lesions can be mistaken for aphthous ulcers or herpes. Lesions on the
nipple can be confused with cellulitis or eczema. Adjacent lymph nodes
are generally enlarged and nontender. The chancre heals spontaneously
within 4-­6 weeks, leaving a thin scar.
Untreated patients develop manifestations of secondary syphilis
related to spirochetemia 2-­10 weeks after the chancre heals. Manifestations of secondary syphilis include a generalized nonpruritic maculopapular rash, notably involving the palms and soles (Fig. 264.4).
Pustular lesions can also develop. Condylomata lata, gray-­white to
erythematous wartlike plaques, can occur in moist areas around the
anus, scrotum, or vagina, and white plaques (mucous patches) may

1867

be found in mucous membranes. Secondary syphilis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of virtually any rash of unknown
etiology. A flulike illness with low-­grade fever, headache, malaise,
anorexia, weight loss, sore throat, myalgias, arthralgias, and generalized lymphadenopathy is often present. Renal, hepatic, or ocular manifestations may be present. Meningitis occurs in about 30% of patients
with untreated syphilis, occurring at any stage but most commonly in

Fig. 264.4 Secondary syphilis. Ham-­colored palmar macules on an

adolescent with secondary syphilis. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli
J. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
2002.)

Exposure
Incubation
(10-90 days; mean ~21)
Primary syphilis
(chancre formation)
lasts 2-6 weeks
Incubation
(4-8 weeks after
appearance of chancre)*

Infectious
via sexual or
mother-to-child
transmission
(1 year)

Asymptomatic

Symptomatic
5%
• Acute-subacute
aseptic meningitis
• Cranial neuritis
• Ocular involvement
• Meningovascular
disease (stroke)

Early latent syphilis (asymptomatic)
(1 year or less post-infection)
Late latent syphilis (asymptomatic)
(>1 yr or unknown duration
post-infection)

Tertiary syphilis

Noninfectious

Early neurosyphilis

Secondary syphilis

Recurrence
20-30%
Infectious via
mother-to-child
transmission
(5 years)

Central
nervous
system
invasion
25%-60%

Cardiovascular syphilis
10%
(Onset ≥ 10
years post-infection)

Gummatous disease
15%
(Onset ≥ 5
years post-infection)

~80%
clearance

Tertiary syphilis
Late neurosyphilis
General paresis
Tabes dorsalis
2%-5%
2%-9%
(Onset ≥ 15
(Onset ≥ 15
years post-infection)
years post-infection)

Fig. 264.3 Natural course of untreated syphilis. As of January 2018, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention renamed early and late latent

syphilis early syphilis, nonprimary, nonsecondary and syphilis, unknown duration or late, respectively. *HIV infection may modify the progression of
syphilis; the chancre may coexist with the secondary syphilis stage, suggesting a more rapid progression to the secondary stage. (Modified from
Radolf JD, Tramont EC, Salazar JC. Syphilis [Treponema pallidum]. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles
and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 237.5, p. 2874.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1868 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
secondary syphilis (see Fig. 264.3). It is characterized by cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) pleocytosis and elevated protein level. Patients with meningitis might not show neurologic symptoms. Even without treatment,
secondary infection becomes latent within 1-­2 months after onset of
rash. Relapses with secondary manifestations can occur during the
first year of latency (the early latent period). Late syphilis follows and
may be either asymptomatic (late latent) or symptomatic (tertiary).
Tertiary disease follows in about one-­third of untreated cases and is
marked by neurologic, cardiovascular, and gummatous lesions (nonsuppurative granulomas of the skin, bone, and liver resulting from the
host cytotoxic T-­cell response). In the preantibiotic era, neurologic
manifestations of tertiary syphilis (tabes dorsalis and paresis) were
common. The clinical course of syphilis and its tissue manifestations
reflect the immunopathobiology of the host humoral and delayed-­type
hypersensitivity responses. A robust timeline of progression through
the overlapping stages occurs in immunocompromised HIV patients

Congenital Infection

Untreated syphilis during pregnancy results in a vertical transmission
rate approaching 100%, with profound effects on pregnancy outcome,

Fig. 264.5 Osteochondritis and periostitis in a newborn with congenital syphilis.

A

B

reflecting obliterating endarteritis. Fetal or perinatal death occurs in
40% of affected infants. Premature delivery can also occur. Neonates
can also be infected at delivery by contact with an active genital lesion.
Most infected infants are asymptomatic at birth, including up to 40%
with CSF seeding, and are identified only by routine prenatal screening. In the absence of treatment, symptoms develop within weeks or
months. Among infants symptomatic at birth or in the first few months
of life, manifestations have traditionally been divided into early and
late stages. All stages of congenital syphilis are characterized by a vasculitis, with progression to necrosis and fibrosis. The early signs appear
during the first 2 years of life, and the late signs appear gradually during the first 2 decades. Early manifestations vary and involve multiple
organ systems, resulting from transplacental spirochetemia, and are
analogous to the secondary stage of acquired syphilis. Hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, and elevated liver enzymes are common. Histologically, liver involvement includes bile stasis, fibrosis, and extramedullary
hematopoiesis. Lymphadenopathy tends to be diffuse and resolve
spontaneously, although shotty nodes can persist.
Coombs-­negative hemolytic anemia is characteristic. Thrombocytopenia is often associated with platelet trapping in an enlarged spleen.
Characteristic osteochondritis and periostitis (Fig. 264.5) and a
mucocutaneous rash (Fig. 264.6A and B) manifesting with erythematous maculopapular or vesiculobullous lesions followed by desquamation involving the hands and feet (see Fig. 264.6C) are common.
Mucous patches, persistent rhinitis (snuffles), and condylomatous
lesions (Fig. 264.7) are highly characteristic features of mucous membrane involvement containing abundant spirochetes. Blood and moist,
open lesions from infants with congenital syphilis and children with
acquired primary or secondary syphilis are infectious until 24 hours of
appropriate treatment.
Bone involvement is common. Roentgenographic abnormalities
include Wimberger lines (demineralization of the medial proximal tibial metaphysis); multiple sites of osteochondritis at the wrists,
elbows, ankles, and knees; and periostitis of the long bones and, rarely,
the skull. The osteochondritis is painful, often resulting in irritability and refusal to move the involved extremity (pseudoparalysis of
Parrot).
Congenital neurosyphilis is often asymptomatic in the neonatal period, although CSF abnormalities can occur even in asymptomatic infants. Failure to thrive, chorioretinitis, nephritis, and
nephrotic syndrome can also be seen. Manifestations of renal
involvement include hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, hypercholesterolemia, and hypocomplementemia,
probably related to glomerular deposition of circulating immune
complexes. Less common clinical manifestations of early congenital
syphilis include gastroenteritis, peritonitis, pancreatitis, pneumonia, eye involvement (glaucoma and chorioretinitis), nonimmune
hydrops, and testicular masses.
Late manifestations (children >2 years of age) are rarely seen in
developed countries. These result primarily from chronic granulomatous inflammation of bone, teeth, and the central nervous system and
are summarized in Table 264.1. Skeletal changes are caused by persistent or recurrent periostitis and associated thickening of the involved

C

Fig. 264.6 A and B, Papulosquamous plaques in two infants with syphilis. C, Desquamation on the palm of a newborn’s hand. (A and B from
Eichenfeld LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB, eds. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2001: p. 196; courtesy Dr. Patricia Treadwell.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 264 u Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)

1869

Fig. 264.7 Perianal condylomata lata. (From Karthikeyan K, Thappa

DM. Early congenital syphilis in the new millennium. Pediatr Dermatol.
2002;19:275–276.)

Fig. 264.8 Hutchinson teeth as a late manifestation of congenital
syphilis.

Table 264.1  Late Manifestations of Congenital Syphilis
SYMPTOM/SIGN

DESCRIPTION/COMMENTS

Olympian brow

Bony prominence of the forehead caused by
persistent or recurrent periostitis

Clavicular or
Higoumenakis sign

Unilateral or bilateral thickening of the
sternoclavicular third of the clavicle

Saber shins

Anterior bowing of the midportion of the tibia

Scaphoid scapula

Convexity along the medial border of the
scapula

Hutchinson teeth

Peg-­shaped upper central incisors; they
erupt during sixth yr of life with abnormal
enamel, resulting in a notch along the
biting surface

Mulberry molars

Abnormal first lower (6 yr) molars
characterized by small biting surface and
excessive number of cusps

Saddle nose*

Depression of the nasal root, a result of
syphilitic rhinitis destroying adjacent bone
and cartilage

Rhagades

Linear scars that extend in a spokelike
pattern from previous mucocutaneous
fissures of the mouth, anus, and genitalia

Juvenile paresis

Latent meningovascular infection; it is rare
and typically occurs during adolescence
with behavioral changes, focal seizures, or
loss of intellectual function

Juvenile tabes

Rare spinal cord involvement and
cardiovascular involvement with aortitis

Hutchinson triad

Hutchinson teeth, interstitial keratitis, and
eighth cranial nerve deafness

Clutton joint

Unilateral or bilateral painless joint swelling
(usually involving the knees) from synovitis
with sterile synovial fluid; spontaneous
remission usually occurs after several weeks

Interstitial keratitis

Manifests with intense photophobia and
lacrimation, followed within weeks or
months by corneal opacification and
complete blindness

Eighth cranial nerve
deafness

May be unilateral or bilateral, appears at
any age, manifests initially as vertigo and
high-­tone hearing loss, and progresses to
permanent deafness

*A perforated nasal septum may be an associated abnormality.

Fig. 264.9 Saddle nose in a newborn with congenital syphilis.
bone. Dental abnormalities, such as Hutchinson teeth (Fig. 264.8),
are common. Defects in enamel formation lead to repeated caries and
eventual tooth destruction. Saddle nose (Fig. 264.9) is a depression of
the nasal root and may be associated with a perforated nasal septum.
Other late manifestations of congenital syphilis can manifest as
hypersensitivity phenomena. These include unilateral or bilateral interstitial keratitis and the Clutton joint (see Table 264.1). Other common
ocular manifestations include choroiditis, retinitis, vascular occlusion,
and optic atrophy. Soft tissue gummas (identical to those of acquired
disease) and paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria are rare hypersensitivity
phenomena.

DIAGNOSIS

Fundamental limitations of the currently available tests for syphilis are
vexing, but results must always be interpreted in the context of patient
history and physical examination. Physicians should remain aware of
their local prevalence rates and treat presumptively when syphilis is
suspected by clinical and epidemiologic data. The diagnosis of primary
syphilis is confirmed when T. pallidum is demonstrated by dark-­field
microscopy or direct fluorescent antibody testing on specimens from
skin lesions, placenta, or umbilical cord. Nucleic acid–based amplification assays, such as PCR, are also used in some specialized laboratories but are not commercially available. Despite the absence of a true

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1870 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
gold-­standard serologic assay, serologic testing for syphilis remains
the principal means for diagnosis and traditionally involves a two-­
step screening process with a nontreponemal test followed by a confirmatory treponemal test (Fig. 264.10A). Both test types are required
for serologic-­based diagnosis. False-­negative tests may occur in early
syphilis, and high-­risk individuals may need repeat testing in 2-­4 weeks
if clinically indicated.
The Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and rapid
plasma reagin (RPR) tests are sensitive nontreponemal tests that
detect antibodies against phospholipid antigens on the treponeme
surface that cross react with cardiolipin-­lecithin-­cholesterol antigens
of damaged host cells. The quantitative results of these tests are helpful both in screening and in monitoring therapy. Titers increase with
active disease, including treatment failure or reinfection, and decline
with adequate treatment (Fig. 264.11). Nontreponemal tests usually
become nonreactive within 1 year of adequate therapy for primary
syphilis and within 2 years of adequate treatment for secondary disease.
Fifteen to twenty percent of patients become serofast (nontreponemal
titers persisting at low levels for long periods). In congenital infection,
nontreponemal tests become nonreactive within a few months after
adequate treatment. Certain conditions such as infectious mononucleosis and other viral infections, autoimmune diseases, and pregnancy
can give false-­positive VDRL results. False-­positive results are less
common with the use of purified cardiolipin-­lecithin-­cholesterol antigen. All pregnant women should be screened early in pregnancy and
at delivery. All positive maternal (parental) serologic tests for syphilis,
regardless of titer, necessitate thorough investigation. Antibody excess
can give a false-­negative reading unless the serum is diluted (prozone
effect) as the formation of the antigen-­antibody lattice needed to
visualize a positive flocculation test is disrupted. False-­negative
results can also occur in early primary syphilis, in latent syphilis of long
duration, and in late congenital syphilis.

Treponemal tests traditionally are used to confirm diagnosis and
measure specific T. pallidum antibodies (immunoglobulin [Ig] G,
IgM, and IgA), which appear earlier than nontreponemal antibodies.
Treponemal tests include the T. pallidum particle agglutination test
(TP-­PA, which is the preferred treponemal test) and the fluorescent
treponemal antibody absorption test (FTA-­ABS). Treponemal antibody titers become positive soon after initial infection and usually
remain positive for life, even with adequate therapy (see Fig. 264.11).
These antibody titers do not correlate with disease activity. Traditionally they are useful for diagnosis of a first episode of syphilis and for
distinguishing false-­positive results of nontreponemal antibody tests
but cannot accurately identify length of time of infection, response to
therapy, or reinfection.
There is limited cross reactivity of treponemal antibody tests with
other spirochetes, including the causative organisms of Lyme disease
(Borrelia burgdorferi), yaws, endemic syphilis, and pinta. Only venereal
syphilis and Lyme disease are found in the United States. Nontreponemal tests (VDRL, RPR) are uniformly nonreactive in Lyme disease.
Various enzyme-­
linked, chemiluminescence, and multiplex flow
immunoassays to detect treponemal IgG and IgM have been developed. These assays have increased sensitivity and are amenable to
automation and high-­volume use. Rapid point-­of-­care tests are available to allow quality screening programs in resource-­limited settings
where the World Health Organization otherwise relies on syndromic
management of STIs and patients are treated for all likely causes of
their constellation of signs and symptoms. In the United States, use
of immunoassays has confounded screening because it switches the
traditional algorithm: the treponemal-­specific testing is done before
the nontreponemal testing. Because the former remain positive for
life, clinical and epidemiologic data are required to provide guidelines
to distinguish cured disease, early syphilis, untreated late latent disease, and true false-­positive tests. Benefits of reverse screening are

Treponemal
(immunoassay)

Reactive

RPR or VDRL
(Nontreponemal test*)

Nonreactive
Step 1

Nontreponemal

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 2

+ Nontreponemal test
Treponemal test
EIA/CIA, TP-PA, TP-HA, or FTA-ABS

– Nontreponemal test
No syphilis or very recent
infection testing concludes

Supplemental treponemal*

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 3

+ Treponemal test
Syphilis new case or
previously treated case

– Treponemal test
Biologic false-positive
(see text for significance)

Consistent with
current or past
syphilis infection

Consistent with
past or potential
early syphilis
infection

Inconclusive for
syphilis infection;
potentially early
infection or false
positive

No laboratory
evidence of
syphilis infection

A

Lab interpretation
*The supplemental treponemal test should use a unique platform and/or antigen,
different from the first treponemal test.

B
Fig. 264.10 A, Traditional laboratory testing algorithm for syphilis. B, Suggested alternative testing algorithm. EIA/CIA, Enzyme immunoassay/

chemiluminescence immunoassay; FTA-­ABS, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; TP-­HA, Treponema pallidum
hemagglutination; TP-­PA, Treponema pallidum particle agglutination; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory. *If nontreponemal test is positive qualitatively, a titer is then quantitated. (A based on data from Workowski KA, Berman S; Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention. Sexually
transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep 2010;59[RR-­12]:1–110. pp. 26–29.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 264 u Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)

1871

FTA-Abs
100

% of patients who test positive

TPHA
80

60
IgM*
Untreated

40
VDRL/RPR
20

Treated
2

4

6

Time of
infection

10 12

2

10

Weeks

20

Years
Time post-infection

Primary
lesion
Clinical
stages
of syphilis

8

Primary

Fig. 264.11 Common patterns of serologic reactiv-

Secondary
lesion
Secondary

Latent
(asymptomatic)

*IgM by ELISA or FTA-ABS 195 or immunoblot.

increased detection of transmissible early syphilis and of late latent
disease to afford monitoring for tertiary disease. Although the CDC
and American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Red Book continue to recommend the traditional screen (“conventional diagnostic approach”;
see Fig. 264.10A), they have provided guidelines for interpretation of
the reverse screening algorithm (see Fig. 264.10B). Reverse screening
may yield false-­positive results, particularly in low-­prevalence populations where testing results should be interpreted with caution, as false-­
positive testing in children may have serious adverse consequences.
If reverse testing yields a positive treponemal result but a negative
nontreponemal result, a second treponemal test targeting a different
treponemal antigen is needed for confirmation. Interpretation of nontreponemal and treponemal serologic tests in the newborn can be confounded by maternal IgG antibodies transferred to the fetus. Passively
acquired antibody is suggested by a neonatal titer at least fourfold (i.e.,
a two-­tube dilution) less than the maternal (parental) titer. This conclusion can be verified by a gradual decline in antibody in the infant, usually becoming undetectable by 3-­6 months of age. Conversely, an infant
nontreponemal titer fourfold higher than the mother’s at the time of
delivery or a persistent or rising nontreponemal titer in the infant suggests congenital infection.
Neurologic involvement can occur at any stage of syphilis. The
diagnosis of neurosyphilis remains difficult but is often established
by demonstrating pleocytosis and increased protein in the CSF and
a positive CSF VDRL test along with neurologic symptoms. The
CSF VDRL test is specific but relatively insensitive (22–69%) for
neurosyphilis. CSF PCR and IgM immunoblot tests are being studied but not currently recommended for use in making the diagnosis
of neurosyphilis.
Dark-­field or direct fluorescent antibody microscopy of scrapings from primary lesions or congenital or secondary lesions can
reveal T. pallidum, often before serology becomes positive, but these
modalities are usually not available in clinical practice. Since 2015 different methods of PCR, including routine PCR, nested PCR, reverse-­
transcriptase PCR, and quantitative PCR targeting different DNA
gene sequences, have been used by many laboratories as methods to
detect T. pallidum in primary disease. However, there are currently

Tertiary

ity in syphilis patients. FTA-­Abs, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (test); RPR, rapid plasma
reagin (test); TPHA, Treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (test). IgM by immunoassay. (From Peeling R,
Ye H. Diagnostic tools for preventing and managing
maternal and congenital syphilis: an overview. Bull
World Health Organ. 2004;82[6]:439–446.)

no commercially available test kits, and each test must be validated
for use in each laboratory. Furthermore, these tests are not useful for
asymptomatic patients, and interpretation may be complicated by
the fact that they amplify both dead and living organisms. Placental examination by gross and microscopic techniques can be useful
in the diagnosis of congenital syphilis. The disproportionately large
placentas are characterized histologically by focal proliferative villitis,
endovascular and perivascular arteritis, and focal or diffuse immaturity of placental villi.

Congenital Syphilis

A diagnosis of congenital syphilis requires a thorough review of maternal (parental) history of syphilis treatment preconception and the
testing, treatment, and dynamics of response during the current pregnancy. Regardless of maternal (parental) treatment and the presence/
absence of symptoms in the infant, proactive evaluation and treatment
of exposed neonates is critical (Fig. 264.12 and Table 264.2). Symptomatic infants should be thoroughly evaluated and treated. Figure 264.12
and Table 264.3 describe the guidelines for evaluating and managing
asymptomatic infants who are considered at risk for congenital syphilis because the maternal (parental) nontreponemal and treponemal
serology is positive. Internationally adopted, refugee, and immigrant
children should also be screened, regardless of history or report of
treatment. Diagnostic testing risk-­stratifies infants to probability of
congenital infection: proven or highly probable congenital syphilis,
possible congenital syphilis, congenital syphilis less likely, or congenital syphilis unlikely.
A diagnosis of neurosyphilis in the newborn with syphilitic infection is confounded by poor sensitivity of the CSF VDRL test in this
age-­group and lack of CSF abnormalities. A positive CSF VDRL test
in a newborn warrants treatment for neurosyphilis, even though it
might reflect passive transfer of antibodies from serum to CSF. It is
now accepted that all infants with a presumptive diagnosis of congenital syphilis should be treated with regimens effective for neurosyphilis because central nervous system involvement cannot be reliably
excluded. A diagnosis of syphilis beyond early infancy should lead to
consideration of possible child abuse.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1872 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Reverse-sequence screening approach

Conventional diagnostic approach
Initial reactive maternal RPR/VDRL

Nonreactive maternal treponemal testa

Initial positive maternal treponemal EIA/CIA screening test

Reactive maternal treponemal testa,b

Reactive maternal RPR/VDRL

Reactive alternative maternal
treponemal test (eg, TP-PA)a,b

False-positive reaction:
no further evaluation
(if pregnant,
treponemal repeat
testing may be
appropriate)

Evaluate mother’s treatment history for syphilis

Maternal treatment:
• None, OR
• Undocumented, OR
• Less than 4 wk before
delivery, OR
• Nonpenicillin drug, OR
• Maternal evidence/concern
of reinfection/relapse
(fourfold or greater increase
in maternal titers)c
• Partner recently diagnosed
with syphilis

Maternal penicillin
treatment during
pregnancy AND
4 wk or more before
delivery, AND no
evidence/concern of
maternal reinfection or
relapse

Adequate maternal
treatment before
pregnancy with low
stable (serofast)d or
negative titer AND
infant examination
normal; if infant
examination is
abnormal, proceed
with evaluatione

Nonreactive maternal RPR/VDRL

Nonreactive alternative maternal
treponemal test (eg, TP-PA)a

• If epidemiologic risk and
clinical probability of
syphilis is low, no further
evaluation is required
• If not low, consider
repeat RPR/VDRL in 2–4
wk to differentiate early
primary infection from
false positive

Reactive maternal
RPR/VDRL at
2–4 wk

Evaluatee
Evaluatee

Infant physical
examination
normal; AND
evaluation
normal; AND
infant
RPR/VDRL
same or less
than fourfold
the maternal
RPR/VDRL
titerc

Infant physical
examination
abnormal; OR
evaluation
abnormal or
incomplete; OR
RPR/VDRL at
least fourfold
greater than
maternal
RPR/VDRLc

Possible
congenital
syphilis

Proven or highly
probable
congenital
syphilis

Infant RPR/VDRL
fourfold or greater
than maternal
RPR/VDRL titerc

Infant RPR/VDRL not
fourfold or greater than
maternal RPR/VDRLc

Infant physical
examination
abnormal

Proven or
highly probable
congenital
syphilis

Infant physical
examination
normal

Congenital
syphilis less
likely

Congenital
syphilis unlikely

Infant physical
examination
normal; AND
evaluation
normal; AND
infant
RPR/VDRL
same or less
than fourfold
the maternal
RPR/VDRL
titerc

Infant physical
examination
abnormal; OR
evaluation
abnormal or
incomplete; OR
RPR/VDRL at
least fourfold
greater than
maternal
RPR/VDRLc

Possible
congenital
syphilis

Proven or highly
probable
congenital
syphilis

Fig. 264.12 Algorithm for the diagnostic approach of infants born to mothers (birthing parents) with reactive serologic tests for syphilis. aTre-

ponema pallidum particle agglutination (TP-­PA) (which is the preferred treponemal test) or fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-­ABS).
bTest for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody. Infants of HIV-­infected mothers do not require different evaluation or treatment for syphilis.
cA fourfold change in titer is the same as a change of two dilutions. For example, a titer of 1:64 is fourfold greater than a titer of 1:16, and a titer of
1:4 is fourfold lower than a titer of 1:16. When comparing titers, the same type of nontreponemal test should be used (e.g., if the initial test was an
RPR, the follow-­up test should also be an RPR). dStable VDRL titers 1:2 or less or RPR 1:4 or less beyond 1 year after successful treatment are considered low serofast. eComplete blood cell (CBC) and platelet count; cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination for cell count, protein, and quantitative
VDRL; other tests as clinically indicated (e.g., chest radiographs, long-­bone radiographs, eye examination, liver function tests, neuroimaging, and
auditory brainstem response). For neonates, pathologic examination of the placenta or umbilical cord with specific fluorescent antitreponemal antibody staining, if possible. RPR, Rapid plasma regain; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory. (From American Academy of Pediatrics. Syphilis.
In Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca,
IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2021: Fig. 3.15, p. 734.)

For infants with proven or highly probable disease or abnormal
physical findings, complete evaluation, including serologic tests (RPR
or VDRL), complete blood count with differential and platelet count,
liver function tests, long-­bone radiographs, ophthalmology examination, auditory brainstem response, and other tests as indicated, should
be performed. If possible, pathologic examination of the placenta and/
or umbilical cord with specific fluorescent antitreponemal antibody
staining is recommend by the AAP. For infants with a positive VDRL
or RPR test result and normal physical examination whose mothers
were inadequately treated, further evaluation is not necessary if 10 days
of parenteral therapy are administered.

TREATMENT

The goals of early detection and treatment include treatment of current
infection and prevention of both late-­stage disease and sexual or vertical transmission. T. pallidum remains extremely sensitive to penicillin,
with no evidence of emerging penicillin resistance, and thus penicillin
remains the treatment drug of choice (additional information available
in Table 264.4 and at http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment for patients
over 1 month old). Parenteral penicillin G is the only documented
effective treatment for congenital syphilis, syphilis during pregnancy,
and neurosyphilis and is recommended for treatment of syphilis in
persons with HIV. Aqueous crystalline penicillin G is preferred over

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 264 u Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)
Table 264.2  Clues that Suggest a Diagnosis of
Congenital Syphilis

Table 264.3  Confirmed Proven or Highly Probable
Congenital Syphilis

EPIDEMIOLOGIC
BACKGROUND

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
Any neonate with:

Untreated early syphilis in the
mother
Untreated latent syphilis in the
mother
An untreated mother who has
contact with a known patient
with syphilis during pregnancy
Mother treated less than 30 days
before delivery
Mother treated for syphilis
during pregnancy with a drug
other than penicillin
Mother treated for syphilis
during pregnancy without
follow-­up to demonstrate
fourfold decrease in titer
Mother co-infected with HIV

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Osteochondritis, periostitis
Snuffles, hemorrhagic or
mucopurulent rhinitis
Condylomata lata
Bullous lesions, palmar or plantar
rash
Mucous patches
Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly
Jaundice, hepatitis
Nonimmune hydrops fetalis
Generalized lymphadenopathy
Central nervous system signs;
elevated cell count or protein
in cerebrospinal fluid
Hemolytic anemia, diffuse
intravascular coagulation,
thrombocytopenia
Pneumonitis
Nephrotic syndrome
Placental villitis or vasculitis
(unexplained enlarged
placenta)
Intrauterine growth restriction

Arranged in decreasing order of confidence of diagnosis.
Modified from Remington JS, Klein JO, Wilson CB, et al., eds. Infectious Diseases of
the Fetus and Newborn Infant, 6th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2006:556.

procaine penicillin, because it better achieves and sustains the minimum concentration of 0.018 μg/mL (0.03 units/mL) needed for 7-­10
days to achieve the prolonged treponemicidal levels required for the
long dividing time of T. pallidum.
In 2023, due to manufacturing limitations and increased demand,
the United States entered a period of penicillin G shortage, requiring prioritization of pregnant persons to receive this antibiotic, as no
other medication is proven to prevent vertical transmission. Penicillin G is often preferred for IM injection in treatment of other syphilis
infections as an approach to ensure adherence to therapy, and thus the
shortage may lead to increased transmission.
For proven or highly probable congenital syphilis, procaine penicillin
G (50,000 U/kg IM daily × 10 days) should only be used if access to IV
penicillin G is limited (such as in a low-­resource setting) or if IV access
cannot be obtained. For infants with possible congenital syphilis, aqueous
penicillin G (50,000 U/kg IV every 12 hours when 1 wk or younger, then
every 8 hours for infants older than 1 wk, for a total of 10 days of therapy)
is preferred, though procaine penicillin G (50,000 U/kg IM daily x 10 days)
may be given. Benzathine penicillin G (50,000 U/kg IM) as a single dose
can be considered but only if all components of the evaluation are normal
and follow-up is certain. Infants in whom congenital syphilis is less likely
may be treated with benzathine penicillin G (50,000 U/kg IM) as a single
dose. If no treatment is given, infants must be closely followed until the
nontreponemal test becomes nonreactive. If any portion of the assessment
for congenital syphilis is abnormal or not obtained, or the CSF studies are
uninterpretable, or outpatient follow-­up cannot be assured, treatment with
procaine penicillin G is preferred. Patients with persistent or increasing
titers require repeat evaluation and treatment with a 10-day course of parenteral penicillin G, even if previously treated.
Although nonpenicillin regimens are available to the penicillin-­
allergic patient, desensitization followed by standard penicillin therapy is the most reliable strategy. Success of treatment also depends on
the integrity of the host immune response. A transient acute systemic
febrile reaction called the Jarisch-­Herxheimer reaction (caused by
massive release of endotoxin-­like antigens during bacterial lysis) occurs
in 15–20% of patients with acquired or congenital syphilis treated with
penicillin. It is not an indication for discontinuing penicillin therapy.

1873

• An abnormal physical examination that is consistent with
congenital syphilis;
• A serum quantitative nontreponemal serologic titer that is
fourfold (or greater) higher than the mother’s titer at delivery (e.g.,
maternal titer = 1:2, neonatal titer ≥1:8 or maternal titer = 1:8,
neonatal titer ≥1:32); or
• A positive dark-­field test or PCR of placenta, cord, lesions, or
body fluids or a positive silver stain of the placenta or cord.
Recommended evaluation:
• CSF analysis for VDRL, cell count, and protein
• Complete blood count (CBC) and differential and platelet count
• Long-­bone radiographs
• Other tests as clinically indicated (e.g., chest radiograph, liver
function tests, neuroimaging, ophthalmologic examination, and
auditory brainstem response)
Recommended regimens, confirmed or highly probable congenital
syphilis:
Aqueous crystalline penicillin G 100,000-­150,000 units/kg body
weight/day, administered as 50,000 units/kg body weight/dose by
IV every 12 hr during the first 7 days of life and every 8 hr thereafter
for a total of 10 days*
OR
Procaine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight/dose IM in a single
daily dose for 10 days
If >1 day of therapy is missed, the entire course should be restarted.
Data are insufficient regarding use of other antimicrobial agents
(e.g., ampicillin). When possible, a full 10-­day course of penicillin
is preferred, even if ampicillin was initially provided for possible
sepsis. Using agents other than penicillin requires close serologic
follow-­up for assessing therapy adequacy.
*Preferred therapy per the 2021-2024 AAP Red Book
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Congenital syphilis. Sexually
Transmitted Diseases and Treatment Guidelines, 2021. Scenario 1. https://www.cdc.gov
/std/treatment-­guidelines/congenital-­syphilis.htm.

Use of other agents for congenital syphilis should only be done in consultation with a pediatric infectious diseases specialist and requires
close clinical and serologic follow-­up.

Acquired Syphilis

Primary, secondary, and early latent disease is treated with a single dose
of benzathine penicillin G (50,000 units/kg IM, maximum 2.4 million units, in a single dose). Persons with late latent or tertiary disease
require three doses at 1-­week intervals. Nonpregnant penicillin-­allergic
patients without neurosyphilis may be treated with either doxycycline
(4.4 mg/kg divided in 2 doses, max 200 mg per day, orally twice a day
for 14 days) or tetracycline (25-50 mg/kg divided in 4 doses, max 2 g
per day, orally for 14 days, for age ≥8 years). Emerging azalide and macrolide resistance has been documented throughout the United States (a
23S ribosomal NA [rRNA] point mutation at position 2058) and, more
recently, worldwide (a 23S rRNA point mutation at position 2059),
compromising the effective use of these antibiotics. Careful serologic
follow-­up is always necessary. Documentation of serologic cure is an
essential part of syphilis treatment. Less than a fourfold decline in titer
reflects treatment failure.
The CDC recommends that all persons with syphilis be tested for
HIV and other STIs. Patients diagnosed with syphilis with a negative
HIV test should undergo repeat testing 3 months later. Diagnosis of
syphilis in high-­
risk individuals, particularly men or transgender
women who have sex with men, is associated with increased risk of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1874 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 264.4  Recommended Treatment for Syphilis in People Older Than 1 Mo
STATUS

CHILDREN

ADULTS

Congenital syphilis in patients >1 mo old;
OR children >2 mo with late and previously
untreated congenital syphilis

Aqueous crystalline penicillin G 200,000-­
300,000 U/kg/day IV administered as
50,000 U/kg, every 4-­6 hr for 10 days*

Primary, secondary, and early latent syphilis†

Penicillin G benzathine‡ 50,000 U/kg IM, up
to the adult dose of 2.4 million U in a single
dose
If allergic to penicillin and not pregnant,
Doxycycline 4.4 mg/kg divided in 2 doses, max
200 mg per day, orally twice a day for 14 days
(for ages ≥8 yr)
OR
Tetracycline 25-­50 mg/kg divided in 4 doses,
max 2 g per day, orally for 14 days (for ages
≥8 yr)

Penicillin G benzathine 2.4 million U IM in a
single dose
OR
If allergic to penicillin and not pregnant,
doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 14
days
OR
Tetracycline 500 mg orally 4 times/day for 14
days

Late latent syphilis§

Penicillin G benzathine 50,000 U/kg IM, up to
the adult dose of 2.4 million U, administered
as 3 single doses at 1-­wk intervals (total
150,000 U/kg, up to the adult dose of 7.2
million U)
If allergic to penicillin and not pregnant,
Doxycycline 4.4 mg/kg divided in 2 doses,
max 200 mg per day, orally twice a day for 4
weeks (for ages ≥8 yr)
OR
Tetracycline 25-­50 mg/kg divided in 4 doses,
max 2 g per day, orally for 4 weeks (for ages
≥8 yr)

Penicillin G benzathine 7.2 million U total,
administered as 3 doses of 2.4 million U IM,
each at 1-­wk intervals; pregnant women who
have delays in any dose of therapy beyond
9 days between doses should repeat the full
course of therapy
OR
If allergic to penicillin and not pregnant,
Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 4 wk
OR
Tetracycline 500 mg orally, 4 times/day for 4 wk

Tertiary

—

Penicillin G benzathine 7.2 million U total,
administered as 3 doses of 2.4 million U IM
at 1-­wk intervals
If allergic to penicillin and not pregnant,
consult an infectious diseases expert

Neurosyphilis||

Aqueous crystalline penicillin G 200,000-­
300,000 U/kg/day IV every 4-­6 hr for 10-­14
days, in doses not to exceed the adult dose

Aqueous crystalline penicillin G 18-­24 million
U per day, administered as 3-­4 million U IV
every 4 hr for 10-­14 days¶
OR
Penicillin G procaine‡ 2.4 million U IM once
daily PLUS probenecid 500 mg orally 4
times/day, both for 10-­14 days¶

*If the patient has no clinical manifestations of disease, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination is normal, and the CSF Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test result is
negative, some experts would treat with up to 3 weekly doses of penicillin G benzathine 50,000 U/kg IM. Some experts also suggest giving these patients a single dose of penicillin
G benzathine 50,000 U/kg IM after the 10-­day course of intravenous aqueous penicillin.
†Early latent syphilis is defined as being acquired within the preceding year.
‡Penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine are approved for intramuscular administration only.
§Late latent syphilis is defined as syphilis beyond 1 year’s duration.
||Patients who are allergic to penicillin should be desensitized.
¶Some experts administer penicillin G benzathine 2.4 million U IM once per week for up to 3 weeks after completion of these neurosyphilis treatment regimens.
IV, Intravenously; IM, intramuscularly.
From American Academy of Pediatrics. Syphilis. In: Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases,
32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2021: Table 3.67, pp. 741–742.

subsequent HIV acquisition, and preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP)
should be considered. Patients co-infected with HIV are at increased
risk for neurologic complications and higher rates of treatment failure. CDC guidelines recommend the same treatment of primary and
secondary syphilis as for patients who are not infected with HIV, but
some experts recommend three weekly doses of benzathine penicillin G. HIV-­infected patients with late latent syphilis or latent syphilis
of unknown duration should have a CSF evaluation for neurosyphilis
before treatment.
Sex partners of infected persons of any stage should be evaluated and
treated. Persons exposed for 90 days or less preceding diagnosis in a sex
partner should be treated presumptively even if seronegative. Persons
exposed for more than 90 days before the diagnosis in a sex partner
should be treated if seropositive or if serologic tests are not available.

Follow-­up serology should be performed on treated patients to establish adequacy of therapy, and all patients should be tested for other
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV. Children with acquired
primary, secondary, or latent syphilis should undergo evaluation for
possible sexual assault or abuse.

Syphilis in Pregnancy

When clinical or serologic findings suggest active infection or when
the diagnosis of active syphilis cannot be excluded with certainty,
treatment is indicated. The goals of treatment of the pregnant person include eradication of maternal (parental) disease, prevention of
parent-­to-­child transmission, and treatment of fetal infection. Patients
should be treated immediately with the penicillin regimen appropriate for the pregnant person’s stage of syphilis. Those who have been

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 264 u Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)
adequately treated in the past do not require additional therapy unless
quantitative serology suggests evidence of reinfection (fourfold elevation in titer).
Penicillin G is the only agent known to be effective for treating fetal
infection and for prevention of congenital infection. Pregnant patients
who are allergic to penicillin should be desensitized and treated with
penicillin. If doses for late latent syphilis are delayed beyond 9 days
from the prior dose, the full course of therapy needs to be repeated.
Additional therapy may be considered for pregnant persons with
primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis or when syphilis is diagnosed during the second half of pregnancy and sonographic evidence
of fetal or placental syphilis is noted. In these cases, a second dose of
benzathine penicillin G (2.4 million units IM given 1 week after the
initial dose) may decrease the risk of vertical transmission. Jarisch-­
Herxheimer reaction in the second half of pregnancy may induce premature labor or fetal distress, and patients with reactions should seek
obstetric attention promptly.

Congenital Syphilis

Adequate maternal (parental) treatment at least 30 days before delivery is likely to prevent congenital syphilis. All infants born to pregnant
persons with syphilis should be followed until nontreponemal serology is negative. The infant should be treated if there is any uncertainty
about the adequacy of maternal (parental) treatment. The goal of
infant treatment is prevention of organ damage, skeletal deformity, and
developmental delay. Any infant at risk of congenital syphilis should be
evaluated for HIV.
Congenital syphilis is treated in infants up to 1 month of age with
aqueous penicillin G (100,000-­150,000 units/kg/24 hr IV divided every
12 hours for the first week of life and every 8 hours thereafter) or procaine penicillin G (50,000 units/kg IM once daily) given for 10 days.
Both penicillin regimens are recognized as adequate therapy for congenital syphilis, but higher concentrations of penicillin are achieved
in the CSF of infants treated with intravenous aqueous penicillin G
than in those treated with intramuscular procaine penicillin. Treated
infants should be closely monitored at 2-­, 4-­, 6-­, and 12-­month well
child care visits and serologic nontreponemal titers repeated every 2-­3
months until nonreactive. Titers generally decrease by 3 months of age
and become nonreactive by 6 months of age if adequately treated or
if antibody was merely transplacentally acquired without infection.
Infants diagnosed and treated for congenital syphilis after 1 month of
age should be treated with aqueous crystalline penicillin G 200,000300,000 U/kg/day IV administered as 50,000 U/kg, every 4-6 hr for
10 days (Table 264.4). Nontreponemal titers may resolve more slowly
if the patient was treated after 1 month old. Increasing or persistent
stable titers 6-­12 months after initial treatment suggest possible ongoing infection, and repeat evaluation, including CSF, is indicated. Repeat
treatment (penicillin G IV for 10 days) may be indicated. Infants with
a negative nontreponemal test born to a person seroreactive at the time
of delivery could have incubating congenital infection and so should
be retested at 3 months. Infants with initial abnormal CSF studies only
require repeat lumbar puncture if they have persistent nontreponemal
serologic titers at 6-­12 months old. If CSF has a persistent positive
VDRL or abnormal indices not attributable to another ongoing illness,
retreatment is indicated after 2 years of follow-­up. At age 2 previously
treated infants should receive a full developmental assessment. In a
very low-­risk neonate who is asymptomatic and whose mother was
treated appropriately, without evidence of relapse or reinfection but
with a low and stable VDRL titer (serofast), no evaluation is necessary.
Some specialists, however, would treat such an infant with a single dose
of benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg IM.

PREVENTION

Syphilis, including congenital syphilis, is a reportable disease in all
50 states and the District of Columbia. Testing is indicated at any

1875

time for persons with suspicious lesions, a history of recent sexual
exposure to a person with syphilis, or diagnosis of another sexually transmitted infection, including HIV infection. Screening for
syphilis in asymptomatic, nonpregnant persons at increased risk for
infection has received an A recommendation from the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) as providing significant benefit.
Direct-to-consumer test services for STIs (or “home tests”) have
become more acceptable following consumer experience with similar testing during the COVID-19 pandemic, and best practices for
implementation are an area of intense research. As of late 2023, the
US CDC had posted request for comment on proposed guidelines
for the use of doxycycline as post-exposure prophylaxis for bacterial
STI prevention, including syphilis, to be offered to MSM and transgender women with a history of at least one bacterial STI in the last
12 months; insufficient evidence is currently available to give recommendations for other groups, including children, cisgender women
or heterosexual men, transgender men, or other queer and nonbinary
individuals. The resurgence of syphilis compels clinicians to remain
cognizant of its protean manifestations to avoid missed or late diagnosis. Timely treatment lessens risk of community spread. Despite
the genome sequencing of T. pallidum in 1998, vaccine development
remains elusive, confounded by the treponeme’s ability to evade the
immune system.

Congenital Syphilis

Congenital syphilis is a preventable disease, a sentinel event indicating multiple missed opportunities. Primary prevention is tied to
prevention of syphilis in women of childbearing age, and secondary
prevention with early diagnosis and prompt treatment of women and
their partners. Access to and use of comprehensive prenatal care is
key, with careful history taking (including interim sexual partners) at
each visit. Routine prenatal screening for syphilis remains the most
important factor in identifying infants at risk for developing congenital syphilis. Screening all women at the beginning of prenatal care is
an evidence-­based standard of care and legally required in all states.
In pregnant women without optimal prenatal care, serologic screening for syphilis should be performed at the time pregnancy is diagnosed. Any person who is delivered of a stillborn infant at 20 weeks
or fewer of gestation should be tested for syphilis. In communities
and populations with a high prevalence of syphilis and in patients
at high risk (pregnant persons with a history of incarceration, drug
use, or multiple or concurrent partners), testing should be performed
at least two additional times: at the beginning of the third trimester (28 weeks) and at delivery. Some states mandate repeat testing
at delivery for all pregnant persons, underscoring the importance
of preventive screening. Those at high risk for syphilis should be
screened even more frequently, either monthly or, pragmatically (in
the case of inconsistent prenatal care), at every medical encounter
because they can have repeat infections during pregnancy or reinfection late in pregnancy. Follow-­up serologic testing of all treated
pregnant persons should be done after treatment to document titer
decline, relapse, or reinfection.
No newborn should leave the hospital without the mother’s (parent’s) syphilis status having been determined at least once during
pregnancy or at delivery. In states conducting newborn screening
for syphilis, both the parent’s and infant’s serologic results should
be known before discharge. Appropriate follow-­up for the treated or
exposed infant should be arranged. In addition, all previously uninvestigated infants of an infected mother should be screened. Strong
linkages between clinicians and public health practitioners remain
essential for comprehensive prevention of acquired and congenital
syphilis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1876 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 265

Nonvenereal Treponemal
Infections
Stephen K. Obaro and H. Dele Davies
Nonvenereal treponemal infections—yaws, bejel (endemic syphilis), and
pinta—are caused by different subspecies of Treponema pallidum and
occur in tropical and subtropical areas. The causative agents of nonvenereal treponematoses—T. pallidum pertenue, T. pallidum subspecies
endemicum, and Treponema carateum—cannot be distinguished from
T. pallidum subspecies pallidum by morphologic or serologic tests.
In general, nonvenereal treponematoses have prominent cutaneous
manifestations and relapsing courses, as in venereal syphilis, but they
are not found in urban centers, they are not sexually transmitted, and
they are not congenitally acquired. Transmission is primarily through
body contact, poor hygiene, crowded conditions, and poor access to
healthcare. Children also serve as the primary reservoirs for these
organisms, spreading infection via skin-­to-­skin and skin–to–mucous
membrane contact, and possibly via fomites as well.
Penicillin remains the treatment of choice for syphilis and nonvenereal
treponemal infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

265.1 Yaws (Treponema pertenue)
Stephen K. Obaro and H. Dele Davies
Yaws is the most prevalent nonvenereal treponematosis. The causative agent, Treponema pertenue, bears very close genomic resemblance to T. pallidum subspecies pallidum. The overall sequence

A

B

identity between the genomes of T. pallidum pertenue and T. pallidum subspecies pallidum is 99.8%. Yaws is a contagious, chronic,
relapsing infection involving the skin and bony structures caused by
the spirochete T. pertenue, which is identical to T. pallidum microscopically and serologically. This disease occurs in tropical regions
with heavy rainfall and annual temperatures ≥27°C (80°F). Almost
all cases occur in children in tropical and subtropical countries. It
is also referred to as “framboesia,” “pian,” “parangi,” and “bouba.”
A high percentage of the population is infected in endemic areas.
T. pertenue is transmitted by direct contact from an infected
lesion through a skin abrasion or laceration. Transmission is facilitated by overcrowding and poor personal hygiene in the rainforest areas of the world. Yaws predominantly affects children, with
approximately 75% of cases being reported in children younger than
15 years of age. This population also constitutes the reservoir for
disease transmission. The initial papular lesion, which constitutes
primary yaws, also described as the mother yaw, occurs 2-­8 weeks
after inoculation. This lesion typically involves the buttocks or
lower extremities. The papule develops into a raised, raspberry-­like
papilloma and is often accompanied by regional lymphadenopathy.
The skin pathology is similar to that of venereal syphilis, consisting
of epidermal hyperplasia and papillomatosis (Fig. 265.1). Healing of
the mother yaw leaves a hypopigmented scar. The secondary-­stage
lesions can erupt anywhere on the body before or after the healing
of the mother yaw and may be accompanied by lymphadenopathy,
anorexia, and malaise. Multiple cutaneous lesions (daughter yaws,
pianomas, or framboesias) appear, spread diffusely, ulcerate, and
are covered by exudates containing treponemes. Secondary lesions
heal without scarring. Recurrent lesions are common within 5 years
after the primary lesion.
The lesions are often associated with bone pain resulting from
underlying periostitis or osteomyelitis, especially of the fingers,
nose, and tibia. The initial period of clinical activity is followed
by a 5-­to 10-­year period of latency. The appearance of tertiary-­
stage lesions develops in approximately 10% of infected patients,
with onset typically at puberty, with solitary and destructive lesions.
These lesions occur as painful papillomas on the hands and feet,
gummatous skin ulcerations, or osteitis. Bony destruction and
deformity, juxtaarticular nodules, depigmentation, and painful

C

100 Pm

Fig. 265.1 Yaws lesions in a patient with treatment failure associated with macrolide-­resistant T p pertenue. A, Primary lesion (red, moist 2.5-­cm
ulcer) on the left leg of an 11-­yr-­old patient with yaws observed at the 30-­mo survey. Lesional swab PCR was positive for T p pertenue with wild-­type
23S rRNA. B, Secondary yaws papillomas (multiple nodules with yellow granular surface) seen at 36-­mo survey. These lesions were PCR positive for
T p pertenue with A2059G mutation in 23S rRNA. C, Photomicrograph of skin biopsy of the larger papilloma lesion in panel B with abundant spirochete organisms stained bright red by the Treponema pallidum immunohistochemical stain (×400 magnification). T p pertenue, Treponema pallidum
subspecies pertenue. (From Mitja O, Godornes C, Houinei W, et al. Re-­emergence of yaws after single mass azithromycin treatment followed by
targeted treatment: a longitudinal study. Lancet. 2018;391:1599–1606, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 265 u Nonvenereal Treponemal Infections
hyperkeratosis (dry crab yaws) of the palms and soles are common.
Approximately 10% of patients may progress and develop tertiary-­
stage lesions after 5 years or more of untreated infection, although
this outcome is now rare.
The diagnosis is based on the characteristic clinical manifestations of the disease in an endemic area. Dark-­f ield examination of
cutaneous lesions for treponemes and both treponemal and nontreponemal serologic tests for syphilis, which are positive because
of cross reactivity, are used to confirm the diagnosis. The nontreponemal agglutination tests, such as the rapid plasma reagin and Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory tests, are positive in untreated
cases, and these tests can be used for test of cure, because they
revert to negative after treatment. However, the treponemal tests
(T. pallidum hemagglutination assay, T. pallidum particle agglutination assay, and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption) are
more specific and remain positive for life. New immunochromatographic test strips that can be applied for testing both whole blood
and serum are simple, cheap, and easy to use and do not require
refrigeration. However, they have lower sensitivity compared with
the antibody assays and appear to work best in persons with more
active disease.
The differential diagnosis includes other conditions with similar
cutaneous manifestations such as eczema, psoriasis, excoriated chronic
scabies, tungiasis, leishmaniasis, tropical ulcer cutaneous mycoses, and
verrucae. Involvement of the bone may mimic dactylitis that is commonly associated with sickle cell disease.
Treatment of yaws consists of a single dose of the long-­acting
benzathine penicillin G (1.2 million units IM for adults and 0.6 million units for children <10 years) for index patients and all contacts.
Patients allergic to penicillin may be treated with erythromycin,
doxycycline, or tetracycline at appropriate doses for venereal syphilis
(see Chapter 264). One oral dose of azithromycin (30 mg/kg; maximum: 2 g) is as effective as benzathine penicillin. Treatment cures
the lesions of active yaws, renders them noninfectious, and prevents
relapse. Family members, contacts, and patients with latent infection
should receive the same dose as those with active disease. Eradication
of yaws from some endemic areas has been accomplished by treating
the entire population (mass treatment) with azithromycin, although
reemergence has been reported in those who did not receive mass
treatment. In 2023, due to manufacturing limitations and increased
demand, the United States entered a period of penicillin G shortage,
potentially causing treatment to shift to erythromycin, doxycycline,
or tetracycline until the shortages are resolved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

265.2 Bejel (Endemic Syphilis; Treponema
pallidum endemicum)
Stephen K. Obaro and H. Dele Davies
Bejel, or endemic syphilis, affects children in remote rural communities living in poor hygienic conditions. Unlike yaws, bejel can
occur in temperate and dry, hot climates. Infection with T. pallidum subspecies endemicum follows penetration of the spirochete
through traumatized skin or mucous membranes. In experimental infections, a primary papule forms at the inoculation site after
an incubation period of 3 weeks. A primary lesion is almost never
visualized in human infections; however, primary ulcers have been
described surrounding the nipples of nursing mothers with infected
children.
The clinical manifestations of the secondary stage typically
occur 3-­6 months after inoculation and are confined to the skin
and mucous membranes. They consist of highly infectious mucous
patches on the oral mucosa and condyloma-­like lesions on the
moist areas of the body, especially the axilla and anus. These

1877

mucocutaneous lesions resolve spontaneously over a period of several months, but recurrences are common. The secondary stage is
followed by a variable latency period before the onset of late or tertiary bejel. The tertiary stage can occur as early as 6 months or as
late as several years after resolution of initial symptoms. The lesions
in the tertiary stage are identical to those of yaws and include
gumma formation in skin, subcutaneous tissue, and bone, resulting
in painful destructive ulcerations, swelling, and deformity.
The diagnosis is based on the characteristic clinical manifestations
of the disease in an endemic area. Dark-­field examination of cutaneous
lesions for treponemes and both treponemal and nontreponemal serologic tests for syphilis, which are positive because of cross reactivity, are
used to confirm the diagnosis.
Differentiation from venereal syphilis is extremely difficult in an
endemic area. Bejel is distinguished by the absence of a primary chancre and lack of involvement of the central nervous system and cardiovascular system during the late stage.
Treatment of early infection consists of a single dose of benzathine penicillin G (1.2 million units IM for adults and 0.6 million
units for children <10 years). Late infection is treated with three
injections of the same dosage at intervals of 7 days. Patients allergic to penicillin may be treated with erythromycin or tetracycline.
Similarly, when penicillin G is unavailable because of manufacturing limitations, treatment with erythromycin or tetracycline is
appropriate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

265.3 Pinta (Treponema carateum)
Stephen K. Obaro and H. Dele Davies
Pinta is a chronic, nonvenereally transmitted infection caused by T.
pallidum subsp. carateum, a spirochete morphologically and serologically indistinguishable from other human treponemes. This is perhaps
the mildest of the nonvenereal treponematoses. The disease is endemic
in Mexico, Central America, South America, and parts of the West
Indies and largely affects children younger than 15 years of age.
Infection follows direct inoculation of the treponeme through
abraded skin. After a variable incubation period of days, the primary lesion appears at the inoculation site as a small asymptomatic
erythematous papule resembling localized psoriasis or eczema. The
regional lymph nodes are often enlarged. Spirochetes can be visualized on dark-­field examination of skin scrapings or from biopsy
of the involved lymph nodes. After a period of enlargement, the
primary lesion disappears. Unlike primary yaws, the lesion does not
ulcerate but can expand with central depigmented resolution. Secondary lesions follow within 6-­8 months and consist of small macules and papules on the face, scalp, and other sun-­exposed portions
of the body. These pigmented, highly infectious lesions are scaly
and nonpruritic and can coalesce to form large plaquelike elevations resembling psoriasis. In the late or tertiary stage, atrophic and
depigmented lesions develop on the hands, wrists, ankles, feet, face,
and scalp. Hyperkeratosis of palms and soles is uncommon.
The diagnosis is based on the characteristic clinical manifestations
of the disease in an endemic area. Dark-­field examination of cutaneous
lesions for treponemes and both treponemal and nontreponemal serologic tests for syphilis, which are positive because of cross reactivity, are
used to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment consists of a single dose of benzathine penicillin
G (1.2 million units IM for adults and 0.6 million units for children <10 years). Tetracycline and erythromycin are alternatives for
patients allergic to penicillin and during periods when penicillin
G is unavailable because of manufacturing limitations. Treatment
campaigns and improvement of standards of living are necessary for
reduction and elimination of the disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1878 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
late summer and fall and often after heavy rainfalls. Exposure to
contaminated floodwaters is also a documented source of infection. Transmission via animal bites and directly from person to
person has been rarely reported.

Chapter 266

Leptospira

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

H. Dele Davies and Kari A. Simonsen
Leptospirosis is a common and widespread zoonosis caused by aerobic,
motile spirochetes of the genus Leptospira.

Leptospires enter human hosts through mucous membranes (primarily the eyes, nose, and mouth), transdermally through abraded skin, or
by ingestion of contaminated water. After penetration, they circulate
in the bloodstream, causing endothelial damage of small blood vessels
with secondary ischemic damage to end organs.

ETIOLOGY

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Leptospira spp. are thin, helix-­shaped members of the phylum Spirochaetes. There are 22 species identified within the genus Leptospira,
and these are further divided into over 300 serovars. There are at least
10 pathogenic Leptospira species, with serovars demonstrating preferential host specificity.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Leptospirosis has a worldwide distribution, but most human cases
occur in tropical and subtropical countries with disease burden
disproportionately affecting resource-­
p oor populations. Leptospires survive for days to weeks in warm and damp environmental
conditions, including water and moist soil. In the United States,
the CDC estimates 100-­200 annual cases; Hawaii reports about
50% of U.S. cases, with Pacific Coast and Southern states having
a higher incidence than the remainder of the country. Leptospires
infect many species of animals, including rats, mice, and moles;
livestock such as cattle, goats, sheep, horses, and pigs; wild mammals like raccoons or opossums; and domestic dogs. Infected
animals excrete spirochetes in their urine for prolonged periods.
Globally, most human cases result from exposure to water or soil
contaminated with rat urine; however, the major animal reservoir
in the United States is the dog. Groups at high risk for leptospirosis include persons exposed occupationally or recreationally to
contaminated soil, water, or infected animals. High-­r isk occupations include agricultural workers, veterinarians, abattoir workers,
meat inspectors, rodent control workers, laboratory workers, sewer
workers, and military personnel. Cases are more frequent in the

Anicteric Leptospirosis
Second Stage
0 days–1 mo
(Immune)

Myalgia
Headache
Abdominal
pain
Vomiting
Conjunctival
suffusion
Fever

Meningitis
Uveitis
Rash
Fever

Anicteric Leptospirosis

The septicemic phase of anicteric leptospirosis has an abrupt onset
with flulike signs of fever, shaking chills, lethargy, severe headache,
malaise, nausea, vomiting, and severe debilitating myalgia most
prominent in the lower extremities, lumbosacral spine, and abdomen. Bradycardia and hypotension can occur, but circulatory collapse is uncommon. Conjunctival suffusion with photophobia and
orbital pain (in the absence of chemosis and purulent exudate),

Icteric Leptospirosis
(Weil Syndrome)
First Stage
3-7 days
(Septicemic)

Second Stage
10-30 days
(Immune)

Leptospires
Present

Important
Clinical
Findings

Fever

First Stage
3-7 days
(Septicemic)

The spectrum of human leptospirosis ranges from asymptomatic
infection to severe disease (5–10% of infections) with multiorgan
dysfunction and death. The onset is usually abrupt, and the illness may follow a monophasic or the classically described biphasic course (Fig. 266.1). The incubation period ranges from 2 to
30 days, after which there is an initial or septicemic phase lasting 2-­7 days, during which leptospires can be isolated from the
blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and other tissues. This phase may
be followed by a brief period of well-­b eing before onset of a second symptomatic immune or leptospiruric phase. This phase is
associated with the appearance of circulating IgM antibody, disappearance of organisms from the blood and CSF, and appearance
of signs and symptoms associated with localization of leptospires
in the tissues. Despite the presence of circulating antibody, leptospires can persist in the kidney, urine, and aqueous humor. The
immune phase can last for several weeks. Symptomatic infection
may be anicteric or icteric.

Blood
CSF

Jaundice
Hemorrhage
Renal failure
Myocarditis

Fig. 266.1 Stages of anicteric and icteric leptospirosis. Cor-

Blood
CSF
Urine

Urine

relation between clinical findings and presence of leptospires
in body fluids. CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid. (From Feigin RD, Anderson DC. Human leptospirosis. CRC Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci.
1975;5:413–467. Copyright CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 266 u Leptospira 1879
generalized lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly may also
be present. A transient (<24 hours) erythematous maculopapular,
urticarial, petechial, purpuric, or desquamating rash occurs in 10%
of cases. Rarer manifestations include pharyngitis, pneumonitis,
arthritis, carditis, cholecystitis, and orchitis. The second or immune
phase can follow a brief asymptomatic interlude and is characterized by recurrence of fever and aseptic meningitis. Although 80%
of infected children have abnormal CSF profiles, only 50% have
clinical meningeal manifestations. CSF abnormalities include a
modest elevation in pressure, pleocytosis with early polymorphonuclear leukocytosis followed by mononuclear predominance rarely
exceeding 500 cells/mm3, normal or slightly elevated protein levels, and normal glucose values. Encephalitis, cranial and peripheral
neuropathies, papilledema, and paralysis are uncommon. A self-­
limited unilateral or bilateral uveitis can occur during this phase,
rarely resulting in permanent visual impairment. Central nervous
system symptoms usually resolve spontaneously within 1 week,
with almost no mortality.

Icteric Leptospirosis (Weil Syndrome)

Weil syndrome is a severe form of leptospirosis seen more commonly in adults (>30 years) than in children. The initial manifestations are similar to those described for anicteric leptospirosis.
However, the immune phase is characterized by jaundice, acute
renal dysfunction, thrombocytopenia, and, in fulminant cases, pulmonary hemorrhage and cardiovascular collapse. Hepatic involvement leads to right upper quadrant pain, hepatomegaly, direct and
indirect hyperbilirubinemia, and modestly elevated serum levels
of hepatic enzymes. Liver function usually returns to normal after
recovery. Patients have abnormal findings on urinalysis (hematuria,
proteinuria, and casts), and azotemia is common, often associated
with oliguria or anuria. Acute kidney failure occurs in 16–40% of
cases. Abnormal electrocardiograms are present in 90% of cases, but
congestive heart failure is uncommon. Transient thrombocytopenia
occurs in >50% of cases. Rarely, hemorrhagic manifestations occur,
including epistaxis, hemoptysis, and pulmonary, gastrointestinal,
and adrenal hemorrhage. Patients with pulmonary hemorrhage
syndrome may have >50% mortality rate, although the overall mortality rate for severe disease is lower, about 5–15%.

DIAGNOSIS

Leptospirosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
acute flulike febrile illnesses with a history of direct contact with animals or with soil or water contaminated with animal urine. The disease may be difficult to distinguish clinically from dengue or malaria
in endemic areas.
The diagnosis is most often confirmed by serologic testing and
less often confirmed by isolation of the infecting organism from
clinical specimens. The gold-­standard diagnostic method is the
microscopic agglutination test, a serogroup-­specific assay using
live antigen suspension of leptospiral serovars and dark-­
f ield
microscopy for agglutination. A fourfold or greater increase in
titer in paired sera confirms the diagnosis. Agglutinins usually
appear by the 12th day of illness and reach a maximum titer by the
third week. Low titers can persist for years. Approximately 10% of
infected persons do not have detectable agglutinins, presumably

because available antisera do not identify all Leptospira serotypes.
Additionally, enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) methods, latex agglutination, and immunochromatography are commercially available, and DNA PCR diagnostics have been developed.
Phase-­contrast and dark-­field microscopy are insensitive for spirochete detection, but organisms may be identified using Warthin-­
Starry silver stain or fluorescent antibody staining of tissue or
body fluids. Unlike other pathogenic spirochetes, leptospires can
be recovered from the blood or CSF during the first 10 days of illness and from urine after the second week by repeated culture of
small inoculum (i.e., one drop of blood or CSF in 5 mL of medium)
on commercially available selective media. However, the inoculum
in clinical specimens is small, and growth can take up to 16 weeks.

TREATMENT

Leptospira spp. demonstrate in vitro susceptibility to penicillin and
tetracyclines, but in vivo effectiveness of these antibiotics in treating
human leptospirosis is unclear because of the naturally high spontaneous recovery rates. Some studies suggest that initiation of treatment
before the seventh day shortens the clinical course and decreases the
severity of the infection; thus treatment with penicillin G, ceftriaxone,
or doxycycline (in children ≥8 years of age) should be instituted
early when the diagnosis is suspected. There is evidence that a short
(<2 weeks) course of doxycycline may be safely used in children >2 years
of age. Parenteral penicillin G (6-­8 million U/m2/day divided every
4 hours IV for 7 days) is recommended, with doxycycline 2 mg/kg/
day divided in two doses with a maximum of 100 mg twice daily as
an alternative for patients allergic to penicillin. Ceftriaxone, and
azithromycin have been evaluated in clinical trials and have demonstrated equivalent effectiveness with doxycycline. These antibiotics can be used as alternatives in patients for whom doxycycline is
contraindicated. In mild illness, oral doxycycline, amoxicillin, and
ampicillin have been used successfully. In severe illness, supportive care with specific attention given to cardiopulmonary status,
renal function, coagulopathy, and fluid and electrolyte balance is
warranted.

PREVENTION

Prevention of human leptospirosis infection is facilitated through
rodent control measures and avoidance of contaminated water and
soil. Immunization of livestock and domestic dogs is recommended
as a means of reducing animal reservoirs. Human vaccine development has been challenging because of the diversity of Leptospira
serovars and their variable geographic distribution. Protective
clothing (i.e., boots, gloves, and goggles) should be worn by persons
at risk for occupational exposure. In hospital settings, in addition
to standard precautions, contact precautions are recommended for
potential exposures to infected urine. Leptospirosis was successfully
prevented in American soldiers stationed in the tropics by administering prophylactic doxycycline (200 mg PO once a week). This
approach may be similarly effective for travelers to highly endemic
areas for short periods; however, there are no specific pediatric data
to support any prophylaxis regimen.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1880 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 267

Relapsing Fever (Borrelia)
Stephen K. Obaro and H. Dele Davies
Relapsing fever is characterized by recurring fevers and flulike symptoms such as headaches, myalgia, arthralgia, and rigors.

ETIOLOGY

Relapsing fever is an arthropod (lice or tick)-­transmitted infection
caused by spirochetes of the genus Borrelia.
Louse-­borne (epidemic) relapsing fever is caused by Borrelia recurrentis and is transmitted from person to person by Pediculus humanus,
the human body louse. Human infection occurs as a result of crushing lice during scratching, facilitating entry of infected hemolymph
through abraded or normal skin or mucous membranes.
Tick-­borne (endemic) relapsing fever is caused by several species
of Borrelia and is transmitted to humans by Ornithodoros ticks. Borrelia
hermsii and Borrelia turicatae are the common species in the western
United States, whereas Borrelia dugesii is the major cause of disease
in Mexico and Central America. Human infection occurs when saliva,
coxal fluid, or excrement is released by the tick during feeding, thereby
permitting spirochetes to penetrate the skin and mucous membranes.
Borrelia miyamotoi has been identified in the Japanese Ixodes persulcatus tick and in the Ixodes dammini tick, the agent that transmits
Lyme disease in the northeastern United States. This Borrelia species
causes a Lyme disease–like illness rather than relapsing fever.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Louse-­borne relapsing fever tends to occur in epidemics associated
with war, poverty, famine, and poor personal hygiene, often in association with typhus. This form of relapsing fever is no longer seen in the
United States but is endemic in parts of East Africa. Using 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) polymerase chain reaction assays for molecular
detection, up to 20.5% of all unexplained fever in the Horn of Africa,
including northwestern Morocco where the population traditionally
lives in mud huts, is caused by tick-­borne relapsing fever, making this
the most common cause of bacterial infections.
Ornithodoros ticks, which transmit endemic relapsing fever and are
distributed worldwide, including in the western United States, prefer
warm, humid environments and high altitudes and are found in rodent
burrows, caves, and other nesting sites (Fig. 267.1). Rodents (e.g.,
squirrels and chipmunks) are the principal reservoirs. Infected ticks
gain access to human dwellings on the rodent host. Human contact is
often unnoticed because these soft ticks have a painless bite and detach
immediately after a short blood meal.

incubation period of tick-­borne disease is usually 7 days (range: 2-­9
days). Each form of relapsing fever is characterized by sudden onset of
high fever, lethargy, headache, photophobia, nausea, vomiting, myalgia, and arthralgia. Additional symptoms may appear later and include
abdominal pain, a productive cough, mild respiratory distress, and
bleeding manifestations, including epistaxis, hemoptysis, hematuria,
and hematemesis. During the end of the primary febrile episode, a diffuse, erythematous, macular, or petechial rash lasting up to 2 days may
develop over the trunk and shoulders. There may also be lymphadenopathy, pneumonia, and splenomegaly. Hepatic tenderness associated
with hepatomegaly is a common sign, with jaundice in half of affected
children. Central nervous system manifestations include lethargy, stupor, meningismus, convulsions, peripheral neuritis, focal neurologic
deficits, and cranial nerve paralysis and may be the principal feature of
late relapses in tick-­borne disease. Severe manifestations include myocarditis, hepatic failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy.
The initial symptomatic period characteristically ends with a crisis
in 2-­9 days, marked by abrupt diaphoresis, hypothermia, hypotension, bradycardia, profound muscle weakness, and prostration. In
untreated patients, the first relapse occurs within 1 week, followed
by usually 3 but up to 10 relapses, with symptoms during each
relapse becoming milder and shorter as the afebrile remission period
lengthens.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis depends on demonstration of spirochetes by dark-­
field
microscopy or in thin or thick blood smears stained with Giemsa or
Wright stain and by blood culture (Fig. 267.2). During afebrile remissions, spirochetes are not found in the blood. Serologic tests have not
been standardized, are generally not available, and produce cross reactions with other spirochetes, including Borrelia burgdorferi, the agent
of Lyme disease. Central nervous system involvement may be associated with lymphocytic pleocytosis. Molecular methods, including
nested polymerase chain reaction or 16S rRNA polymerase chain reaction assays, have been used for detection of tick-­borne and louse-­borne
recurrent fever and have been found to have improved sensitivity and
specificity compared with blood smears. However, these assays are not
yet routinely available for commercial use.

TREATMENT

Oral or parenteral tetracycline or doxycycline is the drug of choice
for louse-­borne and tick-­borne relapsing fever. For children older
than 8 years of age and young adults, tetracycline 500 mg PO every
6 hours or doxycycline 100 mg PO every 12 hours for 10 days is
effective. Single-­dose treatment with tetracycline (500 mg PO) or

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Relapsing fever is cyclical because the Borrelia organisms undergo antigenic (phase) variation. Multiple variants evolve simultaneously during the first relapse, with one type becoming predominant. Spirochetes
isolated during the primary febrile episode differ antigenically from
those recovered during a subsequent relapse. During febrile episodes,
spirochetes enter the bloodstream, induce the development of specific
immunoglobulin M and G antibodies, and undergo agglutination,
immobilization, lysis, and phagocytosis. During remission, Borrelia spirochetes may remain in the bloodstream, but spirochetemia is insufficient to produce symptoms. The number of relapses in untreated patients
depends on the number of antigenic variants of the infecting strain.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Relapsing fever is characterized by febrile episodes lasting 2-­9 days,
separated by afebrile intervals of 2-­7 days. Louse-­borne disease has
an incubation period of 2-­14 days, longer periods of pyrexia, fewer
relapses, and longer remission periods than tick-­borne disease. The

Each dot, placed randomly
within the county of exposure
(where known), represents
one case.

Each dot, placed randomly
within the county of
residence, represents one
case.

Fig. 267.1 Cases of tickborne relapsing fever–United States, 1990–

2011. During the years 1990–2011, 483 cases of tickborne relapsing
fever were reported in the western United States, with infections being
transmitted most frequently in California, Washington, and Colorado.
(From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]. Tick-­borne relapsing fever: distribution. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/relapsing-­
fever/distribution)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 268 u Lyme Disease (Borrelia burgdorferi)

1881

Chapter 268

Lyme Disease (Borrelia
burgdorferi)
Sanjeev K. Swami
Lyme disease is the most common vector-­borne disease in the United
States and is an important public health problem.

ETIOLOGY

Fig. 267.2 Stained thin smear of a newborn’s peripheral blood show-

ing the presence of numerous spirochetes (indicated by arrows) at ×63
magnification—Colorado, 2011. (From Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention [CDC]. Tickborne relapsing fever in a mother and newborn
child–Colorado, 2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61:174–
176.)

erythromycin is efficacious in adults, but experience in children is
limited. In children younger than 8 years of age, erythromycin (50
mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours PO) for a total of 10 days is recommended, although there is evidence that doxycycline given for
durations of less than 2 weeks is safe in children >2 years of age.
Penicillin and chloramphenicol are also effective. Central nervous
system involvement is usually responsive to intravenous ceftriaxone
or penicillin.
Resolution of each febrile episode either by natural crisis or as
a result of antimicrobial treatment is often accompanied by the
Jarisch-­Herxheimer reaction, which is caused by massive antigen
release. Corticosteroid or antipyretic pretreatment does not prevent
this reaction.

PROGNOSIS

With adequate therapy, the mortality rate for relapsing fever is <5%.
A majority of patients recover from their illness with or without treatment after the appearance of anti-­Borrelia antibodies, which agglutinate, kill, or opsonize the spirochete. However, pregnant women
and their neonates are at increased risk for tick-­borne recurrent
fever-­associated complications, including adult respiratory distress
syndrome, Jarisch-­Herxheimer reaction, and precipitous or premature delivery. Neonates have up to a 33% case fatality rate. The risk
of Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction appears to be much higher in louseborne relapsing fever (LBRF) (55.8%) compared to TBRF (19.3%).
However, they have similar overall case fatality rates, TBRF (6.5%)
and LBRF (4–10.2%).

PREVENTION

No vaccine is available. Disease control requires avoidance or elimination of the arthropod vectors. In epidemics of louse-­borne disease,
good personal hygiene and delousing of persons, dwellings, and clothing with commercially available insecticides can prevent dissemination. The risk for tick-­borne disease can be minimized in endemic
areas by maintaining rodent-­free dwellings. Giving prophylactic doxycycline for 4 days after a tick bite may prevent tick-­borne relapsing
fever caused by Borrelia persica.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Lyme disease is a zoonotic infection caused by the transmission of the
spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato (broad sense) to humans via
the bite of an infected tick of the Ixodes genus. In North America, B.
burgdorferi sensu stricto (strict sense) causes almost all cases; another
species in the upper Midwestern United States, Borrelia mayonii
(belonging to the group B. burgdorferi sensu lato), also causes Lyme
disease, but the illness is slightly different, with more diffuse rashes and
gastrointestinal symptoms. In Europe, the species Borrelia afzelii and
Borrelia garinii also cause disease. The three major outer-­surface proteins, called OspA, OspB, and OspC (which are highly charged basic
proteins of molecular weights of about 31, 34, and 23 kDa, respectively), and the 41-­kDa flagellar protein are important targets for the
immune response. Differences in the molecular structure of the different species are associated with differences in the clinical manifestations
of Lyme borreliosis in Europe and the United States. These differences
include the higher incidence of radiculoneuritis in Europe.

TRANSMISSION

In the eastern and midwestern United States, the vector for Lyme
disease is Ixodes scapularis, the black-­legged tick that is commonly
known as the deer tick. It is responsible for most cases in the United
States. The vector on the Pacific Coast is Ixodes pacificus, the western
black-­legged tick. Ixodes ticks have a 2-­year, three-­stage life cycle. The
larvae hatch in the early summer and are usually uninfected with B.
burgdorferi. The tick can become infected at any stage of its life cycle
by feeding on a host, usually a small mammal such as the white-­footed
mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), which is a natural reservoir for B. burgdorferi. The larvae overwinter and emerge the following spring in the
nymphal stage, which is the stage of the tick most likely to transmit the
infection. The nymphs molt to adults in the fall, and then adults spend
the second winter attached to white-­tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus). The females lay their eggs the following spring before they die,
and the 2-­year life cycle begins again.
Several factors are associated with increased risk for transmission
of B. burgdorferi from ticks to humans. The proportion of infected
ticks varies by geographic area and by the stage of the tick’s life cycle.
In endemic areas in the northeastern and midwestern United States,
15–25% of nymphal ticks and 35–50% of adult ticks are infected with
B. burgdorferi. By contrast, I. pacificus often feeds on lizards, which are
not a competent reservoir for B. burgdorferi, reducing the chance that
these ticks will be infected. The risk for transmission of B. burgdorferi
from infected Ixodes ticks is related to the duration of feeding. Experiments in animals show that infected nymphal ticks must feed for 36-­48
hours and infected adults must feed for 48-­72 hours before the risk for
transmission of B. burgdorferi becomes substantial. If the tick is recognized and removed promptly, transmission of B. burgdorferi will not
occur. Most patients with Lyme disease do not remember the tick bite
that transmitted the infection.
The habitat of tick species that carry B. burgdorferi may be geographically expanding in the United States because of climate change.
I. scapularis also transmits other microorganisms, namely Anaplasma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1882 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
phagocytophilum and Babesia microti, as well as Borrelia miyamotoi. Simultaneous transmission can result in co-­infections with these
organisms and B. burgdorferi.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Lyme disease has been reported in more than 50 countries, including
forested areas of Asia; northwestern, central, and eastern Europe; and
eastern and midwestern United States. In Europe, most cases occur in
the Scandinavian countries and in central Europe, especially Germany,
Austria, and Switzerland, whereas in the United States, 92% of cases
occurred in 16 states in 2019: Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New
York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia,
West Virginia, and Wisconsin (Fig. 268.1).
In 2019, the most recent year for which U.S. data are available, more
than 23,000 confirmed cases and more than 11,000 probable cases
were reported. The 3-­year averaged national incidence is estimated
at 7.8 cases per 100,000 population, and in recent years the national
incidence has ranged from a low of 7.0 cases per 100,000 (2012) to a
high of 9.1 cases per 100,000 (2017). In endemic areas, the reported
annual incidence ranges from 20 to 100 cases per 100,000 population,
although this figure may be as high as 600 cases per 100,000 population in hyperendemic areas. The reported incidence of disease by age
is bimodal. There is an initial peak among children age 5-­14 followed
by a second peak among adults 55-­69. In the United States, Lyme disease is diagnosed in males slightly more often than in females. Early
Lyme disease usually occurs from spring to early fall, corresponding to
deer tick activity. Late disease (primarily arthritis) occurs year-­round.
Among adults, outdoor occupation and leisure activities are risk factors; for children, location of residence in an endemic area is the most
important risk for infection.
Lyme disease is designated a nationally notifiable disease by the
CDC and Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists. Healthcare providers, hospitals, laboratories, and other parties are required
by law to notify local health departments when a confirmed or probable case of Lyme disease occurs. The local health departments report
cases to the state and territorial health departments; it is voluntary
in turn for these authorities to report data to the CDC, and therefore the actual number of Lyme disease cases and incidence are likely
underreported and underestimated. Lyme disease was the sixth most
common notifiable disease reported to the CDC in 2019 (following
Chlamydia trachomatis, gonorrhea, syphilis, campylobacteriosis, and
salmonellosis).

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Similar to other spirochetal infections, untreated Lyme disease is
characterized by asymptomatic infection, clinical disease that can
occur in stages, and a propensity for cutaneous and neurologic manifestations. The skin is the initial site of infection by B. burgdorferi.
Disseminated Lyme disease results from the spread of spirochetes
through the bloodstream to tissues throughout the body. The spirochete adheres to the surfaces of a wide variety of different types of
cells, but the principal target organs are the skin, central and peripheral nervous systems, joints, heart, and eyes. Because the organism
can persist in tissues for prolonged periods, symptoms can appear
very late after initial infection.
The symptoms of disseminated Lyme disease are a result of inflammation mediated by interleukin-­1 and other lymphokines in response
to the presence of the organism. It is likely that relatively few organisms
actually invade the host, but cytokines serve to amplify the inflammatory response and lead to much tissue damage. Lyme disease is characterized by inflammatory lesions that contain both T and B lymphocytes,
macrophages, plasma cells, and mast cells. The refractory symptoms
of disseminated Lyme disease can have an immunogenetic basis. Persons with certain HLA-­DR allotypes may be genetically predisposed to
develop chronic Lyme arthritis. An autoinflammatory response in the
synovium can result in clinical symptoms long after the bacteria have
been killed by antibiotics.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of Lyme disease are divided into early and
disseminated stages. Older nomenclature included early localized disease, early disseminated disease, and late disease; early disseminated
and late disease have been combined into disseminated disease in the
current nomenclature (Table 268.1). Untreated patients can progressively develop clinical symptoms of each stage of the disease, or they
can present with disseminated disease without having had any symptoms of the early Lyme disease.

Early Disease

The first clinical manifestation of Lyme disease in many patients
is erythema migrans (Fig. 268.2). Although it usually occurs 7-­14
days after the bite, the onset of the rash has been reported from 3
to 30 days later. The initial lesion occurs at the site of the bite. The
rash is generally either uniformly erythematous or a target lesion
with central clearing; rarely, there are vesicular or necrotic areas

Fig. 268.1 The geographic distribution of

Lyme disease cases in the United States. (From
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reported cases of Lyme disease—United
States, 2019. Available at: https://www.cdc.
gov/lyme/datasurveillance/maps-­recent.html)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 268 u Lyme Disease (Borrelia burgdorferi)

1883

Table 268.1  Clinical Stages of Lyme Disease
DISEASE STAGE

TIMING AFTER
TICK BITE

TYPICAL CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS

Early localized

3-­30 days

Erythema migrans (single),
variable constitutional
symptoms (headache,
fever, myalgia, arthralgia,
fatigue)

Disseminated

3-­12 wk

Erythema migrans (single
or multiple), worse
constitutional symptoms,
cranial neuritis,
meningitis, carditis,
ocular disease

Disseminated

>2 mo

Arthritis

Fig. 268.3 Multiple erythema migrans in early disseminated Lyme
disease.

A

B

Fig. 268.2 Skin manifestations of Lyme borreliosis. A, Erythema mi-

grans on the upper leg, showing central clearing. B, Erythema migrans
of the arm showing “bull’s-­eye” appearance. (A from Stanek G, Strle F.
Lyme borreliosis. Lancet. 2003;362:1639–1647.)

in the center of the rash. Occasionally the rash is itchy or painful,
although usually it is asymptomatic. The lesion can occur anywhere
on the body, but the most common locations are the axilla, periumbilical area, thigh, and groin. It is not unusual for the rash to occur
on the neck, face, or hairline, especially in young children. Without
treatment, the rash gradually expands (hence the name migrans)
to an average diameter of 15 cm and typically remains present for
1-­2 weeks. Erythema migrans may be associated with systemic features, including fever, myalgias, arthralgias, headache, or malaise;
gastrointestinal symptoms are rare. Co-infection with B. microti
or A. phagocytophilum during early infection with B. burgdorferi
is associated with more severe systemic symptoms. Co-­infections
should be suspected with unusual features of Lyme disease, poor
response to appropriate antibiotics, prolonged fever, or laboratory
abnormalities that include anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
or elevated liver enzymes.

Disseminated Disease

In the United States, approximately 20% of patients with acute B.
burgdorferi infection develop secondary (multiple) erythema migrans
lesions, a common manifestation of disseminated Lyme disease,

caused by hematogenous spread of the organisms to multiple skin
sites (Fig. 268.3). The secondary lesions, which can develop several
days or weeks after the first lesion, are usually smaller than the primary lesion and are often accompanied by more severe constitutional
symptoms. The lesions may not have the classic appearance of erythema migrans; they may lack central clearing, appear oval in shape,
or have irregular borders. The most common neurologic manifestations are peripheral facial nerve palsy and meningitis. Peripheral
(or cranial) nerves other than the facial nerve may be affected, and
patients can present with multiple concurrent nerve palsies. Lyme
meningitis usually has an indolent onset with days to weeks of symptoms (longer than viral meningitis) that can include headache, neck
pain and stiffness, and fatigue. Fever is variably present. Patients can
present with both peripheral nerve palsy and meningitis, but typically they have either central nervous system or peripheral nervous
system disease.
The clinical findings of papilledema, cranial neuropathy (especially
cranial nerve VII), and erythema migrans, which are present individually or together in up to 90% of cases, help differentiate Lyme meningitis from viral meningitis, in which these findings are rarely present. The
aseptic meningitis caused by Lyme disease can be accompanied by significant elevations of intracranial pressure, which can sometimes last
weeks or even months. All the cranial nerves except the olfactory have
been reported to be involved with Lyme disease, but the most common
are VI and especially VII. In endemic areas, Lyme disease is the leading
cause of peripheral facial nerve palsy. It is often the initial or the only
manifestation of Lyme disease and is sometimes bilateral. The facial
paralysis usually lasts 2-­8 weeks and resolves completely in most cases.
Radiculoneuritis and other peripheral neuropathies can occur but are
more common in Europe.
Cardiac involvement occurs in 5–15% of disseminated Lyme disease
(overall <1% of Lyme infections) and usually takes the form of heart
block, which can be first, second, or third degree, and the rhythm can
fluctuate rapidly. Rarely, myocardial dysfunction (myocarditis) can
occur. Patients presenting with suspected or proven disseminated
Lyme disease should have a careful cardiac examination, and electrocardiography should be strongly considered, especially if patients
report chest pain, palpitations, or presyncopal symptoms. Lyme carditis is a treatable condition and is the only manifestation of Lyme disease
that has been fatal.
Papilledema and uveitis are most common ocular conditions associated with Lyme disease; optic neuritis has also been reported.
Arthritis is the most common manifestation of disseminated
Lyme disease and begins weeks to months (possibly years) after
the initial infection. Lyme arthritis is classically a monoarticular,
nonmigratory arthritis affecting the large joints. The knee is the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1884 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
most commonly infected joint followed by the hip. Lyme arthritis
can occasionally be oligoarticular or migratory. The hallmark of
Lyme arthritis is joint swelling, which is a result of synovial effusion and sometimes synovial hypertrophy. The swollen joint may be
only mildly symptomatic, or less often, it may be painful and tender,
although patients usually do not experience the severe pain and systemic toxicity that are common with pyogenic arthritis. Micromotion tenderness is rare with Lyme arthritis. If untreated, the arthritis
can last several weeks, resolve, and then be followed by recurrent
attacks in the same or other joints.
Other manifestations of Lyme disease involving the central nervous
system, sometimes termed late neuroborreliosis, are rarely reported in
children. In adults, chronic encephalitis and polyneuritis have been
attributed to Lyme disease. The term Lyme encephalopathy has been
used to describe chronic encephalitis (demonstrable by objective
measures), but other literature has also used this term in reference to
memory loss and other cognitive sequelae after Lyme disease has been
treated. At times, the vague and mistaken term chronic Lyme disease
has been used to describe symptomatology in persons who might have
never had well-­documented infection with B. burgdorferi at all, have
serologic evidence of prior infection but current symptoms not consistent with Lyme disease, or have persistent symptoms after having
received appropriate antibiotic therapy. Prolonged treatment does not
treat the chronic neuropsychiatric symptoms and at times has harmed
the patient.
Some patients experience prolonged symptoms after treatment of
early or disseminated Lyme disease; these symptoms frequently include
fatigue, headaches, myalgias, arthralgias, and difficulty thinking. This
phenomenon is termed posttreatment Lyme disease syndrome. The
etiology for this process is unclear, but prolonged antibiotic treatment
has not been shown to hasten recovery and has been associated with
harm. Most patients have symptom resolution by 6 months without
antibiotic therapy.

Congenital Lyme Disease

In endemic areas, infection can occur during pregnancy, and although
congenital infection appears to be a rare event, there is no recognized
congenital infection syndrome associated with Lyme disease. B. burgdorferi has been identified from several abortuses and from a few liveborn children with congenital anomalies; however, the tissues in which
the spirochete has been identified usually have not shown histologic
evidence of inflammation. Severe skin and cardiac manifestations have
been described in a few cases, but studies conducted in endemic areas
have indicated that there is no difference in the prevalence of congenital malformations among the offspring of women with serum antibodies against B. burgdorferi and the offspring of those without such
antibodies.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Standard laboratory tests rarely are helpful in diagnosing Lyme disease
because any associated laboratory abnormalities usually are nonspecific. The peripheral white blood cell count may be either normal or
elevated. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) may be mildly
elevated. Liver transaminases are occasionally mildly elevated. In Lyme
arthritis, the white blood cell count in joint fluid can range from 25,000
to 100,000/mL, often with a preponderance of polymorphonuclear
cells. A lower ESR (≤40) and C-­reactive protein and a peripheral blood
absolute neutrophil count of less than 10,000 may help to differentiate
Lyme from septic arthritis. When meningitis is present, there usually is
a low-­grade pleocytosis with a lymphocytic and monocytic predominance. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein level may be elevated, but
the glucose concentration usually is normal. Gram stain and routine
bacterial cultures are negative. Imaging of the central nervous system
(e.g., magnetic resonance imaging and single-­photon emission computed tomography) occasionally reveals abnormalities, but there is
no definitive pattern in Lyme disease. The main role of imaging is to
exclude other diagnoses.

DIAGNOSIS

In the appropriate epidemiologic setting (endemic area, season), typical erythema migrans is pathognomonic. Occasionally, the diagnosis of erythema migrans may be difficult because the rash initially
can be confused with nummular eczema, tinea corporis, granuloma
annulare, an insect bite reaction, southern tick–associated rash
illness, or cellulitis. The relatively rapid expansion of erythema
migrans helps distinguish it from these other skin lesions. The other
clinical manifestations of Lyme disease are less specific and may
be confused with other conditions; the monoarticular or oligoarticular arthritis sometimes is confused with a septic joint or other
causes of arthritis in children, such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis
or rheumatic fever; the facial nerve palsy caused by Lyme disease
is clinically indistinguishable from Bell palsy, although bilateral
involvement is much more common with Lyme disease; Lyme meningitis generally occurs in the warmer months, the same period that
enteroviral meningitis is prevalent. Therefore for all disease manifestations other than erythema migrans, it is recommended to have
laboratory confirmation of infection with B. burgdorferi.
Although B. burgdorferi has been isolated from the blood, skin,
CSF, myocardium, and synovium of patients with Lyme disease, the
organism is difficult to isolate in culture (cultivation is largely relegated to research laboratories). Infection is usually identified by the
detection of antibody in serum. Although some laboratories offer
polymerase chain reaction as a diagnostic test for Lyme disease, its
sensitivity is poor because of the low concentrations of bacteria in
many sites, especially CSF. Other antigen-­based tests, including a
test for B. burgdorferi antigens in urine, are unreliable. Clinicians
should be aware that some laboratories use alternative diagnostic
tests and/or alternative interpretive criteria that are not evidence
based, leading to a false diagnosis of Lyme disease. The CDC and
the Food and Drug Administration recommend against using these
tests.

Serology

After the transmission of B. burgdorferi from a tick bite, specific
immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibodies appear first, usually within 2
weeks, peak at 6-­8 weeks, and subsequently decline. Sometimes a prolonged or recurrent elevation of IgM antibodies occurs despite effective antimicrobial treatment. Elevated IgM levels after 6-­8 weeks are
often false positives. Specific IgG antibodies usually appear between
2 and 6 weeks, peak after 4-­6 months, and can remain elevated for
years, particularly in patients with arthritis. The antibody response
to B. burgdorferi may be blunted in patients with early Lyme disease
who are treated promptly with an effective antimicrobial agent. Serodiagnosis during the first 4 weeks of infection is not sensitive and may
need to be repeated.
Historically, the most common method used to detect IgG and
IgM antibodies has been the enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). This method is sensitive but not optimally specific. The ELISA
sometimes produces false-­positive results because of antibodies that
cross react with other spirochetal infections (e.g., B. miyamotoi, syphilis, leptospirosis, or relapsing fever), or certain viral infections (e.g.,
Epstein-­Barr virus), or that occur in certain autoimmune diseases
(e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus). The positive predictive value of
the ELISA result depends primarily on the plausibility that the patient
has Lyme disease based on the clinical and epidemiologic history and
the physical examination (the pretest probability). For patients who
have been in endemic areas with opportunities for Ixodes tick exposure and who have typical clinical manifestations of Lyme disease, the
pretest probability is high, and positive ELISA results are usually true
positives. For patients who are from nonendemic areas and/or who
have little risk for Ixodes tick exposures and/or have nonspecific symptoms (low pretest probability), rates of false-­positive results are high.
Infection with B. miyamotoi may cause false-­positive ELISA tests for
Lyme disease. This syndrome of relapsing fever, headache, and myalgia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 268 u Lyme Disease (Borrelia burgdorferi)
but no rash with neutropenia or thrombocytopenia is uncommon in
Lyme disease.
Western immunoblotting is well-­standardized, and there are
accepted criteria for interpretation. Five of 10 IgG bands and 2 of 3
IgM bands are considered reactive. The Western blot is not as sensitive as ELISA, especially in early infection, but is highly specific.
Any positive or equivocal ELISA can be confirmed with Western
blotting. The CDC recommends using IgM and IgG Western blot
confirmation when symptoms have been present ≤30 days and IgG
only when symptoms have been present longer than 30 days.
Two-­tier testing is the recommended laboratory evaluation of most
cases of Lyme disease and is associated with a high degree of sensitivity
and specificity when used appropriately. Two-­tier assays using serial
ELISAs have been developed that have similar or better sensitivity and
specificity when compared with ELISA followed by Western blot. The
serial ELISA methodology can have improved turn-­around time and
has two quantitative tests rather than a quantitative test followed by
a test that requires interpretation. Stand-­alone ELISAs have also been
developed that have similar sensitivity and specificity when compared
with two-­tier testing.
Clinicians should be aware that Lyme disease might not be the
cause of a patient’s symptoms despite the presence of antibodies to
B. burgdorferi. The test result may be falsely positive (as described
for ELISA), or the patient might have been infected previously.
Antibodies to B. burgdorferi that develop with infection can persist for many years despite adequate treatment and clinical cure of
the disease. In addition, because some people who become infected
with B. burgdorferi are asymptomatic, the background rate of seropositivity among patients who have never had clinically apparent
Lyme disease may be substantial in endemic areas. Finally, because
antibodies against B. burgdorferi persist after successful treatment,
there is no reason to obtain follow-­up serologic tests.

TREATMENT

Table 268.2 provides treatment recommendations. Most patients
can be treated with oral antibiotics. Young children are generally
treated with amoxicillin. Doxycycline has the advantages of good
central nervous system penetration and activity against A. phagocytophilum, which may be transmitted at the same time as B. burgdorferi in certain geographic areas. Historically, children <8 years
were not treated with doxycycline because of the risk of staining
of the permanent teeth. Data from the CDC have shown that this
is not a concern for treatment courses <2 weeks. Doxycycline oral
solution is still challenging to find, so most younger children are
prescribed amoxicillin. There are no data that show a difference in
efficacy between amoxicillin and doxycycline for the treatment of
Lyme disease. Patients who are treated with doxycycline should be
alerted to the risk for developing photosensitivity in sun-­exposed
areas while taking the medication; thus long sleeves, long pants, and
a hat are recommended for activities in direct sunlight. The only
oral cephalosporin proved to be effective for the treatment of Lyme
disease is cefuroxime axetil, which is an alternative for persons who
cannot take doxycycline or who are allergic to penicillin. There is
no reported resistance of B. burgdorferi to these antibiotics. Macrolide antibiotics, including azithromycin, appear to have limited
activity and are only recommended for patients allergic to all of the
other active medications.
Parenteral therapy is usually recommended for patients with
higher degrees of heart block or central nervous system involvement, although oral therapy for meningitis is also considered
acceptable for ambulatory patients. Patients with arthritis that fails
to resolve after an initial course of oral therapy can be retreated
with an oral regimen or can receive intravenous antibiotic therapy.
Ceftriaxone is favored because of its excellent anti-­Borrelia activity,
tolerability, and once-­daily dosing regimen, which can usually be
done on an outpatient basis.

1885

Table 268.2  Recommended Treatment of Lyme Disease
DRUG

PEDIATRIC DOSING

Amoxicillin

50 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses
(max: 1,500 mg/day)

Doxycycline

4.4 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
(max: 200 mg/day) (see text
regarding doxycycline use in
children)

Cefuroxime axetil

30 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
(max: 1,000 mg/day)

Ceftriaxone (IV)*,†

50-­75 mg/kg/day once daily
(max: 2,000 mg/day)

Azithromycin‡

10 mg/kg/day once daily ×7 days

RECOMMENDED THERAPY BASED ON CLINICAL
MANIFESTATION
Erythema migrans
Doxycycline ×10 days
Amoxicillin ×14 days
Cefuroxime ×14 days
Meningitis, radiculopathy

Doxycycline ×14-­21 days or
Ceftriaxone ×14 days (14-­21 for
hospitalized patients)

Cranial nerve palsy§

Doxycycline ×14-­21 days

Cardiac disease

Oral regimen or ceftriaxone 14-­
21 days (see text for specifics)

Arthritis

Oral regimen 28 days

Persistent or recurrent arthritis
after initial treatment

Oral regimen ×28 days or
Ceftriaxone 14-­28 days

Borrelial lymphocytoma

Doxycycline, amoxicillin,
cefuroxime 14 days

*Penicillin G is an alternative parenteral agent but requires more frequent dosing.
†Doses of 100 mg/kg/day should be used for meningitis.
‡For those unable to take amoxicillin or doxycycline.
§Treatment is to prevent late disease, not to treat the cranial palsy; avoid
corticosteroids.

Peripheral facial nerve palsy can be treated using an oral antibiotic.
Experts are divided on whether every patient with Lyme-­associated
facial palsy needs a CSF analysis, but clinicians should consider lumbar
puncture for patients with significant headache, neck pain or stiffness,
or papilledema.
Patients with symptomatic cardiac disease, second-­or third-­degree
heart block, or significantly prolonged PR interval should be hospitalized and monitored closely. These patients should receive a parenteral
antibiotic for their initial treatment. Patients with first-­degree heart
block can be treated with an oral antibiotic, and patients with high
degrees of heart block can be transitioned to oral treatment as their
heart block resolves.
Some patients develop a Jarisch-­Herxheimer reaction soon after
treatment is initiated; this results from lysis of the Borrelia. The manifestations of this reaction are low-­grade fever and achiness. These
symptoms resolve spontaneously within 24-­48 hours, and administration of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs often is beneficial. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs also may be useful in treating symptoms
of early Lyme disease and of Lyme arthritis. Co-­infections with other
pathogens transmitted by Ixodes ticks should be treated according to
standard recommendations.
There is no clear evidence that posttreatment Lyme disease syndrome is related to persistence of the organism. Studies in adults have

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1886 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 268.3  Personal Prevention Measures

Table 268.4  Management of a Suspected Ixodes Tick
Bite in the United States

BEFORE VENTURING
OUTSIDE

DURING AND/OR AFTER
EXPOSURE TO TICK HABITAT†

Personal prevention measures*

Conduct a thorough tick check
of extremities, torso, and areas
where ticks may be visually
obscured (e.g., axilla, nape of
neck, hairline, in and around
ears, umbilicus, groin, popliteal
fossa)

1.	Remove tick with clean fine-­
tipped tweezers (or other
comparable device).

1.	Do not use other
nonmechanical methods for
tick removal.

2.	Identify tick. Send to a
laboratory, refer to an online
resource.

2.	Do not test tick for pathogens
(e.g., send for PCR).

Avoid risky habitats

Bathe or shower within 2 hr

Wear light-­colored clothing

Dry clothes on high heat for at
least 10 min; if not possible,
wash clothes in hot water

3.	Determine if tick meets high-­
risk criteria.
a.	Identified as Ixodes vector
species
b.	Bite occurred in a highly
endemic area
c.	Attached for ≥36 hr

3.	Do not initiate prophylaxis in
any other scenario.

Wear long sleeves and pants
Tuck pants into socks or footwear

Use an EPA-­approved
repellent or insecticide as per
manufacturer’s instructions

If an attached tick is detected

DEET

https://www.cdc.gov/lyme/
removal/index.html

Picaridin

Tip: Store tick (e.g., in sealed
container/plastic bag, wrapped
in clear tape, or taped to a
piece of paper). Label with
date and likely geographic
location of exposure.

IR3535

See clinician and show tick
if concerned that it is
an Ixodes spp. and has fed at
least 36 hr.

p-­Methane-­3,8-­diol (PMD)

Remove properly and clean bite
area

Monitor health for symptoms of
Lyme disease and other tick-­
borne diseases

2-­undecanone
Permethrin (for application to
clothing and gear only)
*Tip: Have handy a fine-­tipped tweezers, tick storage container, and hand sanitizer.
†Continue to conduct a tick check whenever possible to detect and remove feeding
ticks as soon as possible.
DEET, N,N-­Diethyl-­meta-­toluamide; EPA, Environmental Protection Agency.
From Lantos PM, Rumbaugh J, Bockenstedt LK, et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), American Academy of Neurology (AAN),
and American College of Rheumatology (ACR): 2020 Guidelines for the Prevention,
Diagnosis and Treatment of Lyme Disease. Clin Infect Dis. 2021;72(1):e1–e48, Table 5,
p. e13.

not shown benefit with prolonged or repeated treatment with oral or
parenteral antibiotics.

PROGNOSIS

DO NOT

Consider initiating prophylaxis if a, b, and c are met AND it is within
72 hr of tick removal. See dosing in the footnote*.

Wear permethrin-­treated
clothing

Oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE)

DO

There is a widespread misconception that Lyme disease is difficult to
cure and that chronic symptoms and clinical recurrences are common.
The most likely reason for apparent treatment failure is an incorrect
diagnosis of Lyme disease.
The prognosis for children treated for Lyme disease is excellent.
Children treated for erythema migrans rarely develop symptoms of
late Lyme disease. The long-­term prognosis for patients who are treated
beginning in the later stages of Lyme disease also is excellent. Although
chronic and recurrent arthritis may occur, especially among patients

*Doxycycline is given as a single oral dose, 200 mg for adults and 4.4 mg/kg (up to a
maximum dose of 200 mg) for children.
PCR, Polymerase chain reaction.
From Lantos PM, Rumbaugh J, Bockenstedt LK, et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), American Academy of Neurology (AAN),
and American College of Rheumatology (ACR): 2020 Guidelines for the Prevention,
Diagnosis and Treatment of Lyme Disease. Clin Infect Dis. 2021;72(1):e1–e48, Table 6,
p. e13.

with certain human leukocyte antigen allotypes (an autoimmune process), most children who are treated for Lyme arthritis are cured and
have no sequelae. Although there are rare reports of adults who have
developed late neuroborreliosis, usually among persons with Lyme disease in whom treatment was delayed for months or years, similar cases
in children are rare.

PREVENTION

The best way to avoid Lyme disease is to avoid tick-­infested areas (Table
268.3). Children should be examined for deer ticks after known or
potential exposure (although many people are not able to identify the
species or the stage of the tick). If a tick attachment is noted, the tick
should be grasped at the mouthparts with a forceps or tweezers; if these
are not available, the tick should be covered with a tissue (Table 268.4).
The recommended method of tick removal is to pull directly outward
without twisting; infection is usually preventable if the tick is removed
before 36 hours of attachment; at this time the ticks are flat and nonengorged (Fig. 268.4).
The overall risk for acquiring Lyme disease after a tick bite is low
(1–3%) in most endemic areas. If the tick is engorged and present for
>72 hours (a high-­risk tick bite), the risk of infection may increase to
25% in hyperendemic areas. Patients and families should be advised to
watch the area for development of erythema migrans and to seek medical attention if the rash or constitutional symptoms occur. If infection
develops, early treatment of the infection is highly effective. Prophylaxis after a high-­risk tick bite with a single dose of oral doxycycline in
adults (200 mg) or 4.4 mg/kg in children is effective in reducing the risk
of Lyme disease. The routine testing of ticks that have been removed
from humans for evidence of B. burgdorferi is not recommended
because the value of a positive test result for predicting infection in the
human host is unknown.
Personal protective measures that may be effective in reducing the
chance of tick bites include wearing protective clothing (long pants
tucked into socks, long-­sleeved shirts) when entering tick-­infested
areas, checking for and promptly removing ticks, and using tick
repellents such as N,N-­diethyl-­3-­methylbenzamide (DEET) (see
Table 268.3). This chemical can safely be used on pants, socks, and
shoes; care must be used with heavy or repeated application on skin,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 269 u Mycoplasma pneumoniae

1887

Wait and watch Consider for prophylaxis
Unfed

Day 1.5

Day 2

Day 2.5

Day 3

Day 4

Wait and watch Consider for prophylaxis
Unfed

Day 1.5

Day 2

Day 3

Day 4

Day 7

Fig. 268.4 Relative sizes of engorging nymphal and adult female Ixodes scapularis (black-­legged = deer tick) as a function of time spent feeding

(= attachment time). Transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi requires 36-­48 hr of feeding, and therefore antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended only if
the tick has been attached for at least 36 hr, or 1.5 days. By itself, duration of feeding is insufficient for recommending antibiotic prophylaxis. (Top)
Nymphs (Feeding time: Unfed = 0 hr; Day 1.5 = 36 hr; Day 2 = 48 hr; Day 2.5 = 60 hr; Day 3 = 72 hr; Day 4 = 96 hr). (Bottom) Adult females over the
same period. Unfed nymph and adult female are the sizes of poppy and sesame seeds, respectively. Not actual size. (Courtesy of URI TickEncounter
Resource Center, TickEncounter.org; From Lantos PM, Rumbaugh J, Bockenstedt LK, et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America [IDSA], American Academy of Neurology [AAN], and American College of Rheumatology [ACR]: 2020 Guidelines for the Prevention, Diagnosis and Treatment of Lyme Disease. Clin Infect Dis. 2021;72[1]:e1–e48, Fig. 6.)

particularly in infants, because of the risk of systemic absorption and
toxicity. Permethrin treatment of clothing is also an effective prevention strategy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

process (5-­20 days) compared to other bacteria. M. pneumoniae isolates can be classified in two major genetic groups (subtypes 1 and 2)
based on the P1 adhesion protein. Distinguishing these two subtypes
is important for epidemiologic purposes. Like other mycoplasmas, M.
pneumoniae is distinguished by the complete absence of a cell wall,
resulting in (1) their dependence on host cells for obtaining essential
nutrients, (2) their intrinsic resistance to β-­lactam agents, and (3) their
pleomorphic shape and lack of visibility on Gram staining.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Section 9

Mycoplasmal Infections
Chapter 269

Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Asuncion Mejias and Octavio Ramilo
Among the few Mycoplasma species isolated from the human respiratory tract, Mycoplasma pneumoniae remains the most common species
causing respiratory infections in school-­age children and young adults
and is associated with a variety of clinical manifestations.

THE ORGANISM

Mycoplasmas are the smallest self-­replicating prokaryotes known to
cause disease in humans. Their size of 150-­250 nm is more on the order
of viruses than bacteria. M. pneumoniae is a fastidious double-­stranded
DNA bacterium that is distinguished by a small genome (∼800,000
base pairs) and a long doubling time, which makes culturing it a slow

M. pneumoniae infections occur worldwide and throughout the year. This
organism is a frequent cause of community-­acquired pneumonia (CAP)
in children >5 years of age and adults, accounting for ∼20% of all CAP in
middle school and high school children and up to 50% of CAP in college
students and military recruits. The proportion of cases increases according to age, as recently shown in a large population-­based study of CAP
conducted in the United States (3% in <5 years, 17% in 5-­9 years, and 24%
in 10-­17 years).
In contrast to the acute, short-­lived epidemics associated with some
respiratory viruses, M. pneumoniae infection occurs endemically worldwide. Epidemic outbreaks of variable intensity occur every few years and
are likely related to the alternative circulation of the two M. pneumoniae
subtypes. Transmission occurs through the respiratory route by large
droplet spread during close contact with a symptomatic person. Community outbreaks have been described in closed settings (colleges, boarding
schools, military bases) and can spread largely through school contacts.
Attack rates within families are high, with transmission rates of 40–80% for
household adult and children contacts, respectively. In contrast to many
other respiratory infections, the incubation period is 2-­3 weeks; hence, the
course of infection in a specific population (family) may last several weeks.
The occurrence of mycoplasma illnesses is related, in part, to age and
preexposure immunity. Overt illness is less common before 3 years of
age but can occur. Children younger than 5 years of age appear to have
milder illnesses associated with upper respiratory tract involvement,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Immunity after infection is not long-­lasting, as
evidenced by the frequency of reinfections over time. Other pathogens

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1888 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
are frequently co-­detected in children with M. pneumoniae, especially
in those younger than 2 years of age, where viral co-­infections have
been identified in up to 30% of cases. Asymptomatic carriage after
infection can last up to 4 months despite antibiotic therapy and may
contribute to prolonged outbreaks. Children are often the reservoir
from whom mycoplasma spreads. In the clinical setting, there are no
available tools yet to differentiate carriage vs infection.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenicity of M. pneumoniae is dependent on its extracellular
attachment and the initiation of the host cell immune response. The
mechanisms by which M. pneumoniae causes disease include (1) direct
bacterial invasion that initiates in the cells of the ciliated respiratory
epithelium, the target cells of M. pneumoniae infection; (2) toxin mediated through the production of the adenosine diphosphate–ribosylating and vacuolating toxin termed community-­acquired respiratory
distress syndrome (CARDS), an exotoxin that may damage the respiratory tract and has been associated with more severe or even fatal disease; and (3) indirect immune-­mediated effects, by altering antigens in
the cell surface and inducing the production of autoantibodies.
The organism is an elongated snakelike structure with a one-­end organelle, which mediates the attachment to sialic acid receptors in the cilia
through a complex set of adhesion transmembrane proteins (P1, P30,
proteins B and C, P116, and HMW1-­3). Virulent organisms attach to ciliated respiratory epithelial cell surfaces located in the bronchi, bronchioles,
alveoli, and possibly upper respiratory tract and burrow down between
cells, resulting in ciliostasis and eventual sloughing of the cells. This bacterium is capable of forming biofilms, with strain-­specific phenotypic differences, which hinder antibiotic penetration and recognition by the immune
system.
Once M. pneumoniae reaches the lower respiratory tract, it promotes the polyclonal activation of B lymphocytes and CD4+ T cells and
amplifies the immune response with the production of various proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as
tumor necrosis factor-­α, interleukin (IL)-­8, IL-­1β, Il-­6, and IL-­10.
Although it is well documented that specific cell-­mediated immunity and antibody titers against M. pneumoniae increase with age (and
therefore probably follow repeated infections), the immune mechanisms that protect against or clear the infection are not well defined. In
humans, nasal IgA antibodies correlated with protection after experimental challenge. A distinct aspect of M. pneumoniae is its ability to
induce the production of cold agglutinins (IgM antibodies) directed
against the I antigen on the erythrocyte’s surface. Even though antibody responses do not confer complete protection against reinfections,
the importance of a robust humoral response is apparent, because
patients with congenital antibody deficiencies, such as those with
hypogammaglobulinemia, can develop severe and prolonged disease
and have a higher risk of extrapulmonary manifestations. In children
with sickle cell disease or sickle-­related hemoglobinopathies, M. pneumoniae is a common infectious trigger of acute chest syndrome. These
children and also children with Down syndrome can develop severe
Mycoplasma pneumonia. On the other hand, M. pneumoniae does not
seem to be a common infectious agent in patients with AIDS.
M. pneumoniae has been detected by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) in many nonrespiratory sites, including blood, pleural fluid,
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and synovial fluid. The mechanisms of extrapulmonary disease associated with M. pneumoniae are unclear and
appear to be different according to the duration of symptoms at the
time of presentation: direct invasion vs immune-­mediated.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

M. pneumoniae is a frequent cause of upper and lower respiratory tract
infections in children and adolescents. The clinical manifestations of
M. pneumoniae can be divided into respiratory (more common) and
extrapulmonary (less common).

Respiratory Tract Disease

Tracheobronchitis and atypical pneumonia are the most commonly recognized clinical syndromes associated with M. pneumoniae. This agent is

responsible for up to 20% of all cases of CAP. The clinical manifestations
of M. pneumoniae pneumonia evolve according to the stage of the disease.
The onset is usually characterized by gradual development of headache,
malaise, fever, and sore throat, followed by progression of lower respiratory
symptoms, including hoarseness and nonproductive cough. The gradual
onset in children with atypical pneumonia is in contrast to the sudden
onset of lobar pneumonia. Coryza and gastrointestinal manifestations
are unusual and suggest a viral etiology, if present. Approximately 10% of
children will develop a cutaneous maculopapular rash. Although the clinical course in untreated patients is variable, cough, the clinical hallmark of
M. pneumoniae infection, usually worsens during the first week of illness.
Symptoms generally resolve within 2 weeks, although cough can last up to
4 weeks and may be accompanied by wheezing.
Chest examination may be unrevealing, even in patients with severe
cough. There may be no auscultative or percussive findings or only minimum dry rales. Clinical findings are often less severe than suggested by the
chest radiograph, explaining why the term “walking pneumonia” is often
used to describe CAP caused by M. pneumoniae. Radiographic findings
are variable and nonspecific, not allowing differentiation from viral or
bacterial pathogens. Bilateral diffuse infiltrates, lobar pneumonia, or hilar
lymphadenopathy can occur in up to 30% of patients. Although unusual,
large pleural effusions associated with lobar infiltrates and necrotizing
pneumonia have been described in patients with immunodeficiency,
Down syndrome, chronic cardiopulmonary disease, and sickle cell disease.
The white blood cell and differential counts are usually normal, whereas
the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-­reactive protein are often elevated. Appropriate antibiotics shorten the duration of illness but do not
reliably eradicate the organism from the respiratory tract.
Other respiratory illnesses occasionally caused by M. pneumoniae
include undifferentiated upper respiratory tract infections; intractable,
nonproductive cough; pharyngitis (usually without marked cervical
lymphadenopathy); sinusitis; croup; and bronchiolitis. M. pneumoniae is a
common trigger of wheezing in asthmatic children and can cause chronic
colonization in the airways, resulting in lung dysfunction in adolescent and
adult asthmatic patients. Otitis media and bullous myringitis, which also
occur with other viral and bacterial infections, have been described but are
rare, and their absence should not exclude the diagnosis of M. pneumoniae.

Extrapulmonary Disease

Despite the reportedly rare isolation of M. pneumoniae from nonrespiratory sites, the improved sensitivity of PCR for M. pneumoniae
DNA detection has led to increasing identification of this bacterium
in nonrespiratory sites, particularly the central nervous system (CNS).
Patients with or without respiratory symptoms can have involvement
of the skin, CNS, blood, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and joints. Extrapulmonary manifestations have been documented in 11–26% of children with M. pneumoniae infection and include:
1.	CNS disease: Occurs in 0.1% of all patients with M. pneumoniae
infection and in 7% of those requiring hospitalization. Manifestations include encephalitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
(ADEM), transverse myelitis, cerebellar ataxia, aseptic meningitis,
Guillain-­Barré syndrome, Bell palsy, and peripheral neuropathy.
CNS disease manifestations occur 3-­23 days (mean: 10 days) after
onset of respiratory illness but may not be preceded by any signs
of respiratory infection in up to 20% of cases. Studies in children
suggest that there are two pathogenic mechanisms for M. pneumoniae–associated neurologic disease: the first pattern is characterized
by almost absent or no prodromal respiratory symptoms (<7 days)
and nonreactive IgM responses. On the other hand, the second pattern is characterized by the presence of respiratory symptoms (most
commonly cough) for ≥7 days and reactive IgM in acute serum. In
the first group M. pneumoniae is usually identified in CSF by PCR
but not in the respiratory tract, whereas in children presenting with
≥7 days of respiratory symptoms, the opposite is true. These studies suggest that encephalitis occurring more than 7 days after onset
of prodromal symptoms is more likely to be caused by an autoimmune response to M. pneumoniae, whereas its occurrence early in
the course of the disease may be associated with direct bacterial invasion of the CNS. Involvement of the brainstem can result in severe

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 269 u Mycoplasma pneumoniae
dystonia and movement disorders. The CSF may be normal or have
mild mononuclear pleocytosis and/or increased CSF protein concentrations with normal glucose. Diagnosis is confirmed with positive CSF PCR, positive PCR from a throat swab, or demonstration
of seroconversion. Findings on MRI include focal ischemic changes,
ventriculomegaly, diffuse edema, or multifocal white matter inflammatory lesions consistent with postinfectious ADEM. Long-­term
sequelae have been reported in 23–64% of cases.
2.	Mucocutaneous disease: Up to 25% of children with M. pneumoniae
infections can have associated skin and mucosal exanthems, most notably maculopapular rashes, urticaria, and Mycoplasma-­induced rash
and mucositis syndrome (MIRM) or Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (SJS).
Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome and erythema nodosum are also associated
with M. pneumoniae infections. Approximately 10% of children with
M. pneumoniae CAP will exhibit a maculopapular rash. Mycoplasma-­
induced rash and mucositis usually develop 3-­21 days after initial respiratory symptoms, last less than 14 days, and are rarely associated with
severe complications (Figs. 269.1 and 269.2). M. pneumoniae may also
produce an isolated oral mucositis in absence of a rash.
3.	Hematologic abnormalities: Include mild degrees of hemolysis with
a positive Coombs test and minor reticulocytosis 2-­3 weeks after
the onset of illness. Severe hemolysis is associated with high titers
of cold hemagglutinins (≥1:512) and occurs rarely. Thrombocytopenia, aplastic anemia, hemophagocytic syndrome, and coagulation
defects occur occasionally.

Fig. 269.1 Lip changes found in Mycoplasma pneumoniae–associated mucositis.

4.	Musculoskeletal: Arthritis appears to be less common in children
than in adults, but monoarthritis, polyarthritis, and migratory arthritis have been described. Rhabdomyolysis has also been documented, often associated with other organ system manifestations.
5.	Other conditions, such as mild hepatitis, gastroenteritis, pancreatitis, acute glomerulonephritis, iritis or uveitis, and cardiac complications (pericarditis, myocarditis, and rheumatic fever–like syndrome,
most commonly seen in adults) are also described. Fatal M. pneumoniae infections are rare.

DIAGNOSIS

No specific clinical, epidemiologic, or laboratory parameters allow for a
definite diagnosis of M. pneumoniae infection. Nevertheless, pneumonia in school-­age children and young adults with a gradual onset and
cough as prominent findings suggests M. pneumoniae infection. The best
method for diagnosis is a combination of PCR from respiratory samples
and serology (acute and convalescent), as M. pneumoniae colonizes the
airway and has been identified in 17–25% of asymptomatic children.
Cultures on special media (SP4 agar media) of the throat or sputum
might demonstrate the classic M. pneumoniae “mulberry” colonies, but
growth generally requires incubation for more than 2-­3 weeks. The fastidious nutritional requirements of Mycoplasma make cultures slow and
impractical, and few laboratories maintain the capability of culturing M.
pneumoniae.
Serologic tests (immunofluorescence tests, enzyme-­linked immune
assays [EIAs]) to detect serum immunoglobulin (Ig) M, IgA, and IgG
antibodies against M. pneumoniae are commercially available. IgM antibodies have a high rate of false-­positive and false-­negative results. In
most cases, IgM antibodies are not detected within the first week after
symptom onset or in children with recurrent infections and may be positive for up to 6-­12 months after infection, or even years, and thus may
not indicate acute infection. A fourfold or greater increase in IgG antibody titers against M. pneumoniae between acute and convalescent sera
obtained 2-­4 weeks apart is diagnostic. Complement fixation assays are
less sensitive and specific than EIA or immunofluorescent assays.
Cold hemagglutinins (cold-­
reacting antibodies [IgM] against red
blood cells) can be detected in approximately 50% of patients with M.
pneumoniae pneumonia. These antibodies are nonspecific, especially at
titers <1:64, as modest increases in cold hemagglutinins can be observed
in other viral infections. Cold agglutinin antibodies should not be used for
the diagnosis of M. pneumoniae infections if other methods are available.
Nucleic acid amplification test (NAATs) for M. pneumoniae have
replaced other diagnostic tests. PCR of a nasopharyngeal or throat swab
(the combination of both increases sensitivity) for M. pneumoniae genomic
DNA carries a sensitivity and a specificity of 80% to >97%. Different primers have been used to identify gene sequences of the P1 cytoadhesion protein or the ribosomal (r) 16S RNA. PCR allows a more rapid diagnosis in
acutely ill patients and can be positive earlier in the course of infection than
serologic tests. Identification of M. pneumoniae by PCR (or culture) from a
patient with compatible clinical manifestations suggests causation.
The diagnosis of extrapulmonary disease associated with M. pneumoniae is challenging. Although M. pneumoniae has been identified
by PCR in the CSF of children with encephalitis, there are currently
no reliable tests for the diagnosis of CNS or other nonrespiratory sites
associated with M. pneumoniae. Because the extrapulmonary manifestations of M. pneumoniae may have an immunologic base, measuring
acute and convalescent IgM and IgG antibody levels is advisable.

TREATMENT

Fig. 269.2 Classic skin lesions found in Mycoplasma pneumoniae–
associated rash.

1889

M. pneumoniae illness is usually mild, and most cases of pneumonia
can be managed without the need for hospitalization. Because mycoplasmas lack a cell wall, they are inherently resistant to β-­lactam agents
that act by inhibiting the cell wall synthesis. In addition, drugs from
other classes, such as trimethoprim, rifampin, or linezolid, are inactive
against M. pneumoniae. Studies regarding the effectiveness of antimicrobial therapy for M. pneumoniae infections in children are contradictory. Nevertheless, empiric treatment is often initiated in hospitalized
children with CAP or severe extrapulmonary manifestations based on
clinical suspicion because of the difficulty of a definitive diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1890 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Antimicrobial Therapy

M. pneumoniae is typically sensitive to macrolides (erythromycin,
clarithromycin, azithromycin), tetracyclines, and quinolones in vitro.
Treatment of Mycoplasma does not assure eradication. Data from
observational studies showed that macrolide treatment of children
with M. pneumoniae CAP shortened the course of illness. Treatment
may be more effective when started within 3-­4 days of illness onset.
Although macrolides do not have bactericidal activity, they are preferred in children younger than 8 years of age. Two multicenter studies
of pediatric CAP demonstrated comparable clinical and bacteriologic
success rates between erythromycin and clarithromycin or azithromycin. However, the newer macrolides were better tolerated. The recommended treatment is clarithromycin (15 mg/kg/day divided into two
doses PO for 10 days; maximum daily dose 1 g) or azithromycin (10
mg/kg PO once on day 1 [maximum dose 500 mg] and 5 mg/kg once
daily [maximum dose 250 mg] PO on days 2-­5). Doxycycline (2-­4
mg/kg/day PO twice a day for 7 days, maximum daily dose 200 mg) in
children of all ages and fluoroquinolones such as levofloxacin (10 mg/
kg per dose twice a day in children <5 years; 10 mg/kg/day once a day
in children ≥5 years—maximum daily dose 750 mg—for 7-­10 days) are
effective but have higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs)
compared with macrolides and currently are not recommended as a
first-­line therapy in children.
Macrolide-­resistant M. pneumoniae infections should be suspected in patients with severe infections not responding to macrolide therapy within the first 48 hours of treatment, especially if they
have a history of exposure to macrolides. Macrolide-­resistant M.
pneumoniae strains have been reported in Asia (70–90% in Japan
and China), Europe (with great variability from country to country:
0% in the Netherlands vs 26% in Italy), and Israel. In the United
States and Canada, the rates of resistance have varied from 2.8% to
13% of cases. The clinical significance of macrolide-­resistant infections has not been completely elucidated. However, if macrolide-­
resistant M. pneumoniae is suspected, switching to a nonmacrolide
antimicrobial regimen such as doxycycline or levofloxacin might
be prudent.

Adjunctive Therapy

There is no evidence that treatment of upper respiratory tract or nonrespiratory tract disease with antimicrobial agents alters the course of
illness. However, patients with severe manifestations of extrapulmonary disease may benefit from antimicrobial treatment because direct
involvement of the bacterium cannot be excluded. Oftentimes antibiotics are administered in combination with immunomodulatory therapy.
In this regard, corticosteroids with or without intravenous immunoglobulin are the most commonly used agents for managing severe M.
pneumoniae extrapulmonary manifestations, particularly for patients
with CNS involvement or rash and mucositis. Although definitive data
are lacking, case studies suggest the associated clinical benefit of steroids in the management of severe lung disease, SJS, and hemolytic
anemia.

PREVENTION

Trials with inactivated and live attenuated vaccines for M. pneumoniae have been conducted with disappointing results. In hospitalized patients, standard and droplet precautions are recommended for
the duration of symptoms. It is important to emphasize that Mycoplasma infection remains contagious as long as cough persists and
despite successful antibiotic therapy. Prophylaxis with tetracyclines
or azithromycin substantially reduces the secondary attack rates in
institutional outbreaks and family close contacts. Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not recommended routinely; however, it can be considered in patients at high risk for severe disease, such as children with
sickle cell disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 270

Genital Mycoplasmas
(Mycoplasma hominis,
Mycoplasma genitalium,
and Ureaplasma
urealyticum)
María I. Sánchez Códez and
Asuncion Mejias
ETIOLOGY

Mycoplasma species are small pleomorphic bacteria that typically lack
a cell wall and are bound by a cell membrane. Many of the biologic
properties of mycoplasmas are in fact the result of the absence of a
rigid cell wall, including resistance to β-­lactam antibiotics. These ubiquitous organisms are difficult to cultivate using routine media and
belong to the family Mycoplasmataceae in the class Mollicutes and
represent the smallest self-­replicating organisms known to date. The
entire genome of many of the Mycoplasma species is among the smallest of the prokaryotic genomes. The family Mycoplasmataceae is composed of two genera responsible for human infection: Mycoplasma and
Ureaplasma. Of those, Mycoplasma hominis, Mycoplasma genitalium,
and Ureaplasma spp., which include Ureaplasma urealyticum (biovar 2)
and Ureaplasma parvum (biovar 1), are considered human urogenital
pathogens and are reviewed in this chapter. The main feature that distinguishes Ureaplasma spp. from Mycoplasma spp. is the ability of the
former to hydrolyze urea for energy production.
Genital mycoplasmas are often associated with sexually transmitted infections such as cervicitis and nongonococcal urethritis (NGU)
or with puerperal infections such as endometritis. M. hominis and
Ureaplasma spp. commonly colonize the female genital tract and
can cause chorioamnionitis, colonization of neonates, and perinatal
infections. The role of M. genitalium in pregnant women has not been
well defined.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Genital mycoplasmas are part of the normal flora and are commonly
present in the genitourinary (GU) tract of postpubertal women and
men and the upper respiratory tract. The prevalence of genital colonization with these bacteria has been directly associated with low
socioeconomic status, hormonal changes, and ethnicity and increases
proportionally according to sexual activity, being highest among individuals with multiple sexual partners. Female colonization is greatest
in the vagina (and less in the endocervix, urethra, and endometrium),
with rates varying from 40% to 80% for Ureaplasma spp. and 21–50%
for M. hominis among sexually active asymptomatic women. Ureaplasma is isolated less often from urine than from the cervix, but M.
hominis is present in the urine and in the cervix with approximately
the same frequency. Male colonization is less common and occurs primarily in the urethra. Among prepubertal children and sexually inactive adults, colonization rates are <10%. M. genitalium is implicated in
approximately 15–20% of NGU cases in men and in 10–30% of women
with cervicitis and also plays a role in pelvic inflammatory disease in
women. Studies using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) show that colonization of the female lower urogenital tract with M. genitalium is less
common than with M. hominis or Ureaplasma spp.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 270 u Genital Mycoplasmas
TRANSMISSION

Genital mycoplasmas are transmitted by sexual contact or by vertical
transmission from mother to infant. As with other perinatal infections, vertical transmission can occur through ascending intrauterine
infection or hematogenous spread from placental infection but most
often occurs through a colonized birth canal at the time of delivery.
Transmission rates among neonates born to women colonized with
Ureaplasma spp. range from 18% to 88%. Neonatal colonization rates
are higher among infants who weigh <1,000 g, infants who are born
in the presence of chorioamnionitis, and infants born to mothers who
are heavily colonized and of lower socioeconomic status. Neonatal
colonization is transient and decreases proportionally with age. Organisms may be recovered from the newborn’s throat, vagina, rectum, and,
occasionally, conjunctiva and respiratory tract.

PATHOGENESIS

Genital mycoplasmas can cause chronic inflammation of the GU tract
and amniotic membranes. These bacteria usually live in a state of
adherence to the respiratory or urogenital tract but can disseminate to
other organs when there is a disruption of the mucosa or a weakened or
immature immune system, such as in premature infants. Ureaplasma
spp. can infect the amniotic sac early in gestation without rupturing
the amniotic membranes, resulting in a clinically silent, chronic chorioamnionitis characterized by an intense inflammatory response. In
addition, mycoplasmas and Ureaplasma spp. hydrolyze arginine or
urea into ammonium for energy production. Ammonium causes an
increase in the genital pH that leads to bacterial dysbiosis with a reduction in Lactobacillus and overgrowth of other genital bacteria that
can promote preterm labor, premature rupture of membranes, and
chorioamnionitis.

1891

Attachment to fetal human tracheal epithelium can cause ciliary
disarray, clumping, and loss of epithelial cells. In vitro studies show
that Ureaplasma spp. stimulates macrophage production of interleukin
(IL)-­6 and tumor necrosis factor-­α. In addition, high concentrations
of proinflammatory cytokines possibly associated with development of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) of prematurity, such as monocyte
chemoattractant protein-­1 and IL-­8, have been found in tracheal secretions from very low birthweight infants colonized with Ureaplasma
spp. Immunity appears to require serotype-­specific antibody. Thus lack
of maternal antibodies might account for a higher disease risk in premature newborns.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The main syndromes associated with Ureaplasma spp., M. genitalium,
and M. hominis are displayed in Table 270.1.

Intrauterine and Neonatal Infections
Chorioamnionitis and Early Onset Infections

Genital mycoplasmas are associated with a variety of fetal and neonatal
infections. Ureaplasma spp. have been associated with clinically inapparent chorioamnionitis, resulting in spontaneous abortion, increased
fetal death, or premature delivery, although the causative role remains
uncertain. Studies have shown that women with Ureaplasma spp.
detected by PCR in amniotic fluid in the first or second trimester of
gestation have an increased risk of preterm labor and delivery. In addition, Ureaplasma spp. are the microorganism most commonly identified by PCR in women with premature rupture of membranes, and
data suggest that U. parvum plays a bigger role than U. urealyticum in
prematurity.

Table 270.1  Clinical Syndromes and Antibiotic Therapy for Ureaplasmas and Mycoplasmas Infection
UREAPLASMA SPP.

M. HOMINIS

M. GENITALIUM

INTRAUTERINE AND NEONATAL INFECTIONS
Chorioamnionitis
++

++

−

Preterm delivery

++

+

++

Postpartum fever

++

+++

UK

BPD

+++

+

UK

CNS infections

+

+

UK

NEC

+

UK

UK

GENITOURINARY INFECTIONS
NGU (acute/chronic)

++*

−

+++

Cervicitis

−

−

+++

PID

+

++

+++

NON-­NEONATAL/NONGENITOURINARY INFECTIONS
CNS disease†
+

++

−

Bacteremia

+

++

−

Surgical wound infections

++

++

−

Arthritis

+

++

−

TREATMENT
Macrolides

++

−

++

Quinolones‡

+

++

+

Clindamycin

−

++

+

Tetracyclines (doxycycline)

++

+

+

*Only Ureaplasma urealyticum (not parvum).
†CNS disease include meningitis, hydrocephalus, brain abscess, subdural empyema, intraventricular hemorrhage, and nonfunctioning CNS shunts.
‡The most commonly used quinolones are ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin.

BPD, Bronchopulmonary dysplasia; CNS, central nervous system; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; NGU, nongonococcal urethritis; PID, pelvic inflammatory disease; UK, unknown.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1892 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Ureaplasma spp. can also be recovered from tracheal, blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), or lung biopsy specimens in up to 50% of sick
infants younger than 34 weeks of gestation. In a study of 351 mother/
infant dyads, isolation of Ureaplasma spp. or M. hominis from cord
blood was documented in 23% of infants born between 23 and 32
weeks of gestation and correlated with the development of systemic
inflammatory response syndrome.

Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia

The role of these organisms in causing severe respiratory insufficiency,
the need for mechanical ventilation, the development of BPD, or death
remains controversial. Nevertheless, meta-­analyses of published studies have identified respiratory colonization with Ureaplasma spp. as
an independent risk factor for the development of BPD. However, trials using erythromycin or azithromycin therapy in high-­risk preterm
infants with tracheobronchial colonization of Ureaplasma spp. have
failed to show any difference in the development of BPD in treated vs.
nontreated infants. Similarly, treatment with azithromycin in pregnant
women colonized with Ureaplasma spp. did not show a reduction in
the risk of BPD in neonates. To date there is not enough evidence to
support the use of antibiotic therapy in preterm infants at risk for or
with confirmed Ureaplasma spp. infection to prevent the development
of BPD.

Central Nervous System Infections

M. hominis and Ureaplasma spp. have been isolated from the CSF of
premature infants and, less commonly, full-­term infants. These bacteria may represent true pathogens and may be associated with CNS
disease based on the host susceptibility/gestational age and bacteria
pathogenicity. However, the clinical significance of recovering M. hominis and Ureaplasma spp. from the CSF is uncertain, as most infants
have no overt signs of CNS disease, CSF pleocytosis is not consistent,
and spontaneous clearance of mycoplasmas has been documented
without specific therapy.
Ureaplasma spp. have been associated with the development of
subdural empyema and meningitis associated with intraventricular
hemorrhage (IVH) and hydrocephalus. Limited data suggest that meningitis caused by M. hominis can also be associated with IVH, hydrocephalus, and brain abscess, particularly in low birthweight or preterm
neonates and in infants with neural tube defects. In a review of 29
reported neonatal cases with M. hominis meningitis, 8 (28%) neonates
died and 8 (28%) developed neurologic sequelae. The age of onset of
meningitis ranges from 1 to 196 days of life, and organisms can persist
in the CSF without therapy for days to weeks. Pachymeningitis may be
evident on MRI.
Other: M. hominis and Ureaplasma spp. have also been associated
with neonatal conjunctivitis, abscesses (mainly at the scalp electrode
site and associated with M. hominis), pneumonia, bacteremia, and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC).

Genitourinary Infections

In sexually active adolescents and adults, genital mycoplasmas are
associated with sexually transmitted diseases and are rarely associated with focal infections outside the genital tract. U. urealyticum
(not U. parvum) and M. genitalium are recognized etiologic agents
of NGU, mainly in men, and represent the second most common
cause of urethritis after Chlamydia trachomatis. M. genitalium has
been identified in 30% of patients with persistent or recurrent NGU,
because this bacterium is relatively resistant to the antibiotics recommended for the treatment of NGU. Rare complications of NGU
include epididymitis and prostatitis. Salpingitis, cervicitis, pelvic
inflammatory disease, and endometritis have been described in
women associated with M. genitalium and, to a lesser extent, with
M. hominis.

Nongenital Infections

Ureaplasma spp. and M. hominis infections are rarely described
outside the neonatal period. These infections have been reported

in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised children,
including patients with hypogammaglobulinemia, lymphoma, or
solid organ transplant recipients, who appear to be at higher risk
of infection.
Cases of Ureaplasma spp. pneumonia, osteomyelitis, arthritis, meningitis, mediastinitis, bacteremia, infection of aortic grafts, and surgical
site infections have been reported. Recent data suggest that Ureaplasma
spp. is associated with posttransplant hyperammonemia syndrome, a
rare but potentially fatal complication.
M. hominis is most commonly reported in systemic infections and
has been associated with CNS disease (including meningitis, brain
abscesses, subdural empyema, and nonfunctioning shunts), surgical wound infections, arthritis (associated in up to 50% of cases with
prior manipulation of the GU tract), prosthetic and naïve endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and pneumonia. There are reports of life-­threatening
mediastinitis, sternal wound infections, pleuritis, peritonitis, and pericarditis, with high mortality rates in patients after organ transplantation. These infections should be suspected in culture-­negative systemic
or local infections, when samples have been properly collected and
before initiation of antibiotic therapy.

DIAGNOSIS

All Mollicutes lack a cell wall and are therefore not visible on Gram
stain. M. hominis and Ureaplasma spp. can grow in cell-­free media and
require sterols for growth, producing characteristic colonies on agar.
Colonies of M. hominis are 200-­300 μm in diameter with a fried-­egg
appearance, whereas colonies of Ureaplasma spp. are smaller (16-­60
μm in diameter). M. genitalium is a fastidious organism and can be
isolated with difficulty in cell culture systems, requiring up to 8 weeks
to be detected. Most clinical microbiology laboratories do not routinely test for these pathogens, and nucleic acid–based tests are the preferred method for diagnosis. PCR-­based assays have greater sensitivity
than culture (90% vs 40%, respectively) and provide a more practical
method for detection. Serologic assays for genital mycoplasmas have
limited value in the clinical setting and are not commercially available
for diagnostic purposes. In addition, serologic studies for Ureaplasma
spp. are not useful because of the high prevalence of colonization in
healthy children and adults.

Genital Tract Infection

Confirmation of genital tract infection is challenging because of
the high colonization rates in the vagina and urethra. NGU is typically defined as new-­onset urethral discharge or dysuria with Gram
stain of urethral discharge showing ≥5 polymorphonuclear leukocytes per oil-­immersion field in the absence of gram-­negative diplococci (i.e., Neisseria gonorrhoeae). The lack of cell wall prevents
the identification of these bacteria by routine Gram stain. Detection
of Ureaplasma spp. or M. hominis by PCR is available for a variety
of specimens, including urine and swabs of the cervix, urethra, and
vagina. M. genitalium is often identified by nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) of first-­void urine specimens in men and vaginal
swabs in women.

Neonates

Ureaplasma spp. and M. hominis have been isolated from urine,
blood, CSF, tracheal aspirates, pleural fluid, abscesses, and lung tissue. Premature neonates who are clinically ill with pneumonitis, focal
abscesses, or CNS disease (particularly progressive hydrocephalus
with or without pleocytosis) for whom bacterial cultures are negative
or in whom there is no improvement with standard antibiotic therapy
warrant further workup to rule out genital mycoplasmas. Isolation of
Ureaplasma spp. and M. hominis requires special media using urea for
the former and arginine for the latter, and clinical specimens must be
cultured immediately or frozen at −70°C (−94°F) to prevent loss of
organisms. M. hominis can also be detected sometimes using routine
laboratory media such as blood agar or chocolate agar. When inoculated into broth containing arginine (for M. hominis) or urea (for Ureaplasma spp.), growth is indicated by an alkaline pH. Identification of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 271 u Chlamydia pneumoniae
Ureaplasma spp. on agar requires 1-­3 days of growth and visualization
with the dissecting microscope, whereas M. hominis is apparent to the
eye but can require 2-­7 days to grow. PCR-­based assays are available
and will shed light on the causality of these pathogens when sterile sites
are tested (e.g., CSF, joint fluid).

1893

Section 10

Chlamydial Infections

TREATMENT

These organisms lack a cell wall, and thus β-­lactam agents or glycopeptides are not effective. These bacteria are also resistant to sulfonamides and trimethoprim because they do not synthesize folic acid.
Rifamycins do not have activity against Mollicutes (see Table 270.1).
Unlike other mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas, M. hominis is resistant to macrolides but generally susceptible to clindamycin and
quinolones. Most Ureaplasma spp. are susceptible to macrolides
and advanced-­generation quinolones, such as levofloxacin or moxifloxacin, but are intrinsically resistant to aminoglycosides and often
resistant to ciprofloxacin and clindamycin. Susceptibility to tetracyclines is variable for both organisms, with increasing resistance
being reported. M. genitalium is typically susceptible to macrolides and moxifloxacin, with variable resistance to tetracyclines and
clindamycin.

Adolescents and Adults

Recommended treatment for NGU should include antibiotics with
activity against C. trachomatis with either doxycycline (100 mg PO
twice daily for 7 days) or azithromycin (1 g PO as a single dose).
If adherence to a multiday regimen is not a concern, azithromycin
administered over a 5-­day course (500 mg on day 1 followed by 250
mg daily for 4 days) is an alternative and may limit the development of resistance. Recurrent NGU after completion of treatment
suggests the presence of doxycycline or azithromycin-­resistant M.
genitalium. If the initial empiric regimen did not include macrolides, retreatment with an azithromycin-­based regimen may be
indicated. Azithromycin is also preferred in children younger than
8 years and in those with allergy to tetracyclines. On the other hand,
if patients received azithromycin initially, retreatment with moxifloxacin may be most effective. Before the introduction of azithromycin, up to 60% of patients with M. genitalium NGU developed
recurrent or chronic urethritis despite 1-­2 weeks of treatment with
doxycycline.
Sexual partners should also be treated to avoid recurrent disease in
the index case. Nongenital mycoplasmal infections may require surgical drainage and prolonged antibiotic therapy.

Neonates

Treatment of these infections in neonates is challenging, and no
optimal treatment has been established. Doxycycline and quinolones are generally avoided at this age because of their associated toxicities. In addition, attributing causality may be difficult. In
general, therapy for neonates with genital mycoplasma infections
is indicated if infections are associated with pure growth of the
organism or if the organism is detected by PCR from a normally
sterile site in conjunction with compatible disease manifestations
to assure the treatment of an infectious process rather than merely
colonization.
Treatment is usually based on predictable antimicrobial sensitivities
because susceptibility testing is not readily available for individual isolates (see Table 270.1). The treatment of BPD with azithromycin for the
treatment of Ureaplasma spp. remains controversial. For infants with
symptomatic central nervous system (CNS) infection, cures have been
described with chloramphenicol, doxycycline, and quinolones, as they
have better penetration into the CSF than macrolides. The long-­term
consequences of asymptomatic CNS infection associated with genital
mycoplasmas, especially in the absence of pleocytosis, are unknown.
Because mycoplasmas can spontaneously clear from the CSF, therapy
should involve minimal risks.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 271

Chlamydia pneumoniae
Stephan A. Kohlhoff and
Margaret R. Hammerschlag
Chlamydia pneumoniae is a common cause of lower respiratory tract
diseases, including pneumonia in children and bronchitis and pneumonia in adults. This organism was briefly known as Chlamydophila
pneumoniae, and that name is still used as an alternative designation
in some sources.

ETIOLOGY

Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular pathogens that have established
a unique niche in host cells. Chlamydiae cause a variety of diseases in
animal species at virtually all phylogenic levels. The most significant
human pathogens are C. pneumoniae and C. trachomatis (see Chapter
272). C. psittaci is the cause of psittacosis, an important zoonosis (see
Chapter 273). There are now nine recognized chlamydial species.
Chlamydiae have a gram-­negative envelope without detectable peptidoglycan, although recent genomic analysis has revealed that both
C. pneumoniae and C. trachomatis encode proteins forming a nearly
complete pathway for synthesis of peptidoglycan, including penicillin-­
binding proteins. Chlamydiae also share a group-­specific lipopolysaccharide antigen and use host adenosine triphosphate for the synthesis
of chlamydial proteins. Although chlamydiae are auxotrophic for three
of four nucleoside triphosphates, they encode functional glucose-­
catabolizing enzymes that can be used to generate adenosine triphosphate. As with peptidoglycan synthesis, for some reason, these genes
are turned off. All chlamydiae also encode an abundant surface-­
exposed protein called the major outer membrane protein. The major
outer membrane protein is the major determinant of the serologic classification of C. trachomatis and C. psittaci isolates.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

C. pneumoniae is primarily a human respiratory pathogen. The organism has also been isolated from nonhuman species, including horses,
koalas, reptiles, and amphibians, where it also causes respiratory infection, although the role that these infections might play in transmission
to humans is unknown. C. pneumoniae appears to affect individuals of
all ages. The proportion of community-­acquired pneumonias associated with C. pneumoniae infection is 2–19%, varying with geographic
location, the age-­group examined, and the diagnostic methods used.
Several studies of the role of C. pneumoniae in lower respiratory tract
infection in pediatric populations have found evidence of infection in
0–18% of patients based on serology or culture for diagnosis. In one
study, almost 20% of the children with C. pneumoniae infection were
co-infected with Mycoplasma pneumoniae. C. pneumoniae may also be
responsible for 10–20% of episodes of acute chest syndrome in children
with sickle cell disease, up to 10% of asthma exacerbations, 10% of episodes of bronchitis, and 5–10% of episodes of pharyngitis in children.
Asymptomatic infection appears to be common based on epidemiologic studies.
Transmission probably occurs from person to person through respiratory droplets. Spread of the infection appears to be enhanced by close
proximity, as is evident from localized outbreaks in enclosed populations, such as military recruits and in nursing homes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1894 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
RB
8 hr

2 hr

N

N

Phagosome
fusion

Reorganization
EB to RB

8-18 hr

EB
N
N
Attachment and ingestion
Multiplication of RB
18-24 hr

N

N
48-72 hr

Extrusion and release
of infectious EB

24-48 hr
N

Condensation
RB to EB

Mature inclusion

Fig. 271.1 Life cycle of chlamydiae in epithelial cells. EB, Elementary

body; RB, reticulate body. (From Hammerschlag MR. Infections due to
Chlamydia trachomatis and Chlamydia pneumoniae in children and
adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 2004;25:43–50.)

PATHOGENESIS

Chlamydiae are characterized by a unique developmental cycle (Fig.
271.1) with morphologically distinct infectious and reproductive
forms: the elementary body (EB) and reticulate body (RB). After infection, the infectious EBs, which are 200-­400 μm in diameter, attach to
the host cell by a process of electrostatic binding and are taken into the
cell by endocytosis that does not depend on the microtubule system.
Within the host cell, the EB remains within a membrane-­lined phagosome. The phagosome does not fuse with the host cell lysosome. The
inclusion membrane is devoid of host cell markers, but lipid markers
traffic to the inclusion, which suggests a functional interaction with
the Golgi apparatus. The EBs then differentiate into RBs that undergo
binary fission. After approximately 36 hours, the RBs differentiate into
EBs. At approximately 48 hours, release can occur by cytolysis or by
a process of exocytosis or extrusion of the whole inclusion, leaving
the host cell intact. Chlamydiae can also enter a persistent state after
treatment with certain cytokines such as interferon-­γ, treatment with
antibiotics, or restriction of certain nutrients. While chlamydiae are in
the persistent state, metabolic activity is reduced. The ability to cause
prolonged, often subclinical, infection is one of the major characteristics of chlamydiae.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infections caused by C. pneumoniae cannot be readily differentiated
from those caused by other respiratory pathogens, especially M. pneumoniae. The pneumonia usually occurs as a classic atypical (or nonbacterial) pneumonia characterized by mild to moderate constitutional
symptoms, including fever, malaise, headache, cough, and often pharyngitis. Severe pneumonia with pleural effusions and empyema has
been described. Milder respiratory infections have been described,
manifesting as a pertussis-­like illness.
C. pneumoniae can serve as an infectious trigger for asthma, can
cause pulmonary exacerbations in patients with cystic fibrosis, and can
produce acute chest syndrome in patients with sickle cell anemia. C.
pneumoniae has been isolated from middle ear aspirates of children
with acute otitis media, most of the time as co-­infection with other
bacteria. Asymptomatic respiratory infection has been documented in
2–5% of adults and children and can persist for 1 year or longer.

DIAGNOSIS

It is not possible to differentiate C. pneumoniae from other causes
of atypical pneumonia on the basis of clinical findings. Auscultation
reveals the presence of rales and often wheezing. The chest radiograph

often appears worse than the patient’s clinical status would indicate and
can show mild, diffuse involvement or lobar infiltrates with small pleural effusions. The complete blood count may be elevated with a left shift
but is usually unremarkable.
Specific diagnosis of C. pneumoniae infection has been based on
isolation of the organism in tissue culture. C. pneumoniae grows best
in cycloheximide-­treated HEp-­2 and HL cells. The optimum site for
culture is the posterior nasopharynx; the specimen is collected with
wire-­shafted swabs in the same manner as that used for C. trachomatis.
The organism can be isolated from sputum, throat cultures, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and pleural fluid, but few laboratories perform such
cultures because of technical difficulties. There are two U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)–cleared multiplexed nucleic acid amplification testing assays available for detection of respiratory viruses;
pneumonia pathogens; and C. pneumoniae, M. pneumoniae, and Bordetella pertussis on upper respiratory samples. These systems combine
nucleic acid extraction, amplification, detection, and data analysis.
Serologic diagnosis can be accomplished using the microimmunofluorescence (MIF) or the complement fixation tests. The complement
fixation test is genus specific and is also used for diagnosis of lymphogranuloma venereum (see Chapter 272.4) and psittacosis (see Chapter
273). Its sensitivity in hospitalized patients with C. pneumoniae infection and children is variable. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has proposed modifications in the serologic criteria for
diagnosis. Although the MIF test was considered to be the only currently acceptable serologic test, the criteria were made significantly
more stringent. Acute infection, using the MIF test, was defined by
a fourfold increase in immunoglobulin (Ig) G titer or an IgM titer of
≥16; use of a single elevated IgG titer was discouraged. An IgG titer of
≥16 was thought to indicate past exposure, but neither elevated IgA
titers nor any other serologic marker was thought to be a valid indicator of persistent or chronic infection. Because diagnosis would require
paired sera, this would be a retrospective diagnosis. The CDC did not
recommend the use of any enzyme-­linked immune assay for detection
of antibody to C. pneumoniae because of concern about the inconsistent correlation of these results with culture results. Studies of C. pneumoniae infection in children with pneumonia and asthma show that
more than 50% of children with culture-­documented infection have no
detectable serum anti–C. pneumoniae antibody. Because of the availability of FDA-­cleared nucleic acid test technology, diagnosis of acute
infection should not be made using serology.

TREATMENT

The optimum dose and duration of antimicrobial therapy for C. pneumoniae infections remain uncertain. Most treatment studies have used
only serology for diagnosis, and thus microbiologic efficacy cannot be
assessed. Prolonged therapy for 2 weeks or longer is required for some
patients, because recrudescent symptoms and persistent positive cultures have been described after 2 weeks of erythromycin and 30 days of
tetracycline or doxycycline.
Tetracyclines, macrolides (erythromycin, azithromycin, and clarithromycin), and quinolones show in vitro activity. Like C. psittaci, C.
pneumoniae is resistant to sulfonamides. The results of treatment studies have shown that erythromycin (40 mg/kg/day PO divided twice a
day for 10 days), clarithromycin (15 mg/kg/day PO divided twice a day
for 10 days), and azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO on day 1 and then 5 mg/
kg/day PO on days 2-­5) are effective for eradication of C. pneumoniae
from the nasopharynx of children with pneumonia in approximately
80% of cases. Resistance to these commonly used drug classes has not
been conclusively demonstrated. Persistent symptoms may, however,
reflect persistent infection caused by the latent nature of the organism
or another etiology and should prompt a thorough reevaluation.

PROGNOSIS

Clinical response to antibiotic therapy varies. Coughing often persists
for several weeks even after therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 272 u Chlamydia trachomatis 1895

Chapter 272

Chlamydia trachomatis
Margaret R. Hammerschlag
Chlamydia trachomatis is subdivided into two biovars, namely, lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) and trachoma, which is the agent of
human oculogenital diseases other than LGV. Although the strains
of both biovars have almost complete DNA homology, they differ in
growth characteristics and virulence in tissue culture and animals.
In developed countries, C. trachomatis is the most prevalent sexually
transmitted disease, causing urethritis in men, cervicitis and salpingitis
in women, and conjunctivitis and pneumonia in infants.

272.1 Trachoma
Margaret R. Hammerschlag
Trachoma is the most important preventable cause of blindness in the
world. It is caused primarily by the A, B, Ba, and C serotypes of C.
trachomatis. It is endemic in the Middle East and Southeast Asia and
among Navajo Indians in the southwestern United States. In areas that
are endemic for trachoma, genital chlamydial infection is caused by the
serotypes responsible for oculogenital disease: D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and K.
The disease is spread from eye to eye. Flies are a common vector.
Trachoma begins as a follicular conjunctivitis, usually in early
childhood. The follicles heal, leading to conjunctival scarring that can
result in an entropion, with the eyelid turning inward so that the lashes
abrade the cornea. It is the corneal ulceration secondary to the constant
trauma that leads to scarring and blindness. Bacterial superinfection
can also contribute to scarring. Blindness occurs years after the active
disease.
Trachoma can be diagnosed clinically. The World Health Organization suggests that at least two of four criteria must be present for a diagnosis of trachoma: lymphoid follicles on the upper tarsal conjunctivae,
typical conjunctival scarring, vascular pannus, and limbal follicles. The
diagnosis is confirmed by culture or staining tests for C. trachomatis
performed during the active stage of disease. Serologic tests are not
helpful clinically because of the long duration of the disease and the
high seroprevalence in endemic populations.
Poverty and lack of sanitation are important factors in the spread of
trachoma. As socioeconomic conditions improve, the incidence of the
disease decreases substantially. Endemic trachoma is managed by mass
drug administration (MDA) with azithromycin in affected communities. Endemic communities should receive MDA until clinical signs of
active disease in children 1-­9 years of age falls below 5%. MDA with a
single dose of azithromycin to all the residents of a village dramatically
reduces the prevalence and intensity of infection. This effect continues
for 2 years after treatment, probably by interrupting the transmission
of ocular C. trachomatis infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

272.2 Genital Tract Infections
Margaret R. Hammerschlag

EPIDEMIOLOGY

There are an estimated 3 million new cases of chlamydial sexually
transmitted infections each year in the United States. C. trachomatis

is a major cause of epididymitis and is the cause of 23–55% of all cases
of nongonococcal urethritis. As many as 50% of men with gonorrhea
may be co-infected with C. trachomatis. The prevalence of chlamydial
cervicitis among sexually active women is 2–35%. Rates of infection
among girls 15-­19 years of age exceed 20% in many urban populations
and can be as high as 15% in suburban populations.
Children who have been sexually abused can acquire anogenital
C. trachomatis infection, which is usually asymptomatic. However,
because perinatally acquired rectal and vaginal C. trachomatis infections can persist for 3 years or longer, the detection of C. trachomatis
in the vagina or rectum of a young child is not absolute evidence of
sexual abuse.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The trachoma biovar of C. trachomatis causes a spectrum of disease in
sexually active adolescents and adults. Up to 75% of women with C.
trachomatis have no symptoms of infection. C. trachomatis can cause
urethritis (acute urethral syndrome), epididymitis, cervicitis, salpingitis, proctitis, and pelvic inflammatory disease. The symptoms of chlamydial genital tract infections are less acute than those of gonorrhea,
consisting of a discharge that is usually mucoid rather than purulent.
Asymptomatic urethral infection is common in sexually active men.
Autoinoculation from the genital tract to the eyes can lead to concomitant inclusion conjunctivitis.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of genital chlamydial infection is now accomplished by
nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs). These tests have high sensitivity, detecting 10–20% more cases than culture, while retaining high
specificity. Six FDA-­approved NAATs are commercially available for
detecting C. trachomatis, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR;
Amplicor Chlamydia test, Roche Molecular Diagnostics, Nutley, NJ),
strand displacement amplification (ProbeTec, BD Diagnostic Systems,
Sparks, MD), transcription-­mediated amplification (Amp CT, Hologic,
San Diego, CA), and GeneXpert CT/NG assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale,
CA). PCR and strand displacement amplification are DNA amplification tests that use primers that target gene sequences on the cryptogenic C. trachomatis plasmid that is present at approximately 10
copies in each infected cell. Transcription-­mediated amplification is
a ribosomal RNA amplification assay. GeneXpert is an on-­demand,
qualitative, real-­time PCR. All these assays are also available as co-­
amplification tests for simultaneously detecting C. trachomatis and
Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
The available commercial NAATs are FDA-­approved for cervical
and vaginal swabs from adolescent girls and women, urethral swabs
from adolescent boys and men, and urine, pharyngeal, and rectal
swabs from adolescents and adults. Use of urine avoids the necessity
for a clinical pelvic examination and can greatly facilitate screening
in certain populations, especially adolescents, although several studies have now demonstrated that endocervical specimens and vaginal
swabs are superior to urine for NAAT. Self-­collected vaginal specimens appear to be as reliable as specimens obtained by a healthcare
professional.
Data on the use of NAATs for vaginal specimens or urine from
children are very limited and are insufficient to allow making a recommendation for their use. NAATs can be used, but confirmatory
testing must be done. Because of the low prevalence of infection in
this population, the positive predictive values of a positive test can be
less than 30%. Confirmatory testing should consist of testing the original sample with a second FDA-­approved NAAT that targets a different gene sequence from the initial test or repeating the testing before
treatment. Use of non-­FDA-­cleared assays is strongly discouraged.
The etiology of most cases of nonchlamydial nongonococcal urethritis is unknown, although Ureaplasma urealyticum and possibly
Mycoplasma genitalium are implicated in up to one third of cases (see
Chapter 270). Proctocolitis may develop in individuals who have a rectal infection with an LGV strain (see Chapter 272.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1896 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
TREATMENT

The first-­line treatment regimen now recommended by the CDC for
uncomplicated C. trachomatis genital and rectal infection in adult and
adolescent men and nonpregnant women is doxycycline (100 mg PO
twice a day for 7 days). Recent studies have documented that doxycycline is significantly more effective than single-­dose azithromycin.
Alternative regimens are azithromycin (1 g orally in a single dose)
or levofloxacin (500 mg PO once daily for 7 days). Doxycycline and
quinolones are contraindicated in pregnant women, and quinolones
are contraindicated in persons younger than 18 years. For pregnant
women, the recommended treatment regimen is azithromycin (1 g PO
as a single dose) or amoxicillin (500 mg PO 3 times a day for 7 days).
Empirical treatment without microbiologic diagnosis is recommended only for patients at high risk for infection who are unlikely
to return for follow-­up evaluation, including adolescents with multiple
sex partners. These patients should be treated empirically for both C.
trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae.
Sex partners of patients with nongonococcal urethritis should be
treated if they have had sexual contact with the patient during the 60
days preceding the onset of symptoms. The most recent sexual partner
should be treated even if the last sexual contact was more than 60 days
from onset of symptoms.

COMPLICATIONS

at one or more sites, including the conjunctivae, nasopharynx, rectum, and vagina. Transmission is rare after cesarean section with
intact membranes. The introduction of systematic prenatal screening for C. trachomatis infection and treatment of pregnant women
has resulted in a dramatic decrease in the incidence of neonatal
chlamydial infection in the United States. However, in countries
where prenatal screening is not done, such as the Netherlands,
C. trachomatis remains an important cause of neonatal infection,
accounting for >60% of neonatal conjunctivitis.

Inclusion Conjunctivitis

Approximately 30–50% of infants born to mothers with active,
untreated chlamydial infection develop clinical conjunctivitis.
Symptoms usually develop 5-­14 days after delivery, or earlier in
infants born after prolonged rupture of membranes. The presentation is extremely variable and ranges from mild conjunctival
injection with scant mucoid discharge to severe conjunctivitis with
copious purulent discharge, chemosis, and pseudomembrane formation. The conjunctiva may be very friable and may bleed when
stroked with a swab. Chlamydial conjunctivitis must be differentiated from gonococcal ophthalmia, which is sight-­threatening. At
least 50% of infants with chlamydial conjunctivitis also have nasopharyngeal infection.

Complications of genital chlamydial infections in women include
perihepatitis (Fitz-­
Hugh–Curtis syndrome) and salpingitis. Of
women with untreated chlamydial infection who develop pelvic
inflammatory disease, up to 40% will have significant sequelae;
approximately 17% will suffer from chronic pelvic pain, approximately 17% will become infertile, and approximately 9% will have
an ectopic (tubal) pregnancy. Adolescent girls may be at higher
risk for developing complications, especially salpingitis, than older
women. Salpingitis in adolescent girls is also more likely to lead to
tubal scarring, subsequent obstruction with secondary infertility, and
increased risk for ectopic pregnancy. Approximately 50% of neonates
born to pregnant women with untreated chlamydial infection will
acquire C. trachomatis infection (see Chapter 272.3). Women with
C. trachomatis infection have a threefold to fivefold increased risk for
acquiring HIV infection.

Pneumonia

PREVENTION

Infections at Other Sites

Timely treatment of sex partners is essential for decreasing the risk
for reinfection. Sex partners should be evaluated and treated if they
had sexual contact during the 60 days preceding onset of symptoms
in the patient. The most recent sex partner should be treated even if
the last sexual contact was >60 days. Patients and their sex partners
should abstain from sexual intercourse until 7 days after a single-­
dose regimen or after completion of a 7-­day regimen.
Annual routine screening for C. trachomatis is recommended
for all sexually active female adolescents, for all women 20-­25
years of age, and for older women with risk factors such as new
or multiple partners or inconsistent use of barrier contraceptives.
Sexual risk assessment might indicate more frequent screening of
some women.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

272.3 Conjunctivitis and Pneumonia in
Newborns
Margaret R. Hammerschlag

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Chlamydial genital infection is reported in 5–30% of pregnant
women, with a risk for vertical transmission at parturition to newborn infants of approximately 50%. The infant may become infected

Pneumonia caused by C. trachomatis can develop in 10–20% of
infants born to women with active, untreated chlamydial infection. Only approximately 25% of infants with nasopharyngeal
chlamydial infection develop pneumonia. C. trachomatis pneumonia of infancy has a characteristic presentation. Onset usually
occurs between 1 and 3 months of age and is often insidious, with
persistent cough, tachypnea, and absence of fever. Auscultation
reveals rales; wheezing is occasionally present but is uncommon.
The absence of fever and wheezing generally helps to distinguish
C. trachomatis pneumonia from respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia. A distinctive laboratory finding is the presence of peripheral eosinophilia (>400 cells/μL). The most consistent finding on
chest radiograph is hyperinflation accompanied by minimal interstitial or alveolar infiltrates.
Infants born to mothers with C. trachomatis can develop infection
in the rectum or vagina. Although infection in these sites appears to
be totally asymptomatic, it can cause confusion if it is identified later.
Perinatally acquired rectal, vaginal, and nasopharyngeal infections can
persist for 3 years or longer.

DIAGNOSIS

Definitive diagnosis is achieved by isolation of C. trachomatis in cultures of specimens obtained from the conjunctiva or nasopharynx.
Data on the use of NAATs for diagnosis of C. trachomatis in children
are limited but suggest that PCR may be equivalent to culture for
detecting C. trachomatis in the conjunctiva of infants with conjunctivitis. However, NAATs are not currently FDA-­cleared for use with conjunctival or nasopharyngeal specimens from infants. Laboratories can
do internal validation delineated in the CDC 2014 C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae laboratory guidelines.

TREATMENT

The recommended treatment regimens for C. trachomatis conjunctivitis or pneumonia in infants are erythromycin (base or ethylsuccinate,
50 mg/kg/day divided 4 times a day PO for 14 days) or azithromycin
suspension (20 mg/kg/day once daily PO for 3 days). The rationale
for using oral therapy for conjunctivitis is that 50% or more of these
infants have concomitant nasopharyngeal infection or disease at other
sites, and studies demonstrate that topical therapy with sulfonamide
drops and erythromycin ointment is not effective. The failure rate with
oral erythromycin remains 10–20%, and some infants require a second

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 273 u Psittacosis (Chlamydia psittaci) 1897
course of treatment. Mothers (and their sexual contacts) of infants
with C. trachomatis infections should be empirically treated for genital
infection. An association between treatment with oral erythromycin or
oral azithromycin and infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis has been
reported in infants younger than 6 weeks of age.

PREVENTION

Neonatal gonococcal prophylaxis with topical erythromycin ointment
does not prevent chlamydial ophthalmia or nasopharyngeal colonization with C. trachomatis or chlamydial pneumonia. The most effective
method of controlling perinatal chlamydial infection is screening and
treatment of pregnant women. In 2015, the Canadian Pediatric Society
recommended that neonatal ocular prophylaxis be discontinued and
that prenatal screening for chlamydia be enhanced. The program was
implemented in 2016. In the United States, implementation of prenatal
screening and treatment of pregnant women has resulted in a dramatic
decrease in perinatal chlamydial infections. For treatment of C. trachomatis infection in pregnant women, the CDC currently recommends
either azithromycin (1 g PO as a single dose) or amoxicillin (500 mg
PO 3 times a day for 7 days) as first-­line regimens. Erythromycin base
(250 mg PO 4 times a day for 14 days) and erythromycin ethylsuccinate
(800 mg 4 times a day for 7 days, or 400 mg PO 4 times a day for 14
days) are listed as alternative regimens. Reasons for failure of maternal
treatment to prevent infantile chlamydial infection include poor compliance and reinfection from an untreated sexual partner.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

272.4 Lymphogranuloma Venereum
Margaret R. Hammerschlag
LGV is a systemic sexually transmitted disease caused by the L1, L2,
and L3 serotypes of the LGV biovar of C. trachomatis. Unlike strains
of the trachoma biovar, LGV strains have a predilection for lymphoid tissue. Fewer than 1,000 cases are reported in adults in the
United States annually. There has been a resurgence of LGV infections among men who have sex with men in Europe and the United
States. Many of the men were HIV infected and used illicit drugs,
specifically methamphetamines. The only pediatric case that has been
reported since the emergence of the new clusters of HIV-­associated
cases in 2003 was a 16-­year-­old boy who presented with LGV proctocolitis after having receptive unprotected anal intercourse with a
30-­year-­old man he met on the Internet. This history was obtained
after the boy was found to be HIV-­positive. The diagnosis of LGV,
particularly when it presents with proctocolitis, relies on a high index
of suspicion that would lead to emphasizing certain aspects of the
history and ordering the pertinent diagnostic tests. Many pediatricians and pediatric gastroenterologists might not be familiar with
the entity and might not entertain it as a diagnostic consideration
in pediatric patients. The diagnosis can be further suggested by C.
trachomatis testing: commonly by NAATs or culturing the organism
if culture is available. Currently available NAATs will not differentiate
LGV from other C. trachomatis serovars. NAATs for C. trachomatis
are also not FDA-­cleared for testing rectal specimens, but laboratories can do an internal validation as recommended in the CDC 2014
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae laboratory guidelines. NAATs
have been found in several clinical studies to perform well with rectal specimens. Typing of the C. trachomatis specimen can be done
by sequencing from the NAAT specimen by many state laboratories.
Trying to ascertain the C. trachomatis serovar for confirmation of
LGV has therapeutic implications, as LGV needs to be treated with a
3-­week course of doxycycline; a single-­dose of azithromycin will not
eradicate the infection.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The first stage of LGV is characterized by the appearance of the primary lesion, a painless, usually transient papule on the genitals. The
second stage is characterized by usually unilateral femoral or inguinal
lymphadenitis with enlarging, painful buboes. The nodes may break
down and drain, especially in men. In women, the vulvar lymph drains
to the retroperitoneal nodes. Fever, myalgia, and headache are common. The third stage is a genitoanorectal syndrome with rectovaginal
fistulas, rectal strictures, and urethral destruction. Among men who
have sex with men, rectal infection with LGV can produce a severe,
acute proctocolitis, which can be confused with inflammatory bowel
disease or malignancy.

DIAGNOSIS

LGV can be diagnosed by serologic testing or by culture of C. trachomatis or molecular testing for C. trachomatis from a specimen aspirated from a bubo. Most patients with LGV have complement-­fixing
antibody titers of >1:16. Chancroid and herpes simplex virus can be
distinguished clinically from LGV by the concurrent presence of painful genital ulcers. Syphilis can be differentiated by serologic tests. However, co-­infections can occur.

TREATMENT

Doxycycline (100 mg PO bid for 21 days) is the recommended treatment. Alternative regimens are azithromycin (1 g PO once weekly for 3
weeks) or erythromycin base (500 mg PO 4 times a day for 21 days). As
the azithromycin regimen has not been validated, it is recommended
that a test of cure with a C. trachomatis NAAT 4 weeks after completion
of therapy be performed. Sex partners of patients with LGV should be
treated if they have had sexual contact with the patient during the 30
days preceding the onset of symptoms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 273

Psittacosis (Chlamydia
psittaci)
Stephan A. Kohlhoff and
Margaret R. Hammerschlag
Chlamydia psittaci, the agent of psittacosis (also known as parrot fever
and ornithosis), is primarily an animal pathogen and rarely causes human
disease. In birds, C. psittaci infection is known as avian chlamydiosis.

ETIOLOGY

C. psittaci affects both psittacine birds (e.g., parrots, parakeets,
macaws) and nonpsittacine birds (ducks, turkeys); the known host
range includes 130 avian species. The life cycle of C. psittaci is the same
as for C. pneumoniae (see Chapter 271). Strains of C. psittaci have
been analyzed by patterns of pathogenicity, inclusion morphology
in tissue culture, DNA restriction endonuclease analysis, and monoclonal antibodies, which indicate that there are seven avian serovars.
The organism has also been found in nonavian domestic animals,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1898 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
including cattle, sheep, pigs, goats, and cats. Nonavian C. psittaci has
rarely caused disease in humans. Two of the avian serovars, psittacine and turkey, are of major importance in the avian population of
the United States. Each is associated with important host preferences
and disease characteristics. There are four other Chlamydia species
that have birds as their primary hosts: C. avium (pigeons, parrots), C.
gallinacea (chickens, turkeys, ducks), C. ibdis (ibis), and C. buteonis
(hawks, buzzards). C. gallinacea may have the potential to cause outbreaks in poultry plants.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

On average, 11 cases of psittacosis per year in the United States were
reported from 2000 to 2017. However, experts believe the disease
is potentially underreported and underdiagnosed. In 2018, a multistate psittacosis outbreak among poultry plant workers had 13
laboratory-­confirmed cases. The majority of cases were associated
with exposure to birds, including 70% after exposure to caged pet
birds, which were usually psittacine birds, including cockatiels, parakeets, parrots, and macaws. Chlamydiosis among caged nonpsittacine birds occurs most often in pigeons, doves, and mynah birds.
Persons at highest risk for acquiring psittacosis include workers
in poultry plants, bird fanciers, owners of pet birds, and pet shop
employees. Reported cases most likely underestimate the number of
actual infections owing to a lack of awareness and readily available
diagnostic tests.
Inhalation of aerosols from feces, fecal dust, and nasal secretions of animals infected with C. psittaci is the primary route of
infection. Source birds are either asymptomatic or have anorexia,
ruffled feathers, lethargy, and watery green droppings. Psittacosis is
uncommon in children, in part because children may be less likely
to have close contact with infected birds. One high-­risk activity is
cleaning the cage.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infection with C. psittaci in humans ranges from clinically inapparent to severe disease, including pneumonia and multiorgan
involvement. The mean incubation period is 15 days after exposure, with a range of 5-­21 days. Onset of disease is usually abrupt,
with fever, cough, headache, myalgia, and malaise. The fever is high
and is often associated with rigors and sweats. The headache can be
so severe that meningitis is considered. The cough is usually nonproductive. Gastrointestinal symptoms are occasionally reported.
Crackles may be heard on auscultation. Chest radiographs are usually abnormal and are characterized by the presence of variable
infiltrates, sometimes accompanied by pleural effusions. The white
blood cell count is usually normal but is sometimes mildly elevated.
Elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase,
and bilirubin are common. Nonpulmonary complications include
pericarditis, endocarditis, and myocarditis. Mortality occurs in 5%
of cases.

DIAGNOSIS

Psittacosis can be difficult to diagnose because of the varying clinical
presentations. A history of exposure to birds or association with an
active case can be important clues, but as many as 20% of patients
with psittacosis have no known contact. Person-­to-­person spread has
been suggested but not proved. Other infections that cause pneumonia with high fever, unusually severe headache, and myalgia include
routine bacterial and viral respiratory infections as well as Coxiella
burnetii infection (Q fever), Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection, C.
pneumoniae infection, tularemia, tuberculosis, fungal infections, and
Legionnaires’ disease.

A patient is considered to have a confirmed case of psittacosis if
clinical illness is compatible with psittacosis and the case is laboratory
confirmed by identification of C. psittaci by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) from respiratory specimens (e.g., sputum, pleural fluid, or lung
tissue), blood, or stool. Serologic methods are most available, but these
tests have poor specificity and require testing of paired specimens collected weeks apart, delaying or preventing confirmation of the clinical
diagnosis in a timely fashion. A patient is considered to have a probable
case of psittacosis if the clinical illness is compatible with psittacosis
and there is an epidemiologic exposure. Lower respiratory tract samples are the specimen of choice, although 5 of 13 (38%) of the patients
in the 2018 multistate outbreak also had C. psittaci DNA detected in
their stool specimens.
Although C. psittaci will grow in the same culture systems used for
isolation of C. trachomatis and C. pneumoniae, very few laboratories
culture for C. psittaci, mainly because of the potential biohazard. Real-­
time PCR assays can distinguish C. psittaci from other chlamydial species and identify different C. psittaci genotypes. Currently real-­time
PCR for C. psittaci is only available at the CDC.

TREATMENT

Recommended treatment regimens for psittacosis are doxycycline
(100 mg PO twice daily) or tetracycline (500 mg PO 4 times a day)
for at least 10-­14 days after the fever abates. The initial treatment of
severely ill patients is doxycycline hyclate (4.4 mg/kg/day divided
every 12 hours IV; maximum: 100 mg/dose). Erythromycin (500 mg
PO 4 times a day) and azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO on day 1, not to
exceed 500 mg, followed by 5 mg/kg PO on days 2-­5, not to exceed
250 mg) are alternative agents if tetracyclines are contraindicated
(e.g., children <8 years of age and pregnant women) but may be less
effective. Remission is usually evident within 48-­72 hours. Reinfection and clinical disease can develop within 2 months of treatment,
indicating that initial infection does not appear to be followed by
long-­term immunity.

PROGNOSIS

The mortality rate of psittacosis is 15–20% with no treatment but
is <1% with appropriate treatment. Severe illness leading to respiratory failure and fetal death has been reported among pregnant
women.

PREVENTION

Several control measures are recommended to prevent transmission
of C. psittaci from birds. Bird fanciers should be cognizant of the
potential risk. C. psittaci is susceptible to heat and to most disinfectants and detergents but is resistant to acid and alkali. Accurate
records of all bird-­related transactions aid in identifying sources
of infected birds and potentially exposed persons. Newly acquired
birds, including birds that have been to shows, exhibitions, fairs, or
other events, should be isolated for 30-­45 days or tested or treated
prophylactically before adding them to a group of birds. Care
should be taken to prevent transfer of fecal material, feathers, food,
or other materials between birdcages. Birds with signs of avian
chlamydiosis (e.g., ocular or nasal discharge, watery green droppings, or low body weight) should be isolated and should not be
sold or purchased. Their handlers should wear protective clothing
and a disposable surgical cap and use a respirator with an N95 or
higher efficiency rating (not a surgical mask) when handling them
or cleaning their cages. Infected birds should be isolated until fully
treated, which is generally 45 days.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 274 u Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses

Section 11

Rickettsial Infections
Chapter 274

Spotted Fever Group
Rickettsioses
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler

1899

274.1 Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
(Rickettsia rickettsii)
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
RMSF is the most severe rickettsial disease in the United States and
Western Hemisphere. Although spotted fever rickettsiosis is the most
common vector-­borne disease in the United States after Lyme disease, the proportion of these cases caused by R. rickettsii is not known.
Although considered uncommon, RMSF is believed to be greatly
underdiagnosed and underreported. RMSF should be considered in
the differential diagnosis of fever, headache, and rash in the summer
months, especially after tick exposure. Because fulminant disease and
death are associated with delays in treatment, patients in whom the illness is clinically suspected should be treated promptly.

ETIOLOGY
Rickettsia species were classically divided into spotted fever and typhus
groups based on serologic reactions and the presence or absence of
the outer membrane protein A gene (ompA). Sequencing of over 150
complete genomes has refined distinctions. However, there is controversy regarding phylogeny, and some data suggest that diversity and
pathogenicity are the result of gene loss and lateral gene transfer from
other prokaryotes or even eukaryotes, which further obscures accurate
taxonomic classification. One proposal is to divide existing species into
spotted fever and transitional groups based on genetic relatedness; both
include pathogenic species and species not now known to cause human
disease (Table 274.1). Although increasingly more is understood about
the molecular basis by which these bacteria cause human illness, an
alternative classification system based on pathogenetic mechanisms
has not been defined.
The list of pathogens and potential pathogens in the spotted fever
group has expanded dramatically in recent years. Unfortunately, the
most common diagnostic approach uses a serologic method that cannot distinguish among related species; thus the CDC classifies serologically defined cases as “spotted fever rickettsiosis” to reflect this
uncertainty. Among the etiologic agents of spotted fever rickettsiosis are the tick-­borne agents Rickettsia rickettsii, the cause of Rocky
Mountain or Brazilian spotted fever (RMSF); R. conorii, the cause of
Mediterranean spotted fever (MSF) or boutonneuse fever; R. sibirica,
the cause of North Asian tick typhus; R. japonica, the cause of Oriental or Japanese spotted fever; R. honei, the cause of Flinders Island
spotted fever or Thai tick typhus; R. africae, the cause of African tick
bite fever; R. akari, the cause of mite-­transmitted rickettsialpox; R.
felis, the cause of cat flea–transmitted typhus; and R. australis, the
cause of tick-­transmitted Queensland tick typhus. The recognition
that R. parkeri and “R. philipii” (Rickettsia 364D) both cause mild
spotted fever in North America and the association of high seroprevalence for spotted fever group Rickettsia infections in humans
where Amblyomma ticks frequently contain R. amblyommatis suggest that the full range of agents that can cause spotted fever is still
to be discerned.
Infections with other members of the spotted fever and transitional
groups are clinically similar to MSF, with fever, maculopapular rash,
and eschar at the site of the tick bite. Israeli spotted fever (R. conorii
infection) is generally associated with a more severe course in children,
including death. African tick bite fever is relatively mild, can include a
vesicular rash, and often manifests with multiple eschars. New potentially pathogenic rickettsial species have been identified, including R.
slovaca, the cause of tick-­borne lymphadenopathy or Dermacentor-­
borne necrosis and lymphadenopathy. R. aeschlimannii, R. heilongjiangensis, R. helvetica, R. massiliae, and R. raoultii are all reported to cause
mild to moderate illnesses in humans, although few cases have been
described. Fortunately, the vast majority of infections respond well to
doxycycline treatment if instituted early in illness; however, this is a
significant challenge.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

RMSF results from systemic infection of endothelial cells by the obligate intracellular bacterium R. rickettsii.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The term Rocky Mountain spotted fever is historical, because the agent
was discovered in the Bitterroot Range of the Rocky Mountains of Montana. Few cases are reported from this region. Cases have been reported
throughout the continental United States (except Vermont and Maine),
southwestern Canada, Mexico, Central America, and South America,
but not from outside of the Western Hemisphere. In 2010, the CDC
reporting criteria for RMSF changed to spotted fever group rickettsiosis, because serology often does not distinguish R. rickettsii from infection by other spotted fever group Rickettsia. Additionally, cases detected
by enzyme immunoassay were classified as probable. Thus in 2012,
2,802 confirmed and probable cases of spotted fever rickettsiosis were
reported in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports Summary of Notifiable Diseases. Unlike in prior years, most cases were reported from the
west southcentral states, especially from Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Missouri; high numbers of cases were also reported from North Carolina,
Tennessee, Virginia, New Jersey, Georgia, Alabama, and Arizona (Fig.
274.1). The incidence of RMSF cycles over 25-­to 35-­year intervals, but
spotted fever rickettsioses have steadily increased since 1998 over which
time approximately 14% occur in individuals younger than 19 years.
Habitats favored by ticks, including wooded areas or coastal grassland
and salt marshes, and, in the southwestern United States and Mexico,
shaded areas where dogs congregate and acquire infected ticks are those
that place children at increased risk for infection. Foci of intense risk
for infection are found both in rural and urban areas, most recently in
Mexico and South America. Clustering of cases within families likely
reflects shared environmental exposures. In the United States, 90% of
cases occur between April and September, months in which humans
spend the most time outdoors. The highest age-­specific incidence of
RMSF among children is seen in those older than 10 years of age, with
males outnumbering females; however, the highest case fatality rate for
RMSF is observed in those less than 10 years of age.

TRANSMISSION

Ticks are the natural hosts, reservoirs, and vectors of R. rickettsii and
maintain the infection in nature by transovarial transmission (passage of the organism from infected ticks to their progeny). Ticks harboring rickettsiae are substantially less fecund than uninfected ticks;
thus horizontal transmission (acquisition of rickettsiae by taking a
blood meal from transiently rickettsemic hosts such as small mammals or dogs) contributes to maintenance of rickettsial infections
in ticks. Uninfected ticks that simultaneously feed (co-­feed) with
infected transmitting ticks easily become infected, even if feeding
on an immune host, and are also likely to be major contributors to
natural transmission and maintenance. Ticks transmit the infectious
agent to mammalian hosts (including humans) via infected saliva
during feeding. The pathogen R. rickettsii in ticks becomes virulent
after exposure to blood or increased temperature; thus the longer the
tick is attached, the greater the risk of transmission. The principal tick

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

GROUP OR DISEASE AGENT
SPOTTED FEVER GROUP
Rocky Mountain
Rickettsia
spotted fever
rickettsii
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ARTHROPOD VECTOR,
TRANSMISSION HOSTS

GEOGRAPHIC
DISTRIBUTION

PRESENTING
CLINICAL FEATURES*

COMMON LAB
ABNORMALITIES

DIAGNOSTIC
TESTS

Tick bite:
Dermacentor
species (wood
tick, dog tick)
Rhipicephalus
sanguineus
(brown dog tick)

Dogs
Rodents

Western
hemisphere

Fever, headache, rash,*
emesis, diarrhea,
myalgias

AST, ALT
↓Na (mild)
↓Platelets
±Leukopenia
Left shift

Early: IH, DFA, PCR Doxycycline
After first wk: IFA
Tetracycline
Chloramphenicol

TREATMENT†

Mediterranean
spotted fever
(boutonneuse
fever)

Rickettsia conorii

Tick bite: R.
sanguineus
(brown dog tick)

Dogs
Rodents

Africa,
Mediterranean,
India, Middle East

Painless eschar (tache
noir) with regional
lymphadenopathy,
fever, headache, rash,*
myalgias

AST, ALT
↓Na (mild)
↓Platelets
±Leukopenia
Left shift

Early: IH, DFA, PCR Doxycycline
After first wk: IFA
Tetracycline
Chloramphenicol
Azithromycin
Clarithromycin
Fluoroquinolones

African tick-­bite
fever

Rickettsia africae

Tick bite

Cattle
Goats?

Sub-­Saharan Africa,
Caribbean

Fever, single or multiple
eschars, regional
lymphadenopathy,
rash* (can be vesicular)

AST, ALT
↓Platelets

Early: IH, DFA
After 1st wk: IFA

Doxycycline

Tickborne
lymphadenopathy
(TIBOLA);
Dermacentor-­
borne
necrosis and
lymphadenopathy
(DEBONEL)

Rickettsia
Tick bite:
slovaca,
Dermacentor
Rickettsia
raoultii,
Rickettsia
sibirica
mongolo­timonae

?

Europe

Eschar (scalp), painful
lymphadenopathy

?

PCR

Doxycycline

Rickettsia spp.,
364D genotype

“Rickettsia
philippii”

Dermacentor
occidentalis
(Pacific coast tick)

California

Eschar, fever, headache,
lymphadenopathy,
malaise

Unremarkable

PCR

Doxycycline

Flea-­borne spotted
fever

Rickettsia felis

Flea bite

Opossums
Cats
Dogs

Western
hemisphere,
Europe

Fever, rash,* headache

?

Early: PCR
After first wk: IFA

Doxycycline

TRANSITIONAL GROUP
Rickettsialpox
Rickettsia akari

Mite bite

Mice

North America,
Russia, Ukraine,
Adriatic, Korea,
South Africa

Painless eschar, ulcer or
papule; tender regional
lymphadenopathy,
fever, headache, rash*
(can be vesicular)

↓WBC

Early: IH, DFA
After first wk: IFA

Doxycycline
Chloramphenicol

Queensland tick
typhus

Rickettsia
australis

Ixodes holocyclus, I.
tasmani

Bandicoots
and
Rodents

Australia, Tasmania

Fever, eschar,
headache, myalgia,
lymphadenopathy

↓WBC, ↓platelets

Early: PCR on
eschar or eschar
swab;
After first wk: IFA

Doxycycline

TYPHUS GROUP
Murine typhus

Rickettsia typhi

Flea feces

Rats
Opossums

Worldwide

Fever, headache, rash,*
myalgias, emesis,
lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly

AST, ALT
↓Na (mild)
↓WBC
↓ Platelets

Early: DFA, PCR
After first wk: IFA

Doxycycline
Chloramphenicol

1900 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Table 274.1  Summary of Rickettsial Diseases of Humans, Including Rickettsia, Orientia, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, Neorickettsia, and Coxiella

Table 274.1  Summary of Rickettsial Diseases of Humans, Including Rickettsia, Orientia, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, Neorickettsia, and Coxiella—cont’d
GROUP OR DISEASE AGENT

ARTHROPOD VECTOR,
TRANSMISSION HOSTS

GEOGRAPHIC
DISTRIBUTION

PRESENTING
CLINICAL FEATURES*

COMMON LAB
ABNORMALITIES

DIAGNOSTIC
TESTS

TREATMENT†

Rickettsia
prowazekii

Louse feces

Humans

South America,
Central America,
Mexico, Africa,
Asia, Eastern
Europe

Fever, headache,
abdominal pain, rash,*
CNS involvement

AST, ALT
↓Platelets

Early: none
After first wk: IgG/
IgM, IFA

Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Chloramphenicol

Flying squirrel
(sylvatic) typhus

Rickettsia
prowazekii

Louse feces?
Flea feces or bite?

Flying
squirrels

Eastern United
States

Same as above (often
milder)

AST, ALT
↓Platelets

Early: none
After first wk: IFA

Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Chloramphenicol

Orientia
tsutsugamushi,
Orientia chuto
“Orientia
chiloensis”

Chigger bite:
Leptotrombidium
spp.

Rodents?

South Asia, Japan,
Indonesia, Korea,
China, Russia,
Australia, Africa,
Middle East, Chile

Fever, rash,* headache,
painless eschar,
hepatosplenomegaly,
gastrointestinal
symptoms

↓Platelets
AST, ALT

Early: none
After first wk: IFA

Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Chloramphenicol
Rifampicin
Azithromycin

Tick bite:
Amblyomma
americanum (lone
star tick)

Deer
Dogs

United States,
Mexico

Fever, headache,
malaise,
myalgias, rash*‡,
hepatosplenomegaly,‡
swollen hands/feet‡

AST, ALT
↓WBC
↓Platelets
↓Na (mild)

Early: PCR
After first wk: IFA

Doxycycline
Tetracycline

SCRUB TYPHUS
Scrub typhus

EHRLICHIOSIS AND ANAPLASMOSIS
Human monocytic
Ehrlichia
ehrlichiosis
chaffeensis

Human granulocytic
anaplasmosis

Anaplasma
phagocytophilum

Tick bite: Ixodes
species
Haemaphysalis
longicornis

Rodents
Deer
Ruminants

United States,
Europe, Asia

Fever, headache,
malaise, myalgias

AST, ALT
↓WBC,
↓ANC
↓Platelets

Early: PCR, blood
smear After first
wk: IFA

Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Rifampin

Ewingii ehrlichiosis

Ehrlichia ewingii

Tick bite:
Amblyomma
americanum (lone
star tick)

Dogs
Deer

United States
(south-­central,
southeast)

Fever, headache,
malaise, myalgias

AST, ALT, ↓WBC
↓Platelets

Early: PCR
serology not
available

Doxycycline
Tetracycline

Ehrlichia muris
eauclairensis
infection

Ehrlichia
muris ssp.
eauclairensis

Ixodes scapularis

?

Minnesota,
Wisconsin

Fever, headache,
malaise, myalgias

AST, ALT
↓WBC,
↓Platelets

Early: PCR
specific serology
not available

Doxycycline

Neoehrlichiosis

Neoehrlichia
mikurensis

Ixodes ricinus

Small
mammals?

Europe, Asia

Fever, headache,
myalgias, thrombosis

Neutrophilia,
PCR
anemia, elevated
CRP, AST, ALT

Doxycycline

Sennetsu
neorickettsiosis

Neorickettsia
sennetsu

Ingestion of fish
helminth?,
ingestion of
fermented fish

Fish,
trematodes

Japan, Malaysia,
Laos

Fever, “mononucleosis”
symptoms,
postauricular and
posterior cervical
lymphadenopathy

Atypical
lymphocytosis

Doxycycline
Tetracycline

Early: none
After first wk: IFA

Continued

Chapter 274 u Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Epidemic (louse-­
borne) typhus
(recrudescent
form: Brill-­Zinsser
disease)

1901

GROUP OR DISEASE AGENT
Q FEVER
Q Fever: acute (for
chronic, see text)

Coxiella burnetii

ARTHROPOD VECTOR,
TRANSMISSION HOSTS

GEOGRAPHIC
DISTRIBUTION

PRESENTING
CLINICAL FEATURES*

COMMON LAB
ABNORMALITIES

DIAGNOSTIC
TESTS

Inhalation of
infected aerosols:
contact with
parturient
animals, abattoir,
contaminated
cheese and milk,
?ticks

Worldwide

Fever, headache,
arthralgias, myalgias,
gastrointestinal
symptoms, cough,
pneumonia, rash
(children)

AST, ALT
WBC
↓ Platelets
Interstitial infiltrate

Early: PCR
After first wk: IFA

Cattle
Sheep
Goats
Cats
Rabbits

TREATMENT†
Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Fluoroquinolones
Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole

*Rash is infrequently present at initial presentation but appears during the first wk of illness.
†Preferred treatment is in bold.
‡Often present in children but not adults.
ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; ANC, absolute neutrophil count; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CNS, central nervous system; DFA, direct fluorescent antibody; IFA, indirect fluorescent antibody; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM,
immunoglobulin M; IH, immunohistochemistry; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; WBC, white blood cell count.

1902 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 274.1  Summary of Rickettsial Diseases of Humans, Including Rickettsia, Orientia, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, Neorickettsia, and Coxiella—cont’d

Chapter 274 u Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses

1903

Fig. 274.1 Reported incidence rate* of spotted fever

>60
>20 to ≤60
>5 to ≤20
>0 to ≤5
0

a

d

b

rickettsiosis,† by county—United States, 2000–2013. *As
reported through national surveillance, per 1,000,000
persons per year. Cases are reported by county of residence, which is not always where the infection was acquired. †Includes Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF)
and other spotted fever group rickettsioses. In 2010, the
name of the reporting category changed from RMSF to
spotted fever rickettsiosis. (From Biggs HM, Behravesh
CB, Bradley KK, et al. Diagnosis and management of
tickborne rickettsial diseases: Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other spotted fever group rickettsioses,
ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis—United States. MMWR
Recomm Rep. 2016;65:1–44. Fig. 1.)

c

e

1 mm

Fig. 274.2 Tick vectors of agents of human rickettsial diseases. An

unengaged nymph (a), engorged nymph (b), and adult female (c) of
Ixodes scapularis (deer tick), the vector of Anaplasma phagocytophilum
and Ehrlichia muris–like agent (EMLA), the causes of human granulocytic anaplasmosis and EMLA ehrlichiosis, respectively. An adult female
(d) of Amblyomma americanum (lone star tick), the vector of Ehrlichia
chaffeensis and Ehrlichia ewingii, the causes of human monocytic ehrlichiosis and ewingii ehrlichiosis, respectively. An adult female (e) of
Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick), the vector of Rickettsia rickettsii, the cause of Rocky Mountain spotted fever.

hosts of R. rickettsii are Dermacentor variabilis (the American dog
tick) in the eastern United States and Canada, Dermacentor andersoni
(the wood tick) in the western United States and Canada, Rhipicephalus sanguineus (the common brown dog tick) in the southwestern
United States and in Mexico, and several Amblyomma spp. in Central
and South America (Fig. 274.2).
Dogs can serve as reservoir hosts for R. rickettsii, can develop RMSF
themselves, and can bring infected ticks into contact with humans.
Serologic studies suggest that many patients with RMSF likely acquired
the illness from ticks carried by the family dog.
Humans can also become infected when trying to remove an
attached tick, because R. rickettsii–containing tick fluids or feces can
be rubbed into the open wound at the bite site or into the conjunctivae by contaminated fingers. Inhalation of aerosolized rickettsiae has
caused severe infections and deaths in laboratory workers, highlighting
another mechanism of infection.

Fig. 274.3 Immunohistochemical stain demonstrating Rickettsia (red)

in infection of blood vessel endothelial cells. (From Biggs HM, Behravesh CB, Bradley KK, et al. Diagnosis and management of tickborne
rickettsial diseases: Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other spotted fever group rickettsioses, ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis—United States.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2016;65:1–44, Fig. 20.)

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Systemic infection is most obvious on the skin (rash), but nearly all
organs and tissues are affected. After inoculation of tick saliva into the
dermis, rickettsial outer surface proteins bind to the vascular endothelial cell surface proteins, which signals focal cytoskeletal changes and
endocytosis. Thereafter, rickettsia phospholipase-­mediated dissolution
of the endosomal membranes allows escape into the cytosol. Members
of the spotted fever group actively nucleate actin polymerization on one
pole to achieve directional movement, allowing some to propel into
neighboring cells despite minimal initial host cell damage. The rickettsiae proliferate and injure host cells by oxidative membrane alterations,
protease activation, or continued phospholipase activity. It is likely that
some aspects of intracellular infection are mediated by rickettsial protein effectors delivered into the host cell by bacterial secretion systems.
The histologic correlate of the initial macular or maculopapular rash is
perivascular infiltration of lymphoid and histiocytic cells with edema but
without significant endothelial damage. Proliferation of rickettsiae within
the cytoplasm of infected endothelial cells leads to endothelial injury and
lymphohistiocytic or leukocytoclastic vasculitis of small venules and
capillaries, which allows extravasation of intravascular erythrocytes into
the dermis and manifests as a petechial rash (Fig. 274.3). This process
is systemic and ultimately results in widespread microvascular leakage,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1904 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
tissue hypoperfusion, and possibly septic shock or end-­organ ischemic
injury. Infrequently, inflammation leads to nonocclusive thrombi. Very
rarely, small and large vessels become completely obliterated by thrombi,
leading to tissue infarction or hemorrhagic necrosis. Interstitial pneumonitis and vascular leakage in the lungs can lead to noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema, and meningoencephalitis can cause significant cerebral edema and herniation.
The presence of the infectious agent initiates an inflammatory cascade, including release of cytokines and chemokines such as tumor
necrosis factor, interleukin-­1β, interferon-­γ, and regulated upon activation, normal T-­cell expressed and secreted (RANTES). Infection of
endothelial cells by R. rickettsii induces surface E-­selectin expression
and procoagulant activity followed by chemokine recruitment of lymphocytes, macrophages, and, occasionally, neutrophils. Local inflammatory and immune responses are suspected to contribute to the
vascular injury; however, the benefits of effective innate immunity are
greater. Blockade of tumor necrosis factor and interferon-­γ in animal
models diminishes survival and increases morbidity; reactive oxygen
intermediates, nitric oxide expression, and sequestration of tryptophan from rickettsiae are mechanisms by which rickettsiae are killed
within cells. Direct contact of infected endothelial cells with perforin-­
producing CD8 T lymphocytes and interferon-­γ-­producing natural
killer cells, accompanied by rickettsia antibody, helps control the infection. The timing and balance between rickettsia-­mediated increases
in vascular permeability and the benefits of induction of innate and
adaptive immunity are likely the major determinants of severity and
outcome.

Fig. 274.4 Maculopapular rash with central petechiae associated with

Rocky Mountain spotted fever. (From Biggs HM, Behravesh CB, Bradley
KK, et al. Diagnosis and management of tickborne rickettsial diseases:
Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other spotted fever group rickettsioses, ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis—United States. MMWR Recomm
Rep. 2016;65:1–44, Fig. 21.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period of RMSF in children varies from 2 to 14 days
(median: 7 days). In 49% of cases, patients or their parents report a
history of removing an attached tick, although the site of the tick bite
is usually inapparent. Epidemiologic clues include living in or visiting an endemic area, playing or hiking in the woods, typical season,
similar illness in family members, and close contact with a dog. In
patients presenting for care, the illness is initially nonspecific, and
most patients are not diagnosed during their first visit with a healthcare practitioner. Manifestations often (>50%) include fever, rash
(frequently involving the palms or soles), nausea and vomiting, and
headache and, less often (<50%), myalgias, abdominal pain, diarrhea,
conjunctival injection, altered mental status, lymphadenopathy, and
peripheral edema. Pain and tenderness of calf muscles are particularly
common in children.
The typical clinical triad of fever, headache, and rash is observed
in 58% of pediatric patients overall, and rash involving the soles and
palms first appearing after day 3 is associated with significantly higher
risk of death. Fever and headache persist if the illness is untreated.
Fever can exceed 40°C (104°F) and can remain persistently elevated or
can fluctuate dramatically. Headache is severe, unremitting, and unresponsive to analgesics.
Rash usually appears after only 1-­2 days of illness, and an estimated
3–5% of children never develop a rash that is recognized. Initially, discrete, pale, rose-­red blanching macules or maculopapules appear; characteristically, this initial rash is observed on the extremities, including
the wrists, ankles, or lower legs (Fig. 274.4). In 65% of patients, the
initial rash spreads rapidly to involve the entire body, including the
soles and palms. The rash can become petechial or even hemorrhagic,
sometimes with palpable purpura.
In severe disease, the petechiae can enlarge into ecchymoses, which
can become necrotic (Fig. 274.5). Severe vascular obstruction secondary
to the rickettsial vasculitis and thrombosis is uncommon but can result
in gangrene of the digits, earlobes, scrotum, nose, or an entire limb.
Central nervous system infection usually manifests as changes
in mental status (33%) or as photophobia (18%), seizure (17%), or
meningismus (16%). Patients can also manifest ataxia, coma, or auditory deficits. Cerebrospinal fluid parameters are usually normal, but
one third have pleocytosis (<10-­300 cells/μL), either mononuclear or,
less often, neutrophil-­dominated. Some (20%) have elevated protein
(<200 mg/dL) in the cerebrospinal fluid; hypoglycorrhachia is rare.

Fig. 274.5 Late-­stage petechial purpuric rash involving the sole of

the foot in a patient with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. (From Biggs
HM, Behravesh CB, Bradley KK, et al. Diagnosis and management of
tickborne rickettsial diseases: Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other
spotted fever group rickettsioses, ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis—
United States. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2016;65:1–44, Fig. 22.)

Neuroimaging studies often reveal only subtle abnormalities. However,
with advanced disease and neurologic signs, a unique but nonspecific
“starry sky” appearance may be observed on brain MRI that reflects the
same systemic vasculitis observed with skin lesions.

Other

Pulmonary disease occurs more often in adults than in children. However, 33% of children examined have a chest radiograph interpreted as
an infiltrate or pneumonia. The clinical presentation in these cases can
manifest as rales, infiltrates, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Other findings can include conjunctival suffusion, periorbital edema,
dorsal hand and foot edema, and hepatosplenomegaly. Severe disease
can include myocarditis, acute renal failure, and vascular collapse.
Persons with glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency are at
increased risk for fulminant RMSF, defined as death from R. rickettsii
infection within 5 days. The clinical course of fulminant RMSF is characterized by profound coagulopathy and extensive thrombosis leading to kidney, liver, and respiratory failure. Features associated with
increased risk of death include altered mental status, admission to an
intensive care unit, need for inotropic support, coma, and need for rapidly administered intravenous fluid.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 274 u Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses
Occasionally, clinical signs and symptoms suggest a localized process such as appendicitis or cholecystitis. Thorough evaluation usually
reveals evidence of a systemic process, and unnecessary surgical interventions are avoided.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory abnormalities are common but nonspecific. Thrombocytopenia occurs in 60%, and the total white blood cell count is most often
normal, with leukocytosis in 24% and leukopenia in 9%. Other characteristic abnormalities include a left-­shifted leukocyte differential, anemia (33%), hyponatremia (<135 mEq/mL in 52%), and elevated serum
aminotransferase levels (50%).

DIAGNOSIS

Delays in diagnosis and treatment are associated with severe disease
and death. Because no reliable diagnostic test is readily available to
confirm RMSF during illness, which lasts from 10 days to not more
than 3 weeks, the decision to treat must be based on compatible epidemiologic, clinical, and laboratory features. RMSF should be considered
in patients presenting spring through fall with an acute febrile illness
accompanied by headache and myalgia (particularly if they report
exposure to ticks or contact with a dog or have been in forested or tick-­
infested rural areas). A history of tick exposure, a rash (especially if on
the palms or soles), a normal or low leukocyte count with a marked
left shift, a relatively low or decreasing platelet count, and a low serum
sodium concentration are all clues that can support a diagnosis of
RMSF. In patients without a rash or in dark-­skinned patients in whom
a rash can be difficult to appreciate, the diagnosis can be exceptionally
elusive and delayed. One half of pediatric deaths occur within 9 days
of onset of symptoms. Thus treatment should not be withheld pending definitive laboratory results for a patient with clinically suspected
illness. Further, prompt response to early treatment is diagnostically
helpful.
If a rash is present, a vasculotropic rickettsial infection can be diagnosed as early as day 1 or 2 of illness with biopsy of a petechial lesion
and immunohistochemical or immunofluorescent demonstration of a
specific rickettsial antigen in the endothelium. Although highly specific, the sensitivity of this method is probably 70% at most. Furthermore, it can be adversely influenced by prior antimicrobial therapy,
suboptimal selection of skin lesions for biopsy, and examination of
insufficient tissue because of the focal nature of the infection. Tissue or
blood can also be evaluated for R. rickettsii nucleic acids by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) at the CDC and selected public health or reference laboratories; PCR on blood is less sensitive than PCR on tissue
and of similar sensitivity to tissue immunohistochemistry, probably
because the level of rickettsemia is generally very low (<6 rickettsiae/
mL). Because eschars are rare with RMSF, scab scrapings or skin swabs
are not useful specimens for the detection of rickettsemia by PCR.
Definitive diagnosis is most often accomplished by serology,
which is retrospective, because a rise in titer is not seen until after
the first week of illness. The gold standard for the diagnosis of RMSF
is a fourfold increase in immunoglobulin G antibody titer by indirect fluorescent antibody assay between paired acute and convalescent (at 2-­4 weeks) sera, including in the case of seroconversion. A
single IgG titer is neither sensitive (patients can die before seroconversion) nor specific (an elevated titer can represent prior infection).
IgM is nonspecific and does not confirm acute infection. With current serologic methods, RMSF cannot be reliably distinguished from
other spotted fever group rickettsiae infections, some of which are
not known to be pathogenic. Therefore confirming acute spotted
fever group rickettsia infection requires a compatible clinical illness.
Cross reactions of spotted fever group rickettsiae with typhus group
rickettsiae also occur, but titers may be lower for the typhus group.
Cross reactions are not seen with Ehrlichia or Anaplasma infections.
Currently, enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) serologic
methods can only provide “probable” rather than confirmed evidence of infection. Weil-­Felix antibody testing should not be performed because it lacks both sensitivity and specificity. RMSF and
other spotted fever group rickettsioses are reportable diseases in the

1905

United States; however, few reported cases include paired IgG serology, PCR with sequencing, and epidemiologic and clinical metadata.
Therefore little is known about the breadth, pathogenicity, and epidemiology of different spotted fever group rickettsiae in the United
States or across the globe. Chronic infections by spotted fever group
rickettsiae are not documented, such that positive serologic tests
after 1 month or more do not reflect ongoing spotted fever group
rickettsia infection.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Other rickettsial infections are easily confused with RMSF, especially
all forms of human ehrlichiosis and murine typhus and novel spotted
fever group rickettsioses that result from R. parkeri or “R. philipii” str.
364D infections. RMSF can also mimic a variety of other diseases, such
as meningococcemia and enterovirus infections. Negative blood cultures can exclude meningococcemia. PCR can differentiate enterovirus
from R. rickettsii in patients with aseptic meningitis and cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis. Other diseases in the differential diagnosis are
typhoid fever, secondary syphilis, Lyme disease, leptospirosis, rat-­bite
fever, scarlet fever, toxic shock syndrome, rheumatic fever, rubella,
parvovirus infection, Kawasaki disease, idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, Henoch-­Schönlein
purpura, hemolytic uremic syndrome, aseptic meningitis, acute gastrointestinal illness, acute abdomen, hepatitis, infectious mononucleosis,
hemophagocytic and macrophage activation syndromes, dengue fever,
and drug reactions.

TREATMENT

The time-­proven effective therapies for RMSF are tetracyclines and
chloramphenicol. The treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in
patients of all ages, including children under 8 years of age, is doxycycline (4 mg/kg/day divided every 12 hours PO or IV; maximum: 200
mg/day). Tetracycline (25-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours PO;
maximum: 2 g/day) is an alternative. Chloramphenicol (50-­100 mg/kg/
day divided every 6 hours IV; maximum: 4 g/day) should be reserved
for patients with doxycycline allergy and for pregnant women because
chloramphenicol is an independent risk factor for increased mortality vs tetracyclines. If used, chloramphenicol should be monitored to
maintain serum concentrations of 10-­30 μg/mL. Chloramphenicol is
preferred for pregnant women because of potential adverse effects of
doxycycline on fetal teeth and bone and maternal liver function. RMSF
is a life-­threatening illness for which prompt therapy is imperative, and
multiple recent studies demonstrate a negligible risk for tooth discoloration in children younger than 8 years of age with the use of doxycycline. Chloramphenicol is rarely associated with aplastic anemia and is
no longer available as an oral preparation in the United States. An additional benefit of doxycycline over chloramphenicol is its effectiveness
against potential concomitant Ehrlichia or Anaplasma infection. Sulfonamides should not be used because they are associated with greater
morbidity and mortality with all rickettsial infections. Other antibiotics, including penicillins, cephalosporins, and aminoglycosides, are not
effective. The use of alternative antimicrobial agents, such as fluoroquinolones and the macrolides (azithromycin and clarithromycin), has
not been evaluated.
Therapy should be continued for a minimum of 5-­7 days and until
the patient has been afebrile for at least 3 days. Treated patients usually defervesce within 48 hours, so the duration of therapy is usually
<10 days. Spotted fever group rickettsia infection resolves within several weeks if treated appropriately; thus patients with remitting clinical
manifestations after 1 month do not benefit from continued or additional treatment.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Most infections resolve rapidly with appropriate antimicrobial therapy
and do not require hospitalization or other supportive care. Among
those hospitalized, 36% require intensive care. Particular attention
to hemodynamic status is mandatory in severely ill children because
iatrogenic pulmonary or cerebral edema could be easily precipitated
owing to diffuse microvascular injury of the lungs, meninges, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1906 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
brain. Judicious use of corticosteroids for meningoencephalitis has
been advocated by some, but no controlled trials have been conducted.

COMPLICATIONS

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Complications of RMSF include noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
from pulmonary microvascular leakage, cerebral edema from
meningoencephalitis, and multiorgan damage (hepatitis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, epidermal necrosis, and gangrene) mediated by
rickettsial vasculitis and/or the accumulated effects of hypoperfusion
and ischemia (acute renal failure). Long-­term neurologic sequelae
can occur in any child with RMSF but are more likely to occur in
those hospitalized for ≥2 weeks. Examples of neurologic sequelae
include speech or swallowing disorders; global encephalopathy; cerebellar, vestibular, and motor dysfunction; hearing loss; and cortical blindness. Learning disabilities and behavioral problems are the
most common neurologic sequelae among children who have survived severe disease.

274.2 Mediterranean Spotted Fever or
Boutonneuse Fever (Rickettsia
conorii)

PROGNOSIS

ETIOLOGY

Delays in diagnosis and therapy are significant factors associated with
severe illness or death. Before the advent of effective antimicrobial
therapy for RMSF, the case fatality rate was 10% for children and 30%
for adults. The overall case fatality rate decreased to a historic low (0.3–
0.4%) from 2003 to 2012; however, many experts attribute this decrease
to detection and reporting of other less virulent emerging forms of spotted fever group rickettsioses that cannot be readily differentiated from
RMSF using current serologic tests. The overall case fatality rate of children 0-­9 years of age was 1.4%, but rates as high as 8.5% and 11.8% were
documented in Texas (1986–1996) and in Arizona (1999–2007), respectively, and rates as high as 30–40% are now reported from outbreaks in
Mexico, Brazil, and other parts of South America. Diagnosis based on
serology alone underestimates the true mortality of RMSF, because death
occurs at a median of 7 days (before developing a serologic response).
Deaths occur despite the availability of effective therapeutic agents,
indicating the need for clinical vigilance and a low threshold for early
empiric therapy. Even with administration of appropriate antimicrobials, delayed therapy can lead to irreversible vascular or end-­organ damage and long-­term sequelae or death. Early therapy in uncomplicated
cases usually leads to rapid defervescence within 1-­3 days and recovery
within 7-­10 days. A slower response may be seen if therapy is delayed.
In those who survive despite no treatment, fever subsides in 2-­3 weeks.

PREVENTION

No vaccines are available. Prevention of RMSF is best accomplished by preventing or treating tick infestation in dogs, avoiding areas where ticks reside, using insect repellents containing
N,N-­
diethyl-­
3-­
methylbenzamide (DEET) or new alternatives
(https://www.epa.gov/insect-­repellents/find-­repellent-­r ight-­you),
wearing protective clothing, and carefully inspecting children after
play in areas where they are potentially exposed to ticks. Recovery from
infection yields lifelong immunity.
Prompt and complete removal of attached ticks helps reduce the
risk for transmission because rickettsiae in the ticks need to be reactivated to become virulent, and this requires at least several hours to
days of exposure to body heat or blood. Contrary to popular belief,
the application of petroleum jelly, 70% isopropyl alcohol, fingernail
polish, or a hot match are not effective in removing ticks. A tick can
be safely removed by grasping the mouth parts with a pair of forceps
at the site of attachment to the skin and applying gentle and steady
pressure to achieve retraction without twisting, thereby removing the
entire tick and its mouth parts. The site of attachment should then
be disinfected. Ticks should not be squeezed or crushed, because
their fluids may be infectious. The removed tick should be soaked in
alcohol or flushed down the toilet, and hands should be washed to
avoid accidental inoculation into conjunctivae, mucous membranes,
or breaks in skin. Typically, prophylactic antimicrobial therapy is
not recommended because tetracyclines and chloramphenicol are
only rickettsiastatic; however, the evidence to support this position
is meager.

Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
MSF, or boutonneuse fever, is caused by R. conorii; it is also called by
other names, such as Kenya tick typhus, Indian tick typhus, Israeli spotted fever, and Astrakhan fever. It is a moderately severe vasculotropic
rickettsiosis in adults but comparatively milder in children, with more
frequent lymphadenopathy; often, MSF is initially associated with an
eschar at the site of the tick bite. Minor differences in clinical presentation could be associated with genetic diversity of this species.
MSF is caused by systemic endothelial cell infection by the obligate
intracellular bacterium R. conorii. Similar species are distributed globally, such as R. sibirica, R. heilongjiangensis, and R. mongolotimonae
in Russia, China, Mongolia, and Pakistan; R. australis and R. honei in
Australia; R. japonica in Japan; R. africae in South Africa; and R. parkeri
and “R. philippii” str. 364D in the Americas (see Table 274.1). Analysis
of antigens and related DNA sequences show that all are closely related
within a broad genetic clade that includes spotted fever group Rickettsia species such as R. rickettsii, the cause of RMSF.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

R. conorii is distributed over a large geographic region, including India,
Pakistan, Russia, Ukraine, Georgia, Israel, Morocco, southern Europe,
Ethiopia, Kenya, and South Africa. Reported cases of MSF in southern
Europe have steadily increased since 1980, and the seroprevalence is
11–26% in some areas. The peak in reported cases occurs during July
and August in the Mediterranean basin; in other regions it occurs during warm months when ticks are active.

TRANSMISSION

Transmission occurs after the bite of the brown dog tick, R. sanguineus,
or for other Rickettsia spp. tick genera such as Dermacentor, Haemaphysalis, Amblyomma, Hyalomma, and Ixodes. Clustering of human
cases of boutonneuse fever, infected ticks, and infected dogs implicates
the household dog as a potential vehicle for transmission.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The underlying pathology seen with MSF is nearly identical to that of
RMSF, except that eschars are often present at the site of a tick bite where
inoculation of rickettsiae occurs. The histopathology of the resultant
lesion includes necrosis of dermal and epidermal tissues with a superficial crust; a dermis densely infiltrated by lymphocytes, histiocytes, and
scattered neutrophils; and damaged capillaries and venules in the dermis. Immunohistochemical stains and nucleic acid amplification tests
confirm that the lesions contain rickettsia-­infected endothelial cells
and potentially other cells such as macrophages. The necrosis results
from both direct rickettsia-­mediated vasculitis and resultant extensive
local inflammation. Thus rickettsiae have ready access to lymphatics
and venous blood and disseminate to cause systemic disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

Typical findings in children include fever (37–100%), a maculopapular rash that appears 3-­5 days after onset of fever (94–100%), hepatosplenomegaly (20–83%), myalgias and arthralgias (10–42%), headache
(8–63%), nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea (5–28%), and lymphadenopathy (52–54%). In 60–90% of patients, a painless eschar, or tache noire,
appears at the site of the tick bite, often on the scalp, with accompanying
regional lymphadenopathy (50–60%) (Fig. 274.6). The infection can be
severe, mimicking RMSF, although morbidity and fatalities in children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 274 u Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses

1907

Specific fluoroquinolone regimens effective for children have not been
established, although recent reports suggest that the use of fluoroquinolones is associated with increased disease severity as compared with
doxycycline. Intensive care may be required.

COMPLICATIONS

Fig. 274.6 Various appearances of eschars associated with Rickettsia

parkeri rickettsiosis. (From Biggs HM, Behravesh CB, Bradley KK, et al.
Diagnosis and management of tickborne rickettsial diseases: Rocky
Mountain spotted fever and other spotted fever group rickettsioses,
ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis—United States. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2016;65:1–44, Fig. 24.)

are less frequent than in adults. Findings can include seizures, purpuric skin lesions, meningitis and neurologic deficits, respiratory and/
or acute renal failure, and severe thrombocytopenia. Even though the
case fatality rate can be as high as 10% in adults and severe infections
occur in approximately 9% of children, pediatric deaths are rare. As
with RMSF, a particularly severe form occurs in patients with glucose-­
6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and in patients with underlying
conditions such as alcoholic liver disease or diabetes mellitus.

DIAGNOSIS

Laboratory diagnosis of MSF and related spotted fever group rickettsioses is the same as that for RMSF. Cases can be confirmed by immunohistologic or immunofluorescent demonstration of or amplification
of nucleic acids from rickettsiae in eschar crust or skin biopsies, or
demonstration of seroconversion, or accompanied by a fourfold rise in
serum antibody titer to spotted fever group rickettsiae between acute
and convalescent sera. Antibodies to spotted fever group antigens cross
react, so RMSF or other spotted fever group rickettsiosis in the United
States or MSF in Europe, Africa, and Asia cannot be distinguished by
these methods. When eschars are present, biopsy of the eschar with
submission of tissue or a swab of the base for PCR provides considerably higher sensitivity than PCR on blood and is advocated, if available.
In vitro cultivation via centrifugation-­assisted shell vial tissue culture
is rarely used for clinical diagnosis. Treatment should not be withheld
while waiting for diagnostic test results.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis includes conditions also associated with
single eschars, such as anthrax, bacterial ecthyma, brown recluse spider bite, rat-­bite fever (caused by Spirillum minus), and other rickettsioses (such as rickettsialpox, African tick-­bite fever, R. parkeri or “R.
philipii” str. 364D rickettsiosis, and scrub typhus). The spotted fever
group rickettsia R. africae causes African tick-­bite fever, a milder illness
than MSF that is often associated with multiple eschars and occasionally a vesicular rash. African tick-­bite fever can be contracted in North
Africa, where MSF also occurs, and is a common infection of travelers to sub-­Saharan Africa who encounter bush or high grasslands on
safari. R. parkeri and “R. philipii” str. 364D rickettsiosis are emerging
infections in North and South America and in the U.S. western states,
respectively. Both often present with an eschar and milder clinical
manifestations similar to those observed with African tick-­bite fever.

TREATMENT AND SUPPORTIVE CARE

In adults, MSF is effectively treated with tetracycline, doxycycline,
chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, levofloxacin, azithromycin,
or clarithromycin. For children, the treatment of choice is doxycycline
(4 mg/kg/day divided every 12 hours PO or IV; maximum: 200 mg/
day). Tetracycline and chloramphenicol are alternatives, as for RMSF.
Azithromycin (10 mg/kg/day once daily PO for 3 days) and clarithromycin (15 mg/kg/day divided twice daily PO for 7 days) are also used.

The complications of MSF are similar to those of RMSF. Overall, the
case fatality rate is less than 2%, but fatalities are rare in children. Particularly severe infections have been noted in patients with underlying medical conditions, including glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency and diabetes mellitus.

PREVENTION

MSF is transmitted by tick bites, and prevention is the same as recommended for RMSF. No vaccine is currently available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

274.3 Rickettsialpox (Rickettsia akari) and
Flea-­Borne Spotted Fever
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
Rickettsialpox is caused by R. akari, a transitional-­group Rickettsia
species that is transmitted by the mouse mite, Allodermanyssus sanguineus. The mouse host for this mite is widely distributed in cities in
the United States, Europe, and Asia. Seroepidemiologic studies suggest a high prevalence of this infection in urban settings. The disease is
uncommon and is usually mild. Unlike the situation with most forms
of rickettsiosis, the macrophage is an important target cell for R. akari.
Rickettsialpox is best known because of its association with a varicelliform rash. In fact, this rash is a modified form of an antecedent typical
macular or maculopapular rash like those seen in other vasculotropic
rickettsioses and is occasionally seen with other rickettsioses such as
African tick-­bite fever. Clinical descriptions in children are infrequent.
At presentation, most patients have fever, headache, and chills. In up
to 90% of cases, there is a painless papular, ulcerative lesion, or eschar
at the initial site of inoculation, which can be associated with tender
regional lymphadenopathy. In some patients, the maculopapular rash
becomes vesicular, involving the trunk, head, and extremities. The
infection generally resolves spontaneously and does not require therapy. However, a short course of doxycycline hastens resolution and is
sometimes used in patients older than 8 years of age and in young children with relatively severe illness. Complications and fatalities are rare;
however, clear examples of severe disease in children like that observed
with RMSF are described.
Flea-­borne spotted fever, caused by Rickettsia felis, is often considered within the typhus group because of flea transmission; however,
phylogenetic studies place it close to the Rickettsia genus spotted fever
or within the “transitional” group. Similarly, a related cat flea–associated agent, R. asembonensis, was isolated from cat fleas; it and other
related rickettsiae in fleas have been identified in environmental samples over broad geographic regions but are not known to cause human
disease. Since the discovery of R. felis in a febrile patient from Texas
by use of molecular amplification methods, and its subsequent isolation from infected cat fleas, molecular and cross reactive serologic tests
have purported to identify human infections globally, some at high
rates of prevalence. Clinical isolates have yet to be made from infected
humans, and many patients identified by molecular methods lack serologic responses or even clinical signs. Its identification within mosquitoes and in conjunction with malaria further confound its role as a
human pathogen. Until many of the discrepant findings observed with
R. felis are resolved, its role as an important infectious agent in humans
remains to be resolved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1908 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 275

Scrub Typhus (Orientia
tsutsugamushi)
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
Scrub typhus is an important cause of acute febrile illness in South and
East Asia and the Pacific and could be emerging in the Middle East,
Africa, and South America. The causative agent is distinct from, but
related to, Rickettsia species. The infection is transmitted via chigger
(larval mite) bites and involves many antigenically diverse strains of
Orientia tsutsugamushi or emerging Orientia spp. such as “O. chuto”
and “O. chiloensis,” hampering vaccine development.

ETIOLOGY

The causative agent of scrub typhus, or tsutsugamushi fever, is O.
tsutsugamushi, which is distinct from other spotted fever and typhus
group rickettsiae (see Table 274.1 in Chapter 274). O. tsutsugamushi
lacks both lipopolysaccharide and peptidoglycan in its cell wall. Like
other vasculotropic rickettsiae, O. tsutsugamushi infects endothelial
cells and causes vasculitis, the predominant clinicopathologic feature
of the disease. However, the organism also infects macrophages and
cardiac myocytes. A new Candidatus species, “Orientia chuto,” was
isolated from a patient in the Middle East, and definitive evidence of
infection based on serology and/or PCR amplification of O. tsutsugamushi genes from acute-­phase blood suggests a wider range for scrub
typhus and related infections. Similarly, a scrub typhus–like illness in
southern Chile has been attributed to infection by a new species, “Orientia chiloensis.”

EPIDEMIOLOGY

At least 1 million infections occur each year, and it is estimated that
more than 1 billion people are at risk. Scrub typhus is recognized
mostly in Asia, including areas delimited by Korea, Pakistan, and
northern Australia. Outside these tropical and subtropical regions, the
disease occurs in Japan, the Primorsky of far eastern Russia, Tajikistan, Nepal, and nontropical China, including Tibet. Cases imported
to the United States and other parts of the world are reported. Endemic
scrub typhus has historically been confined to Asia and Oceania and
the tsutsugamushi triangle; however, Orientia may be distributed more
broadly, with confirmed cases in South America and possible cases
in Africa. Most infections in children are acquired in rural areas. In
Thailand and Sri Lanka, scrub typhus is the cause of 1–8% of acute
fevers of unknown origin. Infections are most common during rainy
months, usually June through November. Reported cases in boys are
higher than in girls.

TRANSMISSION

O. tsutsugamushi is transmitted via the bite of the larval stage (chigger)
of a trombiculid mite (Leptotrombidium in Asia, Herpetacarus in Chile,
and Microtrombicula in Africa), which serves as both vector and reservoir. Vertical transovarial transmission (passage of the organism from
infected mites to their progeny) is the major mechanism for maintenance in nature. Because only the larval stage takes blood meals, a role
for horizontal transmission from infected rodent hosts to uninfected
mites has not been proved, but transmission among co-­feeding larval
mites is a possibility. Multiple serotypes of O. tsutsugamushi are recognized, and some share antigenic cross reactivity; however, they do not
stimulate protective cross-­immunity.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of scrub typhus is uncertain. The process may be
stimulated by widespread infection of vascular endothelial cells, which

corresponds to the distribution of disseminated vasculitic and perivascular inflammatory lesions observed in histopathologic examinations.
In autopsy series, the major result of the vascular injury appears to be
hemorrhage. However, data support the concept that vascular injury
initiated by the infection is sustained by immune-­mediated inflammation that together cause significant vascular leakage. The net result is
significant vascular compromise and ensuing end-­organ injury, most
often manifested in the brain and lungs, as with other vasculotropic
rickettsioses.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

Scrub typhus can be mild or severe in children and can affect almost
every organ system. Most patients present with fever for 9-­11 days
(range: 1-­30 days) before seeking medical care. Regional or generalized lymphadenopathy is reported in 23–93%, hepatomegaly in about
two thirds, and splenomegaly in about one third of children with scrub
typhus. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, occur in up to 40% of children at presentation. A
single painless eschar with an erythematous rim at the site of the chigger bite is seen in 7–68% of cases, and a maculopapular rash is present
in less than half; both can be absent. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis has been described. Leukocyte and platelet counts are most
commonly within normal ranges, although thrombocytopenia occurs
in one quarter to one third of children, and leukocytosis is observed in
approximately 40% of children. Clinical manifestations often respond
dramatically to appropriate treatment. Adverse outcomes in fetuses
and newborn infants of infected mothers have been described, resulting from vertical transmission.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Owing to the potential for severe complications, diagnosis and decision to initiate treatment should be based on clinical suspicion. The
reference diagnostic standard for acute scrub typhus remains demonstration of a fourfold rise in IgG antibody titer by indirect fluorescent
antibody testing of acute-­phase and convalescent-­phase (obtained at
2-­to 4-­week follow-­up) sera. The IgG indirect fluorescent antibody
assay is >90% sensitive with 11 days or more of fever but does not
distinguish acute from past infection in those residing in endemic
regions. A positive acute-­phase IgM is also not definitive evidence of
acute scrub typhus. Although the rickettsiae can be cultivated using
tissue culture methods, polymerase chain reaction tests are not highly
sensitive, and these diagnostic methods are not widely available. The
differential diagnosis includes fever of unknown origin, enteric fever,
typhoid fever, dengue hemorrhagic fever, other rickettsioses, tularemia,
anthrax, dengue, leptospirosis, malaria, and infectious mononucleosis.

TREATMENT AND SUPPORTIVE CARE

The recommended treatment regimen for scrub typhus is doxycycline
(4 mg/kg/day PO or IV divided every 12 hours; maximum: 200 mg/
day). Alternative regimens include tetracycline (25-­50 mg/kg/day PO
divided every 6 hours; maximum: 2 g/day) or chloramphenicol (50-­100
mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours IV; maximum: 4 g/24 hr). If used,
chloramphenicol should be monitored to maintain serum concentrations of 10-­30 μg/mL. Alternatives now supported by data from randomized trials include azithromycin (10 mg/kg PO on day 1, then 5
mg/kg PO; maximum: 500 mg/day) or clarithromycin (15-­30 mg/kg/
day PO divided every 12 hours; maximum: 1 g/day). Therapy should be
continued for a minimum of 5 days and until the patient has been afebrile for at least 3 days to avoid relapse. However, a single dose of oral
doxycycline was reported effective for all 38 children treated with this
regimen in a large series from Thailand. Most children respond rapidly
to doxycycline or chloramphenicol within 1-­2 days (range: 1-­5 days).
Strains of O. tsutsugamushi with modestly higher doxycycline minimal
inhibitory concentrations are reported in some regions of Thailand.
Clinical trials showed that azithromycin could be as effective and that
rifampicin is superior to doxycycline in such cases and could have a
role as an alternative therapy, especially for pregnant women. The use
of ciprofloxacin in pregnant women resulted in an adverse outcome in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 276 u Typhus Group Rickettsioses
five of five pregnancies among Indian women. Intensive care may be
required for hemodynamic management of severely affected patients.

COMPLICATIONS

Serious complications include pneumonitis in 20–35% and meningoencephalitis in approximately 10–25% of children. Acute renal
failure, myocarditis, and septic shock occur less often. Cerebrospinal
fluid examination shows a mild mononuclear pleocytosis with normal
glucose levels. Chest radiographs reveal transient perihilar or peribronchial interstitial infiltrates in most children who are examined.
The reported case fatality rate varies widely; among 883 patients <20
years of age in 18 published studies, the case fatality rate was 11%; the
median for the studies was 1.6–1.8% and ranged as high as 33%. In a
contemporary systematic review and meta-­analysis of Indian children,
the case fatality rate was 1.1%.

PREVENTION

Prevention is based on avoidance of the chiggers that transmit O. tsutsugamushi. Protective clothing is the next most useful mode of prevention. Infection provides immunity to reinfection by homologous but
not heterologous strains; however, because natural strains are highly
heterogeneous, infection does not always provide complete protection
against reinfection. No vaccines are currently available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1909

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Murine typhus has a worldwide distribution and occurs especially
in warm coastal ports, where it is primarily maintained in a cycle
involving rat fleas (Xenopsylla cheopis) and rats (Rattus species). Peak
incidence occurs when rat populations are highest during spring,
summer, and fall. Sentinel surveillance studies suggest that travel-­
acquired murine typhus occurs most often in those visiting Southeast
Asia and Africa. In the United States, murine typhus was prevalent
before eradication efforts using DDT in the 1940s and is now re-­
emerging. The disease is recognized most often in south Texas and
Southern California. However, seroprevalence studies among children indicate that murine typhus is acquired across the southeast
and southcentral United States, thus expanding the endemic areas in
which pediatricians must be alert for this infection. In the coastal
areas of south Texas and in Southern California, the disease is seen
in all months, but predominantly from January through July, and
is associated with a sylvatic cycle involving opossums and cat fleas
(Ctenocephalides felis). The marked increase in reported cases in the
past decade likely relates to increased recognition, improved surveillance, and ecologic factors.

TRANSMISSION

R. typhi normally cycles between rodents or midsize animals such as
opossums and their fleas. Human acquisition of murine typhus occurs
when rickettsiae-­
infected flea feces contaminate flea bite wounds.
Direct inoculation via flea bite is possible, but inefficient.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Chapter 276

Typhus Group
Rickettsioses
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
Members of the typhus group of rickettsiae (see Table 274.1 in Chapter
274) include Rickettsia typhi, the cause of murine typhus, and Rickettsia
prowazekii, the cause of louse-­borne or epidemic typhus. R. typhi is
transmitted to humans by fleas, and R. prowazekii is transmitted in the
feces of body lice. Louse-­borne or epidemic typhus is widely considered to be the most virulent of the rickettsial diseases, with a high case
fatality rate even with treatment. Murine typhus is moderately severe
and likely underreported worldwide; global warming and increased
precipitation may increase cases and spread. The genomes of both R.
typhi and R. prowazekii are similar.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

276.1 Murine (Endemic or Flea-­Borne)
Typhus (Rickettsia typhi)
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler

ETIOLOGY

Murine typhus is caused by R. typhi, a rickettsia transmitted from
infected fleas to rats, other rodents, or opossums and back to fleas.
Transovarial transmission (passage of the organism from infected fleas
to their progeny) in fleas is inefficient. Transmission depends on infection from the flea to uninfected mammals that then sustain transient
rickettsemia and serve as sources of the bacterium for uninfected fleas
that bite during the period of rickettsemia.

R. typhi is a vasculotropic rickettsia that causes disease in a manner
similar to Rickettsia rickettsii (see Chapter 274.1). R. typhi organisms
in flea feces deposited on the skin as part of the flea feeding reflex
are inoculated into the pruritic flea bite wound. After an interval for
local proliferation, the rickettsiae spread systemically via lymphatics
to the blood, after which they infect the endothelium in many tissues.
As with spotted fever group rickettsiae, typhus group rickettsiae infect
endothelial cells, but unlike the spotted fever group rickettsiae, they
polymerize intracellular actin poorly, have limited intracellular mobility, and probably cause cellular injury by either enzymatic membrane
or mechanical lysis after accumulating in large numbers within the
endothelial cell cytoplasm. Intracellular infection leads to endothelial
cell damage, recruitment of inflammatory cells, and vasculitis. The
inflammatory cell infiltrates bring in a number of effector cells, including macrophages that produce proinflammatory cytokines, and CD4,
CD8, and natural killer lymphocytes, which can produce immune
cytokines such as interferon-­γ or participate in cell-­mediated cytotoxic responses. Intracellular rickettsial proliferation of typhus group
rickettsiae is inhibited by cytokine-­mediated mechanisms and nitric
oxide–dependent and –independent mechanisms.
Pathologic findings include systemic vasculitis in response to rickettsiae within endothelial cells. This vasculitis manifests as interstitial
pneumonitis, meningoencephalitis, interstitial nephritis, myocarditis,
and mild hepatitis with periportal lymphohistiocytic infiltrates. As vasculitis and inflammatory damage accumulate, multiorgan damage can
ensue.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In children, murine typhus is generally a self-­limited infection, but
can be severe, similar to other vasculotropic rickettsioses. The incubation period varies from 1 to 2 weeks. The initial presentation is often
nonspecific and mimics typhoid fever; fever of undetermined origin is
the most common presentation. Pediatric patients with murine typhus
exhibit symptoms classically attributed to other vasculotropic rickettsioses, such as rash (48–80%), myalgias (29–57%), vomiting (29–45%),
cough (15–40%), headache (19–77%), and diarrhea or abdominal pain
(10–40%). A petechial rash is observed in <15% of children, and the
usual appearance is that of macules or maculopapules distributed on the
trunk and extremities. The rash can involve both the soles and palms.
Among common clinical features, only abdominal pain, diarrhea, and
sore throat are more common in children than in adults, underscoring

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1910 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
the mild nature of most cases in children. Murine typhus–associated
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is described. Although
neurologic involvement is a common finding in adults with murine
typhus, photophobia, confusion, stupor, coma, seizures, meningismus, and ataxia are seen in <20% of hospitalized children and <6% of
infected children treated as outpatients. Poor neonatal outcomes are
reported with infection during pregnancy; however, frequency and
clinical spectrum are not well documented.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Although nonspecific, laboratory findings are less severe than in
adults. Helpful findings include mild leukopenia (28–40%) with a
moderate left shift, mild to marked thrombocytopenia (30–60%),
hyponatremia (20–66%), hypoalbuminemia (30–87%), and elevated
aspartate aminotransferase (82%) and alanine aminotransferase
(38%). Elevations in serum urea nitrogen are usually a result of prerenal mechanisms.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications of murine typhus in pediatric patients are uncommon;
however, relapse, stupor, facial edema, dehydration, splenic rupture,
and meningoencephalitis are reported. Predominance of abdominal
pain has led to surgical exploration to exclude a perforated viscus.

PREVENTION

Control of murine typhus was dependent on elimination of the flea reservoir and control of flea hosts, and this approach remains important.
However, with the recognition of cat fleas as potentially significant reservoirs and vectors, the presence of these flea vectors and their mammalian hosts in suburban areas where close human exposures occur
poses increasingly difficult control problems. It is not known with certainty if infection confers protective immunity; reinfection appears to
be rare.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Delays in diagnosis and therapy are associated with increased morbidity and mortality; thus diagnosis must be based on clinical suspicion.
Occasionally, patients present with findings suggesting pharyngitis,
bronchitis, hepatitis, gastroenteritis, or sepsis; thus the differential
diagnosis may be extensive. Murine typhus can also mimic SARS-­
CoV-­2–associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
(MIS-­C).
Confirmation of the diagnosis is usually accomplished by comparing acute-­and convalescent-­phase antibody titers obtained with the
indirect fluorescent antibody assay (IFA) to demonstrate a fourfold
rise in titer. Current objective studies of the diagnostic yield of R. typhi
nucleic acid amplification from acute-­phase whole blood show disappointingly low sensitivity, and rickettsial culture is not readily available. Thus paired (acute and convalescent) serology to demonstrate a
fourfold rise in immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibody titer by IFA remains
the standard for confirming acute infection. Use of IgM serologic tests
is discouraged for diagnosis of rickettsial infections because of both
limited sensitivity and specificity.

TREATMENT

A meta-­analysis of murine typhus in children reviewed treatment in
261 children, including 54 who received no antimicrobial therapy.
Although 15% had complications, there were no deaths. The standard
therapy for murine typhus in children was similar to that for adults and
focused on use of tetracyclines or chloramphenicol. Quinolones have
been used in children, and limited clinical studies show that ciprofloxacin is as effective as doxycycline and chloramphenicol to treat murine
typhus; however, treatment failures are reported. In vitro experiments
suggest that minimal inhibitory concentrations of azithromycin and
clarithromycin for R. typhi should be easily achieved. However, in adult
patients, a prospective randomized clinical trial showed that either a 3-­
or 7-­day course of doxycycline was superior to 3 days of azithromycin
for fever clearance.
Therefore the time-­honored recommended treatment for murine
typhus remains doxycycline (4 mg/kg/day divided every 12 hours
PO or IV; maximum: 200 mg/day). Alternative regimens include
tetracycline (25-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours PO; maximum: 2 g/day) or chloramphenicol (50-­100 mg/kg/day divided
every 6 hours IV; maximum: 4 g/day). Therapy should be for a minimum of 3 days and continued until the patient has been afebrile for
at least 3 days.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Although disease is usually mild, 15% of children have complications
and 2–7% require intensive care for management of meningoencephalitis, a disseminated intravascular coagulation–like condition, or other
conditions. As for other rickettsial infections with significant systemic
vascular injury, careful hemodynamic management is mandatory to
avoid pulmonary or cerebral edema.

276.2 Epidemic (Louse-­Borne) Typhus
(Rickettsia prowazekii)
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler

ETIOLOGY

Humans are considered the principal reservoir of R. prowazekii, the
causative agent of epidemic or louse-­borne typhus and its recrudescent
form, Brill-­Zinsser disease. Another reservoir exists in flying squirrels,
their ectoparasites, and potentially ticks in a sylvatic cycle with small
rodents. R. prowazekii is the most pathogenic member of the genus
Rickettsia and multiplies to very large intracellular quantities before
rupture of infected endothelial cells.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The infection is characteristically seen in winter or spring and especially during times of poor hygienic practices associated with crowding, war, famine, extreme poverty, and civil strife. As observed in a
recent outbreak among youths at a rehabilitation center in Rwanda,
infections in children under these conditions can lead to severe adverse
outcomes. R. prowazekii has also been associated with sporadic cases
of a mild, typhus-­like illness in the United States; such cases are associated with exposure to flying squirrels harboring infected lice or fleas. R.
prowazekii organisms isolated from these squirrels appear to be genetically similar to isolates obtained during typical outbreaks.
Most cases of louse-­borne typhus in the developed world are sporadic, but outbreaks have been identified in Africa (Ethiopia, Nigeria,
Rwanda, and Burundi), Mexico, Central America, South America,
Eastern Europe, Afghanistan, Russia, northern India, and China within
the past 25 years. After the Burundi Civil War in 1993, 35,000-­100,000
cases of epidemic typhus were diagnosed in displaced refugees, resulting in an estimated 6,000 deaths.

TRANSMISSION

Human body lice (Pediculus humanus) become infected by feeding on
persons who have rickettsiae circulating in their blood owing to endothelial cell infection. The ingested rickettsiae infect the midgut epithelial cells of the lice and are passed into the feces, which, in turn, are
introduced into a susceptible human host through abrasions or perforations in the skin, through the conjunctivae, or rarely, through inhalation as fomites in clothing, bedding, or furniture.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Louse-­borne typhus can be mild or severe in children. The incubation period is usually <14 days. The typical clinical manifestations
include fever, severe headache, abdominal tenderness, and rash in
most patients, as well as chills (82%), myalgias (70%), arthralgias
(70%), anorexia (48%), nonproductive cough (38%), dizziness (35%),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 277 u Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis
photophobia (33%), nausea (32%), abdominal pain (30%), tinnitus
(23%), constipation (23%), meningismus (17%), visual disturbances
(15%), vomiting (10%), and diarrhea (7%). However, investigation of
recent African outbreaks has shown a lower incidence of rash (25%)
and a high incidence of delirium (81%) and cough associated with
pneumonitis (70%). The rash is initially pink or erythematous and
blanches. In one third of patients, red, nonblanching macules and petechiae appear predominantly on the trunk. Infections identified during
the preantibiotic era typically produced a variety of central nervous
system findings, including delirium (48%), coma (6%), and seizures
(1%). Estimates of case fatality rates range between 3.5% and 20% in
outbreaks.
Brill-­Zinsser disease is a form of typhus that becomes recrudescent months to years after the primary infection, thus rarely affecting
children. When bacteremic with rickettsiae, these infected patients can
transmit the agent to lice, potentially providing the initial event that
triggers an outbreak if hygienic conditions permit.

TREATMENT

Recommended treatment regimens for louse-­borne or sylvatic typhus
are identical to those used for murine typhus. The treatment of choice
is doxycycline (4 mg/kg/day divided every 12 hours PO or IV; maximum: 200 mg/day). Alternative treatments include tetracycline (25-­50
mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours PO; maximum: 2 g/day) or chloramphenicol (50-­100 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours IV; maximum: 4 g/
day). Therapy should be continued for a minimum of 5 days and until
the patient is afebrile for at least 3 days. Evidence exists that doxycycline
as a single 200-­mg oral dose (4.4 mg/kg if <45 kg) is also efficacious.

PREVENTION

Immediate destruction of vectors with an insecticide is important in
the control of an epidemic. Lice live in clothing rather than on the skin;
thus searches for ectoparasites should include examination of clothing.
For epidemic typhus, antibiotic therapy and delousing measures interrupt transmission, reduce the prevalence of infection in the human
reservoir, and diminish the impact of an outbreak. Dust containing
excreta from infected lice is stable and capable of transmitting typhus,
and care must be taken to prevent its inhalation. Infection confers solid
protective immunity. However, recrudescence can occur years later
with Brill-­Zinsser disease, implying that immunity is not complete.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 277

Ehrlichiosis and
Anaplasmosis
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
ETIOLOGY

Ehrlichiosis in humans was first described in 1987, when clusters of
bacteria confined within cytoplasmic vacuoles of circulating leukocytes (morulae), particularly mononuclear leukocytes, were detected
in the peripheral blood of a patient with suspected Rocky Mountain
spotted fever (RMSF). The etiologic agent, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, was
cultivated from blood of an infected patient in 1990 and identified as
the predominant cause of human ehrlichiosis. Investigations showed
that infection by E. chaffeensis is transmitted by Amblyomma americanum ticks and occurs more often than RMSF in some geographic
areas. By 1994, other cases in which morulae were found only in

1911

neutrophils and lacked serologic evidence for E. chaffeensis infection led to the recognition of the species classified as Anaplasma
phagocytophilum, which encompasses several previously described
veterinary pathogens on at least two different continents and causes
anaplasmosis.
Since these discoveries, additional species in the Anaplasmataceae
family were identified as human pathogens, including (1) Ehrlichia
ewingii in 1996, a veterinary pathogen of canine neutrophils transmitted by A. americanum ticks; (2) the Ixodes scapularis–transmitted Ehrlichia muris subsp. eauclairensis in 2009, only present so far
in patients from Minnesota and Wisconsin in the United States; (3)
infections by Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis, presumably Ixodes spp. or Haemaphysalis concinna tick-­transmitted, recognized in
2010 as a cause of sepsis-­like infections of immune-­compromised
patients in Europe, and later as a cause of mild febrile illness in
healthy individuals in China; (4) Panola Mountain Ehrlichia, a bacterium rarely associated with infections in humans but present in A.
americanum ticks in the United States and with genetic features of
the ruminant pathogen Ehrlichia ruminantium; (5) Ehrlichia canis,
the established canine pathogen that has infected humans in Venezuela and possibly Costa Rica; and (6) Anaplasma capra, the cause
of mild fever after Ixodes persulcatus tick bites, so far only identified
in China. The latter five have not yet been established as causes of
infection in children.
Although the infections caused by these various genera have been
called ehrlichiosis, further study has identified substantial differences
in biology and diagnostic approaches such that the CDC now generally separates these into ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, or undetermined
ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis. Human monocytic ehrlichiosis (HME), or
simply ehrlichiosis, describes disease characterized by infection of predominantly monocytes and is caused by E. chaffeensis; human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA), now “anaplasmosis,” describes disease
related to infection of circulating neutrophils by Anaplasma phagocytophilum; and ewingii ehrlichiosis is caused by infection of granulocytes
by E. ewingii (see Table 274.1 in Chapter 274).
All of these organisms are tick-­transmitted and are small, obligate
intracellular bacteria with gram-­negative-­type cell walls. Neorickettsia sennetsu is another related bacterium that is rarely recognized as
a cause of human disease and is not transmitted by ticks. E. chaffeensis alters host signaling and transcription once inside the cell. It
survives in an endosome that enters a receptor recycling pathway
to avoid phagosome-­lysosome fusion and growth into a morula, an
intravacuolar aggregate of bacteria. A. phagocytophilum survives in
a unique vacuole that becomes decorated by microbial proteins that
prevent normal endosomal trafficking and lysosome fusion. Little is
known about the vacuoles in which E. ewingii and E. muris subsp.
eauclairensis grow. These bacteria are pathogens of phagocytic cells in
mammals, and characteristically each species has a specific host cell
affinity: E. chaffeensis infects mononuclear phagocytes, and A. phagocytophilum and E. ewingii infect neutrophils. Infection leads to direct
modifications in function, in part the result of changes in intracellular signal transduction or modulation of transcription of the host
cell that diminishes host defenses toward the bacterium. Yet host
immune and inflammatory reactions are still activated and in part
account for many of the clinical manifestations in ehrlichiosis, such
as overlaps with macrophage activation syndrome or hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Infections with E. chaffeensis occur across the southeastern, south
central, and Mid-­Atlantic States of the United States in a distribution that parallels that of RMSF; cases have also been reported in
northern California. Reported cases of ehrlichiosis have more than
doubled since adoption of the current surveillance case definition
in 2008. Suspected cases with appropriate serologic and occasionally molecular evidence have been reported in Europe, Africa, South
America, and the Far East, including China and Korea. Human infections with E. ewingii have only been identified in the United States in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 277 u Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis
photophobia (33%), nausea (32%), abdominal pain (30%), tinnitus
(23%), constipation (23%), meningismus (17%), visual disturbances
(15%), vomiting (10%), and diarrhea (7%). However, investigation of
recent African outbreaks has shown a lower incidence of rash (25%)
and a high incidence of delirium (81%) and cough associated with
pneumonitis (70%). The rash is initially pink or erythematous and
blanches. In one third of patients, red, nonblanching macules and petechiae appear predominantly on the trunk. Infections identified during
the preantibiotic era typically produced a variety of central nervous
system findings, including delirium (48%), coma (6%), and seizures
(1%). Estimates of case fatality rates range between 3.5% and 20% in
outbreaks.
Brill-­Zinsser disease is a form of typhus that becomes recrudescent months to years after the primary infection, thus rarely affecting
children. When bacteremic with rickettsiae, these infected patients can
transmit the agent to lice, potentially providing the initial event that
triggers an outbreak if hygienic conditions permit.

TREATMENT

Recommended treatment regimens for louse-­borne or sylvatic typhus
are identical to those used for murine typhus. The treatment of choice
is doxycycline (4 mg/kg/day divided every 12 hours PO or IV; maximum: 200 mg/day). Alternative treatments include tetracycline (25-­50
mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours PO; maximum: 2 g/day) or chloramphenicol (50-­100 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours IV; maximum: 4 g/
day). Therapy should be continued for a minimum of 5 days and until
the patient is afebrile for at least 3 days. Evidence exists that doxycycline
as a single 200-­mg oral dose (4.4 mg/kg if <45 kg) is also efficacious.

PREVENTION

Immediate destruction of vectors with an insecticide is important in
the control of an epidemic. Lice live in clothing rather than on the skin;
thus searches for ectoparasites should include examination of clothing.
For epidemic typhus, antibiotic therapy and delousing measures interrupt transmission, reduce the prevalence of infection in the human
reservoir, and diminish the impact of an outbreak. Dust containing
excreta from infected lice is stable and capable of transmitting typhus,
and care must be taken to prevent its inhalation. Infection confers solid
protective immunity. However, recrudescence can occur years later
with Brill-­Zinsser disease, implying that immunity is not complete.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 277

Ehrlichiosis and
Anaplasmosis
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
ETIOLOGY

Ehrlichiosis in humans was first described in 1987, when clusters of
bacteria confined within cytoplasmic vacuoles of circulating leukocytes (morulae), particularly mononuclear leukocytes, were detected
in the peripheral blood of a patient with suspected Rocky Mountain
spotted fever (RMSF). The etiologic agent, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, was
cultivated from blood of an infected patient in 1990 and identified as
the predominant cause of human ehrlichiosis. Investigations showed
that infection by E. chaffeensis is transmitted by Amblyomma americanum ticks and occurs more often than RMSF in some geographic
areas. By 1994, other cases in which morulae were found only in

1911

neutrophils and lacked serologic evidence for E. chaffeensis infection led to the recognition of the species classified as Anaplasma
phagocytophilum, which encompasses several previously described
veterinary pathogens on at least two different continents and causes
anaplasmosis.
Since these discoveries, additional species in the Anaplasmataceae
family were identified as human pathogens, including (1) Ehrlichia
ewingii in 1996, a veterinary pathogen of canine neutrophils transmitted by A. americanum ticks; (2) the Ixodes scapularis–transmitted Ehrlichia muris subsp. eauclairensis in 2009, only present so far
in patients from Minnesota and Wisconsin in the United States; (3)
infections by Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis, presumably Ixodes spp. or Haemaphysalis concinna tick-­transmitted, recognized in
2010 as a cause of sepsis-­like infections of immune-­compromised
patients in Europe, and later as a cause of mild febrile illness in
healthy individuals in China; (4) Panola Mountain Ehrlichia, a bacterium rarely associated with infections in humans but present in A.
americanum ticks in the United States and with genetic features of
the ruminant pathogen Ehrlichia ruminantium; (5) Ehrlichia canis,
the established canine pathogen that has infected humans in Venezuela and possibly Costa Rica; and (6) Anaplasma capra, the cause
of mild fever after Ixodes persulcatus tick bites, so far only identified
in China. The latter five have not yet been established as causes of
infection in children.
Although the infections caused by these various genera have been
called ehrlichiosis, further study has identified substantial differences
in biology and diagnostic approaches such that the CDC now generally separates these into ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, or undetermined
ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis. Human monocytic ehrlichiosis (HME), or
simply ehrlichiosis, describes disease characterized by infection of predominantly monocytes and is caused by E. chaffeensis; human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA), now “anaplasmosis,” describes disease
related to infection of circulating neutrophils by Anaplasma phagocytophilum; and ewingii ehrlichiosis is caused by infection of granulocytes
by E. ewingii (see Table 274.1 in Chapter 274).
All of these organisms are tick-­transmitted and are small, obligate
intracellular bacteria with gram-­negative-­type cell walls. Neorickettsia sennetsu is another related bacterium that is rarely recognized as
a cause of human disease and is not transmitted by ticks. E. chaffeensis alters host signaling and transcription once inside the cell. It
survives in an endosome that enters a receptor recycling pathway
to avoid phagosome-­lysosome fusion and growth into a morula, an
intravacuolar aggregate of bacteria. A. phagocytophilum survives in
a unique vacuole that becomes decorated by microbial proteins that
prevent normal endosomal trafficking and lysosome fusion. Little is
known about the vacuoles in which E. ewingii and E. muris subsp.
eauclairensis grow. These bacteria are pathogens of phagocytic cells in
mammals, and characteristically each species has a specific host cell
affinity: E. chaffeensis infects mononuclear phagocytes, and A. phagocytophilum and E. ewingii infect neutrophils. Infection leads to direct
modifications in function, in part the result of changes in intracellular signal transduction or modulation of transcription of the host
cell that diminishes host defenses toward the bacterium. Yet host
immune and inflammatory reactions are still activated and in part
account for many of the clinical manifestations in ehrlichiosis, such
as overlaps with macrophage activation syndrome or hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Infections with E. chaffeensis occur across the southeastern, south
central, and Mid-­Atlantic States of the United States in a distribution that parallels that of RMSF; cases have also been reported in
northern California. Reported cases of ehrlichiosis have more than
doubled since adoption of the current surveillance case definition
in 2008. Suspected cases with appropriate serologic and occasionally molecular evidence have been reported in Europe, Africa, South
America, and the Far East, including China and Korea. Human infections with E. ewingii have only been identified in the United States in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1912 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
areas where E. chaffeensis also exists, perhaps owing to the shared tick
vector. Canine infections are documented in both sub-­Saharan Africa
and South America.
Although the median age of patients with ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis is generally older (>51 years), many infected children have been
identified, and for ehrlichiosis, the case fatality rate is 4% in those <5
years of age. Perinatal transmission of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
has been documented in case reports. Little is known about the epidemiology of E. ewingii infections; although infections in children
occur, they are recognized at a rate 100-­fold less than for E. chaffeensis. All infections are strongly associated with tick exposure and tick
bites and are identified predominantly during May through September.
Although both nymphal and adult ticks can transmit infection, nymphs
are more likely to transmit disease because they are most active during
the summer.

TRANSMISSION

The predominant tick species that harbors E. chaffeensis and E. ewingii is A. americanum, the lone star tick (see Fig. 274.2d in Chapter
274). The tick vectors of A. phagocytophilum are Ixodes spp., including I. scapularis (black-­legged or deer tick) in the eastern United
States (see Fig. 274.1 in Chapter 274), Ixodes pacificus (western black-­
legged tick) in the western United States, Ixodes ricinus (sheep tick)
in Europe, Ixodes persulcatus in Eurasia, and Haemaphysalis spp. in
China. The Ixodes spp. ticks also transmit Borrelia burgdorferi, Borrelia miyamotoi, Borrelia mayonii, Babesia microti, and tick-­borne
encephalitis-­associated flaviviruses in Europe and Powassan viruses
and E. muris subsp. eauclairensis in North America. Co-­infections
with these agents and A. phagocytophilum are documented in children and adults.
Ehrlichia and Anaplasma species are maintained in nature predominantly by horizontal transmission (tick to mammal to tick) because the
organisms are not transmitted to the progeny of infected adult female
ticks (transovarial transmission). The major reservoir for E. chaffeensis
is the white-­tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), which is found abundantly in many parts of the United States. A reservoir for A. phagocytophilum in the eastern United States appears to be the white-­footed
mouse, Peromyscus leucopus. Deer or domestic ruminants can sustain
persistent asymptomatic infections, but the genetic variants in these
reservoirs might not be infectious for humans. Efficient transmission
requires persistent infections of mammals. Although E. chaffeensis
and A. phagocytophilum can cause persistent infections in animals,
clear evidence of chronic infections in humans is exceedingly rare.
Transmission of Ehrlichia can occur within hours of tick attachment,
in contrast to the 1-­2 days of attachment required for transmission of
B. burgdorferi to occur. Transmission of A. phagocytophilum is via the
bite of the small nymphal stage of Ixodes spp., including I. scapularis
(see Fig. 274.2a in Chapter 274), and is effective only after 36 hours of
attachment on laboratory mice.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Although ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis often clinically mimic RMSF
or typhus, vasculitis is rare. Pathologic findings include mild, diffuse
perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltrates; Kupffer cell hyperplasia and
mild lobular hepatitis with infrequent apoptotic hepatocytes and, less
frequently, centrilobular necrosis, cholestasis, and steatosis; infiltrates
of mononuclear phagocytes in the spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow with occasional hemophagocytosis; granulomas of the liver and
bone marrow in patients with E. chaffeensis infections; and hyperplasia
of one or more bone marrow hematopoietic lineages.
The exact pathogenetic mechanisms are poorly understood, but histopathologic examinations suggest diffuse macrophage activation and
poorly regulated host immune and inflammatory reactions. This activation results in moderate to profound leukopenia and thrombocytopenia despite a hypercellular bone marrow, and deaths often are related
to hemorrhage or secondary opportunistic infections. Hepatic and
other organ-­specific injury occurs by a mechanism that appears to be
triggered by the bacterium but is more closely related to induction of
innate and adaptive immune effectors that are dysregulated in severely

affected patients. Meningoencephalitis with a mononuclear cell pleocytosis in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) occurs with ehrlichiosis but is
rare with anaplasmosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, and ewingii ehrlichiosis are similar. Many well-­
characterized infections of
ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis of variable severity have been reported
in children, including deaths. Whereas anaplasmosis is more common in children, ehrlichiosis appears to be more severe. Children with
ehrlichiosis are often ill for 4-­12 days, shorter than in adults. Abdominal pain may occur disproportionately in children vs adults with
anaplasmosis. In a series of children with ehrlichiosis, most required
hospitalization and many (25%) required intensive care; these statistics
might represent preferential reporting of severe cases. However, review
of case reports and electronic surveillance of anaplasmosis to the CDC
identified that 42% of patients 5-­9 years of age required hospitalization, and the case fatality rate is 4% among children <5 years of age.
Population-­based studies document that seroconversion often occurs
in children who are well or who have only a mild illness. Many fewer
pediatric cases of E. ewingii infection are reported, so the clinical manifestations related to this infection are less well characterized. The incubation period (time from last tick bite or exposure) appears to range
from 2 days to 3 weeks. Nearly 25% of patients do not report a tick bite.
Clinically, ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are undifferentiated febrile
illnesses. In ehrlichiosis, fever (∼100%), headache (77%), and myalgia (77%) are most common, but many patients also report abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Altered mental status accompanied
by other signs of central nervous system involvement is present in
36%. Rash is a common feature (∼60%) in children. The rash is usually macular or maculopapular, but petechial lesions can occur. The
triad of fever, headache, and rash is observed in ∼50%. Photophobia,
conjunctivitis, pharyngitis, and arthralgias can occur but are less consistently present. Lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly
are detected in nearly 50% of children with ehrlichiosis. Edema of the
face, hands, and feet occurs more commonly in children than in adults,
but arthritis is uncommon.
Similar but less severe manifestations occur with anaplasmosis in
children, including fever (93%), headache (73%), myalgia (73%), and
rigors (60%). Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and anorexia occur
in 30% or less of patients. Cough is present in 20%. Rash is infrequent
in anaplasmosis and most often is erythema migrans that results from
concurrent Lyme disease.
Meningoencephalitis with a lymphocyte-­predominant CSF pleocytosis is an uncommon but potentially severe complication of ehrlichiosis that appears to be rare with anaplasmosis. CSF protein may be
elevated, and glucose may be mildly depressed in adults with ehrlichiosis meningoencephalitis, but CSF protein and glucose in affected children are typically normal. In one series, 19% of adult patients with
central nervous system symptoms and abnormal CSF died despite normal CTs of the brain.
Chronic or persistent disease with low or absent fever is very unlikely
to be any form of ehrlichiosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Characteristically, most children with ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis
present with leukopenia (57–80%) and thrombocytopenia (38–93%);
cytopenias reach a nadir several days into the illness. Lymphopenia is
common in both ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. Leukocytosis can also
occur, but usually after the first week of illness or with effective antimicrobial treatment. Adults with pancytopenia often have a cellular or
reactive bone marrow examination, and in nearly 75% of bone marrow
specimens from adults with ehrlichiosis, granulomas and granulomatous inflammation are present; this finding is not a feature of adults
with anaplasmosis. Mild to markedly elevated serum hepatic transaminase levels are frequent in both ehrlichiosis (85–92%) and anaplasmosis (40–50%). Hyponatremia (<135 mEq/L) is present in most cases. A
clinical picture similar to disseminated intravascular coagulopathy has
also been reported.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 277 u Ehrlichiosis and Anaplasmosis
DIAGNOSIS

Any delays in diagnosis or treatment are major contributors to
increased morbidity or mortality in adults, where those not started
on doxycycline at hospital admission are much more likely to require
intensive care and undergo a significantly longer course of illness and
hospitalization. Tick bites are not always reported; thus treatment must
begin as early as possible based on epidemiologic (geographic) and
clinical suspicion. Because both ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis can be
fatal, therapy should not be withheld while waiting for the results of
confirmatory testing. In fact, prompt response to therapy supports the
diagnosis.
Although several reports document pediatric patients with E.
chaffeensis infection diagnosed based on typical Ehrlichia morulae in
peripheral blood leukocytes (Fig. 277.1A), this finding is too infrequent to be considered a useful diagnostic approach. In contrast, anaplasmosis in adults presents with a small but significant percentage
(1–40%) of circulating neutrophils (see Fig. 277.1B) containing typical
morulae in 20–60% of patients.
E. chaffeensis and A. phagocytophilum infections are currently most
frequently established by specific polymerase chain reaction assays
used during the acute phase of illness when antibodies are often not
detected. Both infections can be confirmed by demonstrating a fourfold change in immunoglobulin G titer by indirect immunofluorescence assay between paired sera. Serologic tests during the acute
phase of infection are often negative; consequently, confirmation of
acute infection requires demonstration of a fourfold rise in IgG titer
in paired samples. A single specific titer of ≥128 is suggestive, but the
use of IgM testing is discouraged owing to a lack of specificity. Identification of morulae in monocytes or macrophages for E. chaffeensis or
in neutrophils or eosinophils for A. phagocytophilum by microscopy
is suggestive. Demonstration of specific antigen in a tissue sample by
immunohistochemistry and isolation of the organism in cell culture
are not timely and are used infrequently. E. ewingii infection can only
be confirmed by polymerase chain reaction because it has not been
cultured and serologic antigens are not available. E. ewingii antibodies cross react with E. chaffeensis in routine serologic tests. Up to 15%
of patients with anaplasmosis have serologic cross reactions with
E. chaffeensis; thus serodiagnosis depends on testing with both E.
chaffeensis and A. phagocytophilum antigens and demonstrating a fourfold or higher difference between titers.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Because of the nonspecific presentation, ehrlichiosis mimics other
arthropod-­borne infections such as RMSF, tularemia, babesiosis, Lyme
disease, murine typhus, relapsing fever, and Colorado tick fever. Other
potential diagnoses often considered include otitis media, streptococcal
pharyngitis, infectious mononucleosis, Kawasaki disease, endocarditis,
respiratory or gastrointestinal viral syndromes, hepatitis, leptospirosis,

A

1913

Q fever, collagen-­vascular diseases, hemophagocytic syndromes, and
leukemia. If rash and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy predominate, meningococcemia, bacterial sepsis, and toxic shock syndrome should also be suspected. Meningoencephalitis might suggest
aseptic meningitis caused by enterovirus or herpes simplex virus, bacterial meningitis, or RMSF. Severe respiratory disease may be confused
with bacterial, viral, and fungal causes of pneumonia. Mounting evidence suggests that ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis may be precipitating
factors for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

TREATMENT

Both ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are effectively treated with tetracyclines, especially doxycycline, and the majority of patients improve
within 48 hours. In vitro tests document that both E. chaffeensis and
A. phagocytophilum have minimal inhibitory concentrations to chloramphenicol above blood levels that can be safely achieved. Therefore a
short course of doxycycline is the recommended regimen. Doxycycline
is used safely in children younger than 8 years of age because tooth
discoloration is dose dependent and the need for multiple courses is
unlikely; experience has demonstrated that adverse consequences
of doxycycline use in children <8 years of age are extremely rare, in
particular if courses are relatively short. Few data exist to recommend
alternative therapies; however, both E. chaffeensis and A. phagocytophilum are susceptible in vitro to rifampin, which has been used successfully to treat anaplasmosis in pregnant women and children.
The recommended regimen for patients of all ages with severe or
complicated ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis is doxycycline (for those
who weigh <45 kg, 4 mg/kg/day PO or IV divided every 12 hours;
maximum 200 mg/day). An alternative regimen is tetracycline (25-­50
mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours PO; maximum 2 g/day). For children
who weigh more than 45 kg, the adult dose, 100 mg twice daily by oral
or intravenous route, can be used. Therapy should be continued for ≥5
days and until the patient has been afebrile for ≥2-­4 days.
Other broad-­spectrum antibiotics, including penicillins, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, and macrolides, are not effective. In vitro
studies suggest that fluoroquinolones are active against A. phagocytophilum, although at least one patient relapsed when levofloxacin was
discontinued. E. chaffeensis is naturally resistant to fluoroquinolones
owing to a single nucleotide change in gyrA, which suggests that A.
phagocytophilum could also become resistant to fluoroquinolones
rapidly.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

Fatal ehrlichiosis has been reported in occasional pediatric patients,
where the findings included pulmonary involvement and respiratory
failure in patients with or without immune compromise. The pattern
of severe pulmonary involvement culminating in diffuse alveolar damage and acute respiratory distress syndrome and secondary nosocomial

B

Fig. 277.1 Morulae in peripheral blood leukocytes in patients with human monocytic ehrlichiosis and human granulocytic anaplasmosis. A, A

morula (arrow) containing Ehrlichia chaffeensis in a monocyte. B, A morula (arrowhead) containing Anaplasma phagocytophilum in a neutrophil.
Wright stains, original magnifications ×1,200. E. chaffeensis and A. phagocytophilum have similar morphologies but are serologically and genetically distinct.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1914 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
or opportunistic infections is now well-­documented with ehrlichiosis
and anaplasmosis in adults. Of greater concern is the frequency with
which secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is diagnosed
with ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis in children. Children and adults
who are immunocompromised (e.g., HIV infection, high-­dose corticosteroid therapy, cancer chemotherapy, immunosuppression for organ
transplantation) are at high risk for fulminant E. chaffeensis infection,
for E. ewingii infection, and for severe anaplasmosis.

PREVENTION

Ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, and ewingii ehrlichiosis are tick-­borne diseases, and any activity that increases exposure to ticks increases risk.
Avoiding tick-­infested areas, wearing appropriate light-­colored clothing, spraying tick repellents on clothing, carefully inspecting for ticks
after exposure, and promptly removing any attached ticks diminish
the risk. The interval between tick attachment and transmission of
the agents may be as short as 4 hours; thus attached ticks should be
removed promptly. A role of prophylactic therapy for ehrlichiosis and
anaplasmosis after tick bites has not been investigated. It is not known
if infection confers protective immunity; however, reinfection appears
to be rare.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 278

Q Fever (Coxiella burnetii)
Megan E. Reller and J. Stephen Dumler
Q fever (for query fever, the name given after an outbreak of febrile illness in an abattoir in Queensland, Australia) is rarely reported in children but is probably underdiagnosed. Symptomatic patients can have
acute or chronic disease.

ETIOLOGY

Although previously classified within the order Rickettsiales, Coxiella
burnetii (the causative agent of Q fever) is genetically distinct from the
genera Rickettsia, Orientia, Ehrlichia, and Anaplasma. Hence, based
on small genome analysis, it best aligns with the order Legionellales,
family Coxiellaceae. C. burnetii is highly infectious for both humans
and animals; even a single organism can cause infection. The agent
has been nationally notifiable since 1999 and is listed as a Category
B agent of bioterrorism by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Unlike Rickettsia, the organism can enter a sporogenic
differentiation cycle, which renders it highly resistant to chemical and
physical treatments.
C. burnetii resides intracellularly within macrophages. In vitro, the
organism undergoes a lipopolysaccharide phase variation similar to
that described for smooth and rough strains of Enterobacteriaceae.
Unlike Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, and Chlamydia, C. burnetii survives and
proliferates within acidified phagosomes to form aggregates of >100
bacteria.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The disease is reported worldwide, except in New Zealand. Although
seroepidemiologic studies suggest that infection occurs just as often in
children as in adults, children less often present with clinical disease
than adults. During the large outbreak of Q fever in the Netherlands
in 2007–2009, only 3.5% of those diagnosed with Q fever were age 19
years or younger. Infections are recognized more often in men than in

women. Historically, reported cases in boys and girls have been equal,
although a recent study reported male predominance. Approximately
60% of infections are asymptomatic, and only 5% of symptomatic
patients require hospitalization. Seroprevalence surveys show that
6–70% of children in endemic European and African communities
have evidence of past infection. In France, the overall incidence of Q
fever is estimated to be 50 cases per 100,000 persons. A similar estimate is not available for Africa, where cases are likely misdiagnosed as
malaria. The seroprevalence of Q fever in the United States is estimated
to be 3.1%. Reported cases of Q fever in the United States have been
received from every state, but 35% are reported from four states (California, Texas, Colorado, and Illinois). In the United States, reported Q
fever cases increased by greater than ninefold from 17 cases in 2000 to
167 cases in 2008, reflecting an increase in incidence, increased reporting after September 11, 2001, improved diagnostic tools, or a combination of factors. Cases decreased significantly in 2008–2013 relative to
2007 but returned to previous high levels in 2014 (173 cases, including
147 acute and 39 chronic). Beginning in 2008, reported cases in the
United States have been classified as acute or chronic. Between 2002
and 2014, more than 50% of recognized cases in the United States
required hospitalization. Reported cases in Asia and Australia have
also increased. Most infections in children are identified during the
lamb birthing season in Europe (January through June), after farm visits, or after exposure to placentas of dogs, cats, and rabbits. The largest
(∼4,000 human cases) community outbreak ever described occurred
in the Netherlands in 2007–2012 and was associated with intensive
farming of dairy goats and dairy sheep. In 2011, the first multistate
outbreak of Q fever in humans was linked to interstate sale of infected
goats; an outbreak of unknown source was also reported. From 2000 to
2010, 60% of cases reported to the CDC occurred in individuals without reported exposure to livestock. More than 20% of cases of clinically recognized acute or chronic Q fever occur in immunosuppressed
hosts or in persons with prosthetic valves or damaged native valves or
vessels. These findings highlight the need for considering Q fever in
those with clinically compatible illness, especially but not exclusively
in those with likely exposures and in vulnerable hosts. Epidemiologic
investigations and control efforts require a One Health approach, with
consideration of the interactions between humans, animals, environment, and public health.

TRANSMISSION

In contrast to other rickettsial infections, humans usually acquire C.
burnetii by inhaling infectious aerosols (e.g., contaminated barnyard
dust) or ingesting (and likely aspirating) contaminated foods. Ticks are
rarely implicated. Cattle, sheep, and goats are the primary reservoirs,
but infection in other livestock and domestic pets is also described.
Organisms are excreted in milk, urine, and feces of infected animals,
but especially in amniotic fluids and the placenta. An increase in incidence is associated with the seasonal mistral winds in France that coincide with lamb birthing season and with consumption of cheese among
children in Greece. In Nova Scotia and Maine, exposure to newborn
animals, especially kittens, has been associated with small outbreaks of
Q fever in families. Exposure to domestic ruminants is the major risk
in Europe and Australia, although many urban dwellers in France also
acquire Q fever without such an exposure. Person-­to-­person transmission is possible but rare. Clinical Q fever during pregnancy can result
from primary infection or reactivation of latent infection and is associated with miscarriage, intrauterine growth retardation, and premature
births. Obstetricians and other related healthcare workers are at risk for
acquiring infection because of the quantity of C. burnetii sequestered in
the placenta. Sexual transmission and cases attributable to blood transfusion or bone marrow transplantation are also reported. Transmission
after live cell therapy (injected live animal cells) has also been reported.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The pathology of Q fever depends on the mode of transmission, route
of dissemination, specific tissues involved, and course of the infection.
When acquired via inhalation, a mild interstitial lymphocytic pneumonitis and macrophage-­and organism-­rich intraalveolar exudates are

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 278 u Q Fever (Coxiella burnetii)
often seen. When the liver is involved, a mild to moderate lymphocytic
lobular hepatitis can be seen. Inflammatory pseudotumors can develop
in the pulmonary parenchyma or other tissues. Classic fibrin-­ring
(“doughnut”) granulomas, generally associated with acute, self-­limited
infections, are occasionally identified in liver, bone marrow, meninges,
and other organs. Typically, infected tissues are also infiltrated by lymphocytes and histiocytes.
Recovery from symptomatic or asymptomatic acute infection can
result in persistent subclinical infection, possibly maintained by dysregulated cytokine responses. The persistence of C. burnetii in tissue
macrophages at sites of preexisting tissue damage elicits low-­grade
chronic inflammation and, depending on the site of involvement, can
result in irreversible cardiac valve damage, persistent vascular injury,
or osteomyelitis. Endocarditis of native or prosthetic valves is characterized by infiltrates of macrophages and lymphocytes in necrotic
fibrinous valvular vegetations and an absence of granulomas.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND COMPLICATIONS

Children are less likely to develop symptoms compared with adults.
Only approximately 40–50% of people infected with C. burnetii develop
symptoms. Historically, two forms of symptomatic disease have been
thought to occur. Acute Q fever, now better characterized as primary
Q fever, is more common and usually manifests as self-­limited undifferentiated fever or an influenza-­like illness with interstitial pneumonitis. Persistent localized infection with C. burnetii can cause what has
historically been referred to as chronic Q fever. In adults, persistent
localized infection usually involves the cardiovascular system—native
heart valves, especially those with preexisting valvulopathy, prosthetic
valves, or other endovascular prostheses. Q fever osteomyelitis is less
common but proportionally more common as a manifestation of infection in children. Less common persistent localized C. burnetii infections include lymphadenitis, genital infection, and pericarditis.

Primary (Acute) Q Fever

Acute Q fever develops approximately 3 weeks (range: 14-­39 days)
after exposure to the causative agent. The severity of illness in children
ranges from subclinical infection to a systemic illness of sudden onset
characterized by high fever, severe frontal headache, nonproductive
cough, chest pain, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, arthralgias,
and myalgias. Approximately 40% of children with acute Q fever present with fever, 25% with pneumonia or an influenza-­like illness, >10%
with meningoencephalitis, and >10% with myocarditis. Other manifestations include pericarditis, hepatitis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, rhabdomyolysis, and a hemolytic uremic–like syndrome. Rash,
ranging from maculopapular to purpuric lesions, is an unusual finding
in adults with Q fever but is observed in approximately 50% of pediatric patients. Rigors and night sweats are common in adults with Q fever
and occur less often in children. Prominent clinical findings that can
create diagnostic confusion include fatigue, vomiting, abdominal pain,
and meningismus. Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly may be detected
in some patients.
Routine laboratory investigations in pediatric acute Q fever are usually normal but can reveal mild leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia.
Up to 85% of children have modestly elevated serum hepatic transaminase levels that usually normalize within 10 days. Hyperbilirubinemia
is uncommon in the absence of complications. C-­reactive protein may
not be elevated in pediatric Q fever. Chest radiographs are abnormal
in nearly 30% of all patients; in children, the most common findings
include single or multiple bilateral infiltrates with reticular markings
in the lower lobes.
Primary Q fever in children is usually a self-­limited illness, with
fever persisting for only 7-­10 days compared with 2-­3 weeks in adults.
However, severe manifestations of acute illness, such as myocarditis
requiring cardiac transplantation, meningoencephalitis, pericarditis,
hemophagocytosis, thrombosis with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, and a relapsing febrile illness lasting for several months, have
been reported.

1915

Persistent Localized Q Fever Infection

The risk for developing persistent localized Q fever infection, historically called chronic Q fever, is strongly correlated with advancing age and underlying conditions such as cardiac valve damage or
immunosuppression; persistent localized Q fever infection is rarely
diagnosed in children. A review identified only five cases of Q fever
endocarditis and six cases of osteomyelitis among children, none
of whom had known predisposing immune deficiencies. Four of
the five cases of endocarditis occurred in children with underlying
congenital heart abnormalities and involved the aortic, pulmonary,
and tricuspid valves. Four of the six children with Q fever osteomyelitis had a prior diagnosis or clinical course consistent with idiopathic chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis. A long interval
before diagnosis and lack of high fever are common in pediatric
cases of persistent localized Q fever infection—historically chronic
Q fever.
Although Q fever endocarditis often results in death (23–65% of
cases) in adults, mortality has not been reported for children. Endocarditis associated with persistent or chronic Q fever can occur months to
years after acute infection and can occur in the absence of recognized
acute Q fever and in the absence of clinically recognized valvulopathy.
Chronic hepatitis has also been reported.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory features in children with chronic Q fever are poorly
documented; adult patients often have an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of >20 mm/hr (80% of cases), hypergammaglobulinemia
(54%), and hyperfibrinogenemia (67%). In children, the presence of
rheumatoid factor in >50% of cases and circulating immune complexes in nearly 90% suggest an autoimmune process. The presence
of antiplatelet antibodies, anti–smooth muscle antibodies, antimitochondrial antibodies, circulating anticoagulants, positive direct
Coombs tests, and antiphospholipid antibodies also suggest this
possibility.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Although uncommonly diagnosed, Q fever in children most often
mimics other childhood respiratory infections. It should be considered
in children who have an influenza-­like illness, lower or upper respiratory tract infection, fever of unknown origin, myocarditis, meningoencephalitis, culture-­negative endocarditis, or recurrent osteomyelitis
and who live in rural areas or who are in close contact with domestic
livestock, cats, or animal products.
The diagnosis of primary (acute) Q fever is most easily and
commonly confirmed by testing acute and convalescent sera (3-­6
weeks apart), which show a fourfold increase in indirect fluorescent
immunoglobulin G antibody titers to phase II C. burnetii antigens.
The phase II antibody response to C. burnetii appears first and is
higher than the phase I antibody response. Phase II immunoglobulin G antibodies can remain elevated for months to years, regardless
of initial symptoms or lack thereof. In contrast, persistent localized
(chronic) Q fever is characterized by a phase I immunoglobulin G
antibody titer greater than 800 that is sustained for 6 months or
more, such as occurs with Q fever endocarditis in patients with valvular heart disease. Cross-­reactions with antibodies to Legionella
and Bartonella can occur.
Although culture has been considered the gold standard, sensitivity
(compared with a composite standard including serology and polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) is low. C. burnetii has been cultivated
in tissue culture cells, which can become positive within 48 hours, but
isolation and antimicrobial susceptibility testing of C. burnetii should
be attempted only in specialized biohazard facilities. Testing by PCR
can be performed on blood, serum, and tissue samples and is available
only in some public health, reference, or research laboratories. PCR
has been helpful in patients with equivocal titers, as occurs with early
infection. PCR usually remains positive for 7-­10 days after acute infection. Sensitivity has been improved by real-­time methods and the use

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1916 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
of repeated sequences as targets. Immunohistochemical staining has
also been used but is not readily available. PCR should be performed
either before or shortly after initiation of treatment. PCR can also
confirm a serologic diagnosis of endocarditis in untreated patients.
Genotyping has aided epidemiologic investigations to confirm the
source of infection. The differential diagnosis depends on the clinical
presentation. In patients with respiratory disease, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, legionellosis, psittacosis, and
Epstein-­Barr virus infection should be considered. In patients with
granulomatous hepatitis, tuberculous and nontuberculous mycobacterial infections, salmonellosis, visceral leishmaniasis, toxoplasmosis,
Hodgkin disease, monocytic ehrlichiosis, brucellosis, cat scratch disease (Bartonella henselae), or autoimmune disorders such as sarcoidosis should be considered. Culture-­negative endocarditis suggests
infection with Brucella, Bartonella, HACEK organisms (Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens,
Kingella), partially treated bacterial endocarditis, nonbacterial endocarditis, or potentially noninfectious inflammatory conditions, including chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis and antiphospholipid
syndrome.

TREATMENT

Selection of an appropriate antimicrobial regimen for children is difficult owing to the lack of rigorous studies, the limited therapeutic window for drugs that are known to be efficacious, and the potential length
of therapy required to preclude relapse.
Most pediatric patients with Q fever have a self-­limited illness that
is identified only on retrospective serologic evaluation. However, to
prevent potential complications, treatment should be considered for
patients who present with suspected acute Q fever within 3 days of
onset of symptoms, because therapy started more than 3 days after the
onset of illness has little effect on the course of acute Q fever. Early
treatment is effective in shortening illness duration and severity. Doxycycline (100 mg orally 2 times/day for children 8 years or older or
4 mg/kg/day orally divided 2 times/day for children younger than 8
years, maximum: 200 mg/day, for 14 days) is the drug of choice. Doxycycline may cause permanent tooth discoloration for children younger
than 8 years if used repeatedly but is generally safe when used for short
courses. Children younger than 8 years with mild illness, pregnant
adolescents, and patients allergic to doxycycline can be treated with
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole.
For persistent focal Q fever, especially endocarditis and mostly in
adults, therapy for 18-­36 months is mandatory, because treatment
is more difficult and relapses can occur despite appropriate therapy.
The current recommended regimen for Q fever endocarditis is a
combination of doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine for 18 months
or longer. For patients with heart failure, valve replacement could
be necessary.

PREVENTION

Recognition of the disease in livestock or other domestic animals
should alert communities to the risk for human infection by aerosol
exposures within 15 km. Milk from infected herds must be pasteurized
at temperatures sufficient to destroy C. burnetii. C. burnetii is resistant
to significant environmental conditions but can be inactivated with
a solution of 1% Lysol, 1% formaldehyde, or 5% hydrogen peroxide.
Special isolation measures are not required because person-­to-­person
transmission is rare, except when others are exposed to the placenta
of an infected patient. A vaccine is available and provides protection
against Q fever for at least 5 years in abattoir workers; however, it is
not licensed in the United States. Prospective studies of vaccination
in children at high risk are needed. Clusters of cases resulting from
intense natural exposures, such as in slaughterhouses or on farms, are
well documented. Clusters of cases that occur in the absence of such
an exposure should be investigated as potential sentinel events for
bioterrorism.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 12

Fungal Infections
Chapter 279

Principles of Antifungal
Therapy
William J. Steinbach
Invasive fungal infections are a major cause of morbidity and mortality
in the growing number of immunocompromised children. The antifungal armamentarium has markedly increased in recent years (Tables
279.1 and 279.2).

POLYENES
Amphotericin B

The prototype of the oldest antifungal class, the polyene macrolides,
is amphotericin B deoxycholate. Amphotericin B was once the preferred treatment for most invasive fungal infections and the standard
of comparison for all newer antifungal agents. Amphotericin B is so
named because it is amphoteric, forming soluble salts in both acidic
and basic environments. However, because of its insolubility in water,
amphotericin B for clinical use is actually amphotericin B mixed with
the detergent deoxycholate. Amphotericin B binds to ergosterol, the
major sterol found in fungal cytoplasmic membranes, and acts by creating transmembrane channels. The fungicidal activity is the result of a
damaged barrier and subsequent cell death through leakage of essential
nutrients from the fungal cell.
Amphotericin B is released from its carrier and distributes efficiently
with lipoproteins and is then taken up preferentially by organs of the
reticuloendothelial system. After an initial 24-­to 48-­hour distributional
half-­life, there is very slow release and a subsequent terminal elimination half-­life of up to 15 days. In addition to conventional amphotericin
B deoxycholate, two fundamentally different lipid-­associated formulations are currently available that offer the advantage of an increased daily
dosage of the parent drug, better delivery to the primary reticuloendothelial organs (lungs, liver, spleen), and reduced toxicity. Amphotericin
B lipid complex (ABLC) is a tightly packed ribbon-­like structure of a
bilayered membrane, and liposomal amphotericin B (L-­amphotericin
B) consists of small uniformly sized vesicles of a lipid bilayer of amphotericin B. Lipid formulations of amphotericin B generally have a slower
onset of action, presumably owing to the required disassociation of free
amphotericin B from the lipid vehicle. The ability to safely administer
higher daily doses of the parent drugs improves their efficacy, comparing favorably with amphotericin B deoxycholate but with less toxicity.
Lipid formulations have the added benefit of increased tissue concentrations compared with conventional amphotericin B, specifically in
the liver, lungs, and spleen. Tolerance to amphotericin B deoxycholate
is limited by its acute and chronic toxicities. In addition to interacting with fungal ergosterol, the drug also interacts with cholesterol in
human cell membranes, likely accounting for its toxicity. Up to 80% of
patients receiving amphotericin B develop either infusion-­related toxicity or nephrotoxicity, especially with concomitant therapy with nephrotoxic drugs such as aminoglycosides, vancomycin, cyclosporine, or
tacrolimus. Renal function usually returns to normal after cessation of
amphotericin B, although permanent renal impairment can occur after
larger doses. Amphotericin B nephrotoxicity is generally less severe in
infants and children than in adults, likely because of the more rapid
clearance of the drug in children. Lipid formulations appear to stabilize

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 279 u Principles of Antifungal Therapy

1917

Table 279.1  Suggested Dosing of Antifungal Agents in Children and Neonates
SUGGESTED PEDIATRIC
DOSAGE

DRUG

FORMULATIONS

Amphotericin B deoxycholate

IV

1 mg/kg/day

Generally less toxicity in children than adults; do not
start with smaller test doses

Lipid amphotericin B
formulations

IV

5 mg/kg/day

Generally, all lipid formulations are dosed the same;
there is no clear indication of one formulation over
another for clinical efficacy

Fluconazole

IV, PO

12 mg/kg/day

Loading dose (25 mg/kg) is recommended in
neonates based on pharmacokinetic simulations
and likely suggested in children, but insufficiently
studied

Itraconazole

PO

2.5 mg/kg/dose bid

Divide dosage twice daily in children; follow trough
levels

Voriconazole

IV, PO

8 mg/kg/dose bid IV
maintenance; 9 mg/kg/dose bid
oral maintenance

Linear pharmacokinetics in children requires higher
dosing than in adults; 9 mg/kg/dose bid IV loading,
followed by maintenance dosing; follow trough
levels carefully

Posaconazole

IV, PO

At least 18 mg/kg/day divided
tid for oral suspension; IV and
new powder for oral suspension
6 mg/kg/day once daily (given
bid as a loading dose on first
day)

Dosage unclear in children at present
In adults, max dosage for oral suspension is 800 mg/
day, and optimally divide this into 2 or 3 doses;
follow trough levels; adult dosing for IV and
extended-­release tablet is 300 mg twice on first day,
then 300 mg once daily

Isavuconazole

PO, IV

10 mg/kg (q8h on days 1 and 2
and then once daily thereafter)

Adult dosing for IV and tablet is 200 mg 3 times on
first day, then 200 mg once daily

Micafungin

IV

2-­10 mg/kg/day

Highest dosages in neonates (10 mg/kg/day) and
lower dosages in children; >8 yr of age, use adult
dosage

Anidulafungin

IV

1.5 mg/kg/day

Loading dose of 3 mg/kg/day

Caspofungin

IV

50 mg/m2/day; neonates 25 mg/
m2/day

Load with 70 mg/m2/day, then 50mg/m2/day as
maintenance dosage

amphotericin B in a self-­associated state so that it is not available to
interact with the cholesterol of human cellular membranes.
A clinical trial comparing L-­amphotericin B at doses of 3 mg/kg/day
versus 10 mg/kg/day found no efficacy benefit for the higher dose and
only greater toxicity. Therefore it is generally not recommended to use
any lipid amphotericin B preparations at very high dosages (>5 mg/
kg/day), although some experts report using higher dosing in very difficult infections where a lipid amphotericin B formulation is the first-­
line therapy (e.g., mucormycosis).

PYRIMIDINE ANALOGS
5-­Fluorocytosine

5-­Fluorocytosine (5-­FC) is a fluorinated analog of cytosine and has antifungal activity resulting from the rapid conversion into 5-­fluorouracil
(5-­
FU) within susceptible fungal cells. Clinical and microbiologic
antifungal resistance develops quickly to 5-­FC monotherapy, so clinicians have reserved it for combination approaches. Fungistatic 5-­FC
is thought to enhance the antifungal activity of amphotericin B, especially in anatomic sites where amphotericin B penetration is often suboptimal, such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). 5-­FC penetrates well into
most body sites because it is small, highly water-­soluble, and not bound
by serum proteins to any great extent. One explanation for the synergy
detected with the combination of amphotericin B plus 5-­FC is that the
membrane-­permeabilizing effects of low concentrations of amphotericin B facilitate penetration of 5-­FC to the cell interior. 5-­FC is only
available as an oral formulation in the United States, and the dosage is
150 mg/kg/day in four divided doses.
5-­FC can exacerbate myelosuppression in patients with neutropenia,
and toxic levels can develop when used in combination with amphotericin B, owing to nephrotoxicity of the amphotericin B and decreased

COMMENTS

renal clearance of 5-­FC. Routine serum 5-­FC level monitoring is warranted in high-­risk patients, and levels should be obtained after 3-­5
days of therapy, with a goal to achieve a 2-­hour postdose peak <100
μg/mL (and ideally 30-­80 μg/mL). Levels >100 μg/mL are associated
with bone marrow aplasia. Toxicities can include azotemia, renal tubular acidosis, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and others and appear in
approximately 50% of patients in the first 2 weeks of therapy.
Nearly all clinical studies involving 5-­FC for cryptococcal meningitis
are combination antifungal protocols with amphotericin B. The use of
5-­FC for Candida meningitis in premature neonates is discouraged. A
study evaluating risk factors and mortality rates of neonatal candidiasis
among extremely premature infants showed that infants with Candida
meningitis who received amphotericin B in combination with 5-­FC
had a prolonged time to sterilization of the CSF compared with infants
receiving amphotericin B monotherapy.

AZOLES

The azole antifungals inhibit the fungal cytochrome P45014DM (also
known as lanosterol 14α-­demethylase), which catalyzes a late step
in fungal cell membrane ergosterol biosynthesis. Of the older first-­
generation, itraconazole has activity against Aspergillus, but fluconazole
is ineffective against Aspergillus and other molds. Second-­generation
triazoles (voriconazole, posaconazole, and isavuconazole) have an
expanded antifungal spectrum of activity, including activity against
molds, and generally greater in vitro antifungal activity.

Fluconazole

Fluconazole is fungistatic, and this activity is not influenced by concentration once the maximal fungistatic concentration is surpassed (concentration independent), in contrast to the concentration-­dependent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1918 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 279.2  Suggested Antifungals for Specific, More Common Fungal Pathogens
FUNGAL
SPECIES

AMP

FLU

ITR

VOR

POS

ISA

FLUC

CMA

Aspergillus
calidoustus

++

−

−

−

−

−

−

++

Aspergillus
fumigatus

+

−

±

++

+

++

−

+

Aspergillus terreus

−

−

+

++

+

++

−

+

Blastomyces
dermatitidis

++

+

++

+

+

+

−

−

Candida albicans

+

++

+

+

+

+

+

++

Candida glabrata

+

−

±

±

±

±

+

±

Candida krusei

+

−

−

+

+

+

+

++

Candida lusitaniae

−

++

+

+

+

+

+

+

Candida
parapsilosis

++

++

+

+

+

+

+

±

Coccidioides
immitis

++

+

++

+

++

+

−

−

Cryptococcus spp.

++

+

+

+

+

+

++

−

Fusarium spp.

±

−

−

++

+

+

−

−

Histoplasma
capsulatum

++

+

++

+

+

+

−

−

Mucor spp.

++

−

±

−

+

+

−

−

Scedosporium
apiospermum

−

−

±

+

+

+

−

±

Scedosporium
prolificans

−

−

±

±

±

±

−

±

AMP, amphotericin B formulations; FLU, fluconazole; ITR, itraconazole; VOR, voriconazole; POS, posaconazole; ISA, isavuconazole; FLUC, flucytosine; CMA, caspofungin, micafungin,
or anidulafungin.
++, preferred therapy(ies); +, usually active; ±, variably active; −, usually not active.

fungicidal activity of amphotericin B. Fluconazole is available as
either an oral or intravenous form, and oral administration has a
bioavailability of approximately 90% relative to intravenous administration. Fluconazole passes into tissues and fluids quite rapidly, probably because of its relatively low lipophilicity and limited degree of
binding to plasma proteins. Concentrations of fluconazole are 10-­to
20-­fold higher in the urine than in blood, making it an ideal agent for
treating fungal urinary tract infections. Concentrations in the CSF
and vitreous humor of the eye are approximately 80% of those found
simultaneously in blood.
Simple conversion of the corresponding adult dosage of fluconazole
on a weight basis is inappropriate for pediatric patients. Fluconazole
clearance is generally more rapid in children than in adults, with
a mean plasma half-­life of approximately 20 hours in children and
approximately 30 hours in adult patients. Therefore to achieve comparable exposure in pediatric patients, the daily fluconazole dosage needs
to be essentially doubled. Correct pediatric fluconazole dosages should
be proportionately higher than adult dosages, generally 12 mg/kg/day.
In neonates, the volume of distribution is significantly greater and more
variable than in infants and children, and doubling the dosage for neonatal patients is necessary to achieve comparable plasma concentrations. The increased volume of distribution is thought to be the result
of the larger amount of body water found in the total body volume
of neonates. A pharmacokinetic study in premature infants suggests
that maintenance fluconazole dosages of 12 mg/kg/day are necessary
to achieve exposures similar to those in older children and adults. In
addition, a loading dose of 25 mg/kg in neonates has achieved steady-­
state concentrations sooner. Although a fluconazole loading dose has

been studied in adult and neonatal patients, this approach has never
been formally studied in children, yet makes clinical sense. Side effects
of fluconazole are uncommon but generally include gastrointestinal
upset (vomiting, diarrhea, nausea) and skin rash.
Fluconazole plays an important role in the treatment of invasive candidiasis. Consensus guidelines suggest that use of the fungistatic fluconazole for invasive candidiasis is acceptable as step-­down therapy after
a good clinical response to initial therapy with an echinocandin. Other
clinical scenarios for fluconazole include patients who are not critically ill and who are considered unlikely to have a fluconazole-­resistant
Candida species. Although most isolates of Candida albicans remain
susceptible to fluconazole, for certain Candida species, fluconazole is
not an ideal agent: C. krusei is generally resistant, and C. glabrata is
often resistant. There is no confirmed role for combination antifungal therapy with fluconazole and another antifungal against invasive
candidiasis.
Prophylaxis with fluconazole to prevent neonatal candidiasis
remains a controversial topic. In the first prospective, randomized
double-­blind trial of 100 infants with birthweights <1,000 g, infants
who received fluconazole for 6 weeks had a decrease in fungal colonization and a decrease in the development of invasive fungal infection
(0% vs 20%) compared with placebo. Other studies have yielded similarly encouraging results and have demonstrated that use of fluconazole prophylaxis for 4-­6 weeks in high-­risk infants does not increase
the incidence of fungal colonization and infections caused by natively
fluconazole-­resistant Candida species. A more recent large trial studied
fluconazole prophylaxis in extremely low birthweight infants in nurseries with a lower incidence of candidiasis and found that fluconazole

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 279 u Principles of Antifungal Therapy
prophylaxis led to a decreased incidence of candidiasis but had no
effect on mortality. The universal implementation of such a strategy
across nurseries is discouraged, because the rate of Candida infections
varies greatly among centers. Consensus guidelines now recommend
fluconazole prophylaxis only in centers with high rates (>10%) of neonatal candidiasis.

Itraconazole

Compared to fluconazole, itraconazole has the benefit of antifungal
activity against Aspergillus species but comes with several practical
constraints, such as erratic oral absorption in high-­risk patients and
significant drug interactions. These pharmacokinetic concerns have
been addressed with a better-­absorbed oral solution to replace the
unpredictable capsules used earlier. Itraconazole has a high volume
of distribution and accumulates in tissues, and tissue-­bound levels are
probably more clinically relevant to infection treatment than serum
levels. Dissolution and absorption of itraconazole are affected by gastric pH. Patients with achlorhydria or taking H2-­receptor antagonists
might demonstrate impaired absorption, and co-­administration of
the capsule with acidic beverages such as colas or cranberry juice can
enhance absorption. Administration with food significantly increases
the absorption of the capsule formulation, but the oral suspension with
a cyclodextrin base is better absorbed on an empty stomach.
Side effects are relatively few and include nausea and vomiting
(10%), elevated transaminases (5%), and peripheral edema. There have
been reports in adults of development of cardiomyopathy. Because of
important drug interactions, prior or concurrent use of rifampin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital should be avoided.
Itraconazole has its largest role in treating less serious infections
with endemic mycoses (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and blastomycosis). The plethora of drug interactions make itraconazole a concern in complex patients receiving other medications. As with most
azole antifungals, monitoring itraconazole serum levels is a key principle in management (generally itraconazole trough levels should be
1-­2 μg/mL; trough levels >5 μg/mL may be associated with increased
toxicity). Concentrations should be checked after 5 days of therapy
to ensure adequate drug exposure. When measured by high-­pressure
liquid chromatography, both itraconazole and its bioactive hydroxy-­
itraconazole metabolite are reported, the sum of which should be considered in assessing drug levels.

Voriconazole

Voriconazole is a second-­generation triazole and a synthetic derivative
of fluconazole. Voriconazole generally has the spectrum of activity of
itraconazole and the high bioavailability of fluconazole. Importantly, it
is fungicidal against Aspergillus and fungistatic against Candida. It is
extensively metabolized by the liver and has approximately 90% oral
bioavailability in adults but appears to be closer to 50–60% bioavailability in children. The cytochrome P450 2C19 (CYP2C19) enzyme appears
to play a major role in the metabolism of voriconazole, and polymorphisms in CYP2C19 are associated with slow voriconazole metabolism.
As many as 20% of non-­Indian Asians have low CYP2C19 activity and
develop voriconazole levels as much as fourfold higher than those in
homozygous subjects, leading to potentially increased toxicity.
Voriconazole is available as an oral tablet, an oral suspension, and an
intravenous solution. In adults, voriconazole exhibits nonlinear pharmacokinetics, has a variable half-­life of approximately 6 hours with large
interpatient variation in blood levels, and achieves good CSF penetration. In contrast to the situation in adults, elimination of voriconazole
is linear in children. A multicenter safety, population pharmacokinetic
study of intravenous voriconazole dosages in immunocompromised
pediatric patients showed that body weight was more influential than
age in accounting for the observed variability in voriconazole pharmacokinetics, and voriconazole needs to be dosed higher in pediatric patients than in adult patients. Adult patients load with 6 mg/kg/
dose and then transition to a maintenance dosage of 4 mg/kg/dose,
but children should begin and continue with 9 mg/kg/dose intravenously (see Table 279.1) and continue maintenance dosing at 8 mg/kg/

1919

dose. This need for an increased dosage in treating children is crucial
to understand and is mandated by the fundamentally different pharmacokinetics of this drug in pediatric patients. Obtaining voriconazole
serum levels (to achieve ≥2 μg/mL) is critical for therapeutic success.
Oral voriconazole is best absorbed on an empty stomach. Generally a
trough level greater than the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
of the infecting organism is preferred, and very high voriconazole levels have been associated with toxicity (generally >6 μg/mL). However,
many studies have shown an inconsistent relationship between dosing
and levels, highlighting the need for close monitoring after the initial
dosing scheme and then dose adjustment as needed in the individual
patient. Trough levels should be monitored approximately 5 days after
initiation of therapy and repeated the following week to confirm the
patient remains in the therapeutic range or repeated 4 days after change
of dose. The main side effects of voriconazole include reversible dosage-­
dependent visual disturbances (increased brightness, blurred vision) in
as many as one third of treated patients, elevated hepatic transaminases
with increasing dosages, and occasional skin reactions likely caused by
photosensitization. In some rare long-­term (mean of 3 years of therapy)
cases, this voriconazole phototoxicity has developed into cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma. Discontinuing voriconazole is recommended
in patients experiencing chronic phototoxicity.
The largest prospective clinical trial of voriconazole as primary
therapy for invasive aspergillosis compared initial randomized therapy
with voriconazole versus amphotericin B and demonstrated improved
response and survival with voriconazole over amphotericin B. Voriconazole is guideline-­
recommended as the preferred primary
therapy against invasive aspergillosis. Voriconazole also has a role in
treating candidiasis, but its fungistatic nature makes it often less than
ideal for treating critically ill or neutropenic patients where the fungicidal echinocandin antifungals are preferred.

Posaconazole

Posaconazole is a second-­generation triazole that is a derivative of
itraconazole and is currently available as an oral suspension, an intravenous formulation, and a delayed-­release tablet. The antimicrobial
spectrum of posaconazole is similar to that of voriconazole; however,
the former is active against mucormycosis, and voriconazole is not
active against these particular mold infections.
Effective absorption of the less desirable oral suspension strongly
requires taking the medication with food, ideally a high-­fat meal; taking posaconazole on an empty stomach will result in approximately
one fourth of the absorption as in the fed state, emphasizing the importance of diet to increase serum levels of oral suspension posaconazole
(the opposite of voriconazole). Posaconazole exposure is maximized
with acidic beverages, administration in divided doses, and the absence
of proton pump inhibitors. The tablet formulation has much better
absorption because of its delayed release in the small intestine, but
absorption will still be slightly increased with food. If the patient can
take the large-­sized tablets, the delayed-­release tablet is the preferred
form because of the ability to easily obtain higher and more consistent
drug levels. Importantly, the delayed-­release tablet cannot be broken
for use due to its chemical coating. As a result of the low pH (<5) of IV
posaconazole, a central venous catheter is required for administration.
The IV formulation contains only slightly lower amounts of the cyclodextrin vehicle than voriconazole, so similar theoretical renal accumulation concerns exist. Posaconazole causes transient hepatic reactions,
including mild to moderate elevations in liver transaminases, alkaline
phosphatase, and total bilirubin.
In adult patients, dosages of the oral suspension at >800 mg/day do
not result in increased serum levels, and division of daily dosing into
three or four doses/day results in greater serum levels than a once-­or
twice-­daily dosing scheme when using the oral suspension. The pediatric oral suspension dose recommended by some experts for treating
invasive disease is estimated to be at least 18 mg/kg/day divided 3 times
daily, but even that dose did not achieve target levels when studied.
A study with a new pediatric formulation for suspension, essentially
the tablet form that is able to be suspended, showed a dose of 6 mg/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1920 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
kg (given twice a day as a loading dose on the first day and then once
daily) achieved target exposures necessary for antifungal prophylaxis,
with a safety profile similar to adult patients. A subsequent study suggested that posaconazole dosing for the delayed-­release tablets and IV
formulation requires greater daily doses for children <13 years old.
Pediatric dosing with the current IV or extended-­release tablet dosing
is not yet fully defined, but adolescents can likely follow the adult dosing schemes. Similar to itraconazole and voriconazole, posaconazole
should be monitored with trough levels (to achieve ≥1 μg/mL for treatment and ≥0.07 μg/mL for prophylaxis).
In an international randomized, single-­blinded study of posaconazole versus fluconazole or itraconazole in neutropenic patients
undergoing chemotherapy for acute myelogenous leukemia or myelodysplastic syndromes, posaconazole was superior in preventing invasive fungal infections. Another multisite international randomized,
double-­blinded study in patients with allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation and graft versus host disease showed that posaconazole was not inferior to fluconazole in the prevention of invasive
fungal infections. Posaconazole is approved for prophylaxis against
invasive fungal infections but has shown great efficacy in clinical
experience with recalcitrant mold infections.
In patients with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) and proven
invasive fungal infection refractory to standard therapy, posaconazole
was proved to be well tolerated and quite effective and is the preferred
agent against invasive aspergillosis in this patient population.

minimal, with no apparent myelotoxicity or nephrotoxicity with the
agents. The echinocandins are the preferred primary therapy for
invasive candidiasis.

Caspofungin

Isavuconazole is a triazole that was FDA approved in 2015 for treatment
of invasive aspergillosis and invasive mucormycosis with oral (capsules
only) and IV formulations. Isavuconazole has an antifungal spectrum
similar to that of voriconazole and some activity against Zygomycetes
such as mucormycosis (yet potentially not as potent against Zygomycetes as posaconazole). A phase 3 clinical trial in adult patients demonstrated noninferiority versus voriconazole against invasive aspergillosis
and other mold infections, whereas another study showed good clinical activity against mucormycosis. Isavuconazole is dispensed as the
prodrug isavuconazonium sulfate. Dosing in adult patients is loading
with isavuconazole 200 mg (equivalent to 372-­mg isavuconazonium
sulfate) every 8 hours for 2 days (6 doses), followed by 200 mg once
daily for maintenance dosing. The half-­life is long (>5 days), there is
98% bioavailability in adults, and there is no reported food effect with
oral isavuconazole. Unlike voriconazole, the IV formulation does not
contain the vehicle cyclodextrin, possibly making it more attractive in
patients with renal failure. Early experience suggests a much lower rate
of photosensitivity and skin disorders as well as visual disturbances
compared with voriconazole. A recently completed pediatric pharmacokinetic study reported that a dose of 10 mg/kg (q8h on days 1 and
2 and once daily thereafter) resulted in similar exposures and safety as
seen in adults.

Caspofungin is administered to adults as a 70-­mg loading dose followed by a daily maintenance 50-­mg dosage. Caspofungin has been
evaluated at double the recommended dosage (100 mg/day in adults)
with no adverse effects, and it is unclear if higher dosage of this relatively safe agent results in greater clinical efficacy. At present there is no
known maximum tolerated dosage and no toxicity-­determined maximum length of therapy for caspofungin.
Pharmacokinetics are slightly different in children, with caspofungin
levels lower in smaller children and with a reduced half-­life. A study
evaluated the pharmacokinetics of caspofungin in children with neutropenia and showed that in patients receiving 50 mg/m2/day (maximum, 70 mg/day), the levels were similar to those in adults receiving
50 mg/day and were consistent across age ranges. In this study, weight-­
based dosing (1 mg/kg/day) was suboptimal when compared with
body surface area regimens, so caspofungin should be appropriately
dosed in children as a loading dose of 70 mg/m2/day, followed by daily
maintenance dosing of 50 mg/m2/day.
Echinocandins like caspofungin are guideline-­recommended initial therapy for invasive candidiasis but should be used against invasive aspergillosis only in the setting of potential combination therapy
or for resistant or refractory disease. In a multicenter trial of patients
with invasive candidiasis, 73% of patients who received caspofungin had a favorable response at the end of therapy compared with
62% in the amphotericin B group. Importantly, caspofungin treatment performed equally well to amphotericin B treatment for all the
major Candida species. Earlier studies suggested that some infections with C. parapsilosis do not potentially clear as effectively with
an echinocandin, but the echinocandins are still preferred empiric
therapy against invasive candidiasis. Caspofungin was also evaluated
against L-­amphotericin B in the empirical treatment of patients with
persistent fever and neutropenia and was not inferior to liposomal
amphotericin B. A study in children with acute myeloid leukemia
demonstrated that caspofungin prophylaxis resulted in a significantly
lower incidence of invasive fungal disease compared with fluconazole
prophylaxis. A study comparing caspofungin with triazole prophylaxis in pediatric allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients found no difference in the agents.
Caspofungin in newborns (25 mg/m2/day) has been used for refractory cases of disseminated candidiasis. Neonates with invasive candidiasis are at high risk for central nervous system involvement; it is
not known if the dosages of caspofungin studied provide sufficient
exposure to penetrate the central nervous system at levels necessary to
cure infection. Therefore caspofungin is not recommended as standard
monotherapy in neonatal candidiasis.

ECHINOCANDINS

Micafungin

Isavuconazole

The echinocandins are a class of antifungals that interfere with cell wall
biosynthesis by noncompetitive inhibition of 1,3-­β-­d-­glucan synthase,
an enzyme present in fungi but absent in mammalian cells. 1,3-­β-­glucan
is an essential cell wall polysaccharide and provides structural integrity
for the fungal cell wall. Echinocandins are generally fungicidal in vitro
against Candida species, although not as rapidly as amphotericin B,
and are fungistatic against Aspergillus. As a class, these agents are not
metabolized through the CYP enzyme system, lessening some of the
drug interactions and side effects seen with the azole class. The echinocandins appear to have a prolonged and dosage-­dependent fungicidal
antifungal effect on C. albicans compared with the fungistatic fluconazole. Three compounds in this class (caspofungin, micafungin, and
anidulafungin) are FDA approved for use, but there are others (rezafungin) in late-­stage clinical trials. Owing to the large size of the molecules, the current echinocandins are only available in an intravenous
formulation. Because 1,3-­β-­glucan is a selective target present only in
fungal cell walls and not in mammalian cells, drug-­related toxicity is

The pharmacokinetics of micafungin have been evaluated in children
and young infants. An inverse relation between age and clearance was
observed, where mean systemic clearance was significantly greater
and mean half-­life was significantly shorter in patients 2-­8 years of age
compared to patients 9-­17 years of age. Therefore dosing of micafungin
in children is age-­related and needs to be higher in children <8 years
old. Doses in children are generally 2 mg/kg/day, with higher doses
needed for neonates, infants, and younger patients, and with a dose of
10 mg/kg/day for preterm neonates. Several pharmacokinetic studies
in term and preterm infants have shown that micafungin has a shorter
half-­life and a more rapid rate of clearance in infants compared with
published data in older children and adults. Adult micafungin dosing (100 or 150 mg once daily) is to be used in patients who weigh
more than 40 kg. Unlike the other echinocandins, a loading dose is not
required for micafungin.
Clinical trials, including those of micafungin used for treatment
of invasive candidiasis, as well as prophylaxis studies in patients after

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 280 u Candida 1921
stem cell transplantation, have demonstrated fewer adverse events
compared with liposomal amphotericin B and fluconazole. The most
common adverse events experienced by these patients are related
to the gastrointestinal tract (nausea, diarrhea). Hypersensitivity
reactions associated with micafungin have been reported, and liver
enzymes are elevated in 5% of patients receiving this agent. Hyperbilirubinemia, renal impairment, and hemolytic anemia related to
micafungin use have also been identified in postmarketing surveillance of the drug.
Micafungin at dosages of 100 and 150 mg daily was also noninferior
to caspofungin in an international, randomized, double-­blinded study
of adults with candidemia or invasive candidiasis and was found to be
superior to fluconazole in the prevention of invasive fungal infections
in a randomized study of adults undergoing hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.
Of the three drugs within the echinocandin class, micafungin has
been the one most extensively studied in children. A pediatric substudy as part of a double-­blind, randomized, multinational trial comparing micafungin (2 mg/kg/day) with liposomal amphotericin B (3
mg/kg/day) as first-­line treatment for invasive candidiasis showed
similar success for micafungin and liposomal amphotericin B. In general, micafungin was better tolerated than liposomal amphotericin B,
as evidenced by fewer adverse events leading to discontinuation of
therapy.

Anidulafungin

Anidulafungin has the longest half-­
life of all the echinocandins
(approximately 18 hours). In a study of 25 neutropenic children receiving anidulafungin as empirical therapy, four patients in the group
receiving 0.75 mg/kg/day experienced adverse events such as facial
erythema and rash, elevation in serum blood urea nitrogen, and fever
and hypotension. In a pharmacokinetic study in neonates and young
infants, anidulafungin exposures comparable to adults were achieved
with doses of 1.5 mg/kg/day (3 mg/kg loading dose). One infant in this
cohort supported by extracorporeal membrane oxygenation achieved
the lowest exposure, which suggests that dose adjustments are required
in this population. The adult dose for invasive candidiasis is a loading
dose of 200 mg on the first day, followed by 100 mg daily. An open-­
label study of invasive candidiasis in children showed similar efficacy
and minimal toxicity, comparable to the other echinocandins. An
additional study showed similar and acceptable pharmacokinetics in
patients 1 month to 2 years of age.

Ibrexafungerp

Ibrexafungerp was approved in 2021 for adults with vulvovaginal
candidiasis after two phase 3 studies (VANISH203 and VANISH 306).
This is the first new class of antifungals (also called “fungerps”). Similar to the echinocandins, ibrexafungerp noncompetitively inhibits β-­
1,3-­glucan synthase and is also fungicidal against Candida spp. and
Aspergillus spp. The binding site on the glucan synthase enzyme is not
the same as the echinocandins. Resistance or reduced susceptibility
to the echinocandins is largely through two hot-­spot pathogenic variants in the FKS1 gene, whereas many resistance mutations to ibrexafungerp are caused by the FKS2 gene, and ibrexafungerp does have
activity against some echinocandin-­resistant isolates. Ibrexafungerp
is the first orally available glucan synthase inhibitor and has a long
half-­life, suggesting once-­daily dosing for clinical use. Similar to the
echinocandins, initial studies show limited to no distribution to the
central nervous system and variable distribution to the eye. In a phase
2 study, ibrexafungerp as step-­down therapy after initial echinocandin therapy for invasive candidiasis was well-­tolerated and achieved
a favorable global response similar to the standard of care. There is
an ongoing co-­administration study with voriconazole in pulmonary
invasive aspergillosis (SCYNERGIA) and an ongoing recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis study (CANDLE), yet no completed pediatric
studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 280

Candida
Jessica E. Ericson and Daniel K. Benjamin Jr.
Candidiasis encompasses many clinical syndromes that may be caused
by several species of Candida. Invasive candidiasis (Candida infections
of the blood and other sterile body fluids) is a leading cause of infection-­
related mortality in hospitalized immunocompromised patients.
C. albicans accounts for most human infections, but C. parapsilosis, C. tropicalis, C. krusei, C. lusitaniae, C. glabrata, and several other
species are commonly isolated from hospitalized children. Species
identification and susceptibility testing are important owing to increasing frequency of fluconazole resistance and increasing prevalence of
non-­albicans Candida species. C. auris is an emerging multiresistant
invasive pathogen that has a global presence and affects immunocompromised patients; nosocomial spread has been reported.
Treatment of invasive Candida infections is complicated by the
emergence of non-­albicans strains. Amphotericin B deoxycholate is
inactive against approximately 20% of strains of C. lusitaniae. Fluconazole is useful for many Candida infections but is inactive against all
strains of C. krusei and 5–25% of strains of C. glabrata. Most Candida
are susceptible to echinocandins, but resistance is occasionally seen,
most often among C. krusei and C. glabrata. Susceptibility testing of
these clinical isolates is recommended.

280.1 Neonatal Infections
Jessica E. Ericson and Daniel K. Benjamin Jr.
Candida is a common cause of oral mucous membrane infections
(thrush) and perineal skin infections (Candida diaper dermatitis)
in young infants. Rare presentations include congenital cutaneous
candidiasis, caused by an ascending infection into the uterus during
gestation, and invasive fungal dermatitis, a postnatal skin infection
resulting in positive blood cultures. Invasive candidiasis is a common
infectious complication in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
because of improved survival of extremely preterm infants.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Candida species are a common cause of bloodstream infection in
premature infants. The incidence varies greatly by individual NICU.
Among centers in the National Institutes of Health–sponsored Neonatal Research Network, the cumulative incidence of candidiasis among
infants <1,000 g birthweight ranges from 2% to 28%. Colonization is
associated with a significantly increased risk of future invasive Candida
infection. Up to 10% of full-­term infants are colonized as the result
of vertical transmission from the mother at birth, with slightly higher
rates of colonization in premature infants. Colonization rates increase
to >50% among infants admitted to the NICU by 1 month of age.
Histamine-­2 blockers, corticosteroids, and broad-­spectrum antibiotics
facilitate Candida colonization and overgrowth.
Significant risk factors for neonatal invasive candidiasis include
prematurity, low birthweight, exposure to broad-­spectrum antibiotics,
abdominal surgery, endotracheal intubation, and presence of a central
venous catheter.

PATHOGENESIS

Immunologic immaturity along with an underdeveloped layer of
skin, need for invasive measures (endotracheal tubes, central venous
catheters), and exposure to broad-­spectrum antibiotics places preterm infants at great risk for invasive candidiasis. Premature infants
are also at high risk for spontaneous intestinal perforations and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1922 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
necrotizing enterocolitis. Both conditions require abdominal surgery, prolonged exposure to broad-­spectrum antibiotics, and total
parenteral nutrition administration requiring placement of central
venous catheters. Each of these factors increases the risk of invasive
candidiasis by decreasing the physiologic barriers that protect against
invasive infection.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The manifestations of neonatal candidiasis vary in severity from oral
thrush and Candida diaper dermatitis (see Chapter 280.2) to invasive
candidiasis that can manifest with overwhelming sepsis (see Chapter 280.3). Signs of invasive candidiasis among premature infants
are often nonspecific and include temperature instability, lethargy,
apnea, hypotension, respiratory distress, abdominal distention, and
thrombocytopenia.
Central nervous system involvement is common and is most accurately described as meningoencephalitis. Candida infections involving the central nervous system often result in abscesses, leading to
unremarkable cerebrospinal fluid parameters (white blood cell count,
glucose, protein) even though central nervous system infection is
present. Endophthalmitis is an uncommon complication affecting
<5% of infants with invasive candidiasis, but candidemia is associated with an increased risk of severe retinopathy of prematurity.
Renal involvement commonly complicates neonatal invasive candidiasis. Renal involvement may be limited to candiduria or can manifest
with diffuse infiltration of Candida throughout the renal parenchyma
or the presence of Candida and debris within the collecting system.
Because of the poor sensitivity of blood cultures for Candida, candiduria should be considered a surrogate marker of candidemia in
premature infants. Other affected organs include the heart, bones,
joints, liver, and spleen.

DIAGNOSIS

Mucocutaneous infections are most often diagnosed by direct clinical exam. Scrapings of skin lesions may be examined with a microscope after Gram staining or suspension in KOH. Definitive diagnosis
of invasive disease requires histologic demonstration of the fungus
in tissue specimens or recovery of the fungus from normally sterile
body fluids. Hematologic parameters are sensitive but not specific.
Thrombocytopenia occurs in more than 80% of premature infants with
invasive candidiasis, but also occurs in 75% of premature infants with
gram-­negative bacterial sepsis and nearly 50% of infants with gram-­
positive bacterial sepsis. Blood cultures have very low sensitivity for
invasive candidiasis. In a study of autopsy-­proven candidiasis in adult
patients, the sensitivity of multiple blood cultures for detecting single-­
organ disease was 28%. Blood culture volumes in infants are often only
0.5-­1 mL, making the sensitivity in this population almost certainly
lower. Blood culture volume should be maximized as much as possible
to increase sensitivity.
Further assessment of infants in the presence of documented candidemia should include ultrasound or computerized tomography
of the head to evaluate for abscesses; ultrasound of the liver, kidney,
and spleen; cardiac echocardiography; ophthalmologic exam; lumbar
puncture; and urine culture. These tests are necessary to determine if
more than one body system is infected, which is commonly the case.

PROPHYLAXIS

NICUs with a high incidence of invasive candidiasis should consider
prophylaxis with fluconazole in infants <1,000 g birthweight as a cost-­
effective method of reducing invasive candidiasis. Twice-­weekly fluconazole at 3 or 6 mg/kg/dose decreases rates of both colonization with
Candida species and invasive fungal infections. Use of this dosing strategy has not been shown to increase the frequency of infections caused
by fluconazole-­resistant strains, but use of an alternative antifungal
class for cases of breakthrough infection is suggested.

TREATMENT

In the absence of systemic manifestations, topical antifungal therapy
is the treatment of choice for congenital cutaneous candidiasis in

full-­term infants. Congenital cutaneous candidiasis in preterm infants
can progress to systemic disease, and therefore systemic therapy is warranted in these patients.
Every attempt should be made to remove or replace central venous
catheters once the diagnosis of candidemia is confirmed. Delayed
removal has been consistently associated with increased mortality and
morbidity, including poor neurodevelopmental outcomes.
Although no well-­powered randomized controlled trials exist to
guide the length and type of therapy, 21 days of systemic antifungal
therapy from the last positive Candida culture is recommended in
infants. Antifungal therapy should be targeted based on susceptibility testing. Amphotericin B deoxycholate has been the mainstay of
therapy for systemic candidiasis and is active against both yeast and
mycelial forms. Nephrotoxicity, hypokalemia, and hypomagnesemia
are common, but amphotericin B deoxycholate is better tolerated in
infants than in adult patients. C. lusitaniae, an uncommon pathogen in
infants, is often resistant to amphotericin B deoxycholate. Liposomal
amphotericin is associated with worse outcomes in infants and should
be used only when urinary tract involvement can reliably be excluded.
Fluconazole is often used instead of amphotericin B deoxycholate for
treatment of invasive neonatal Candida infections because of its effectiveness and low incidence of side effects. It is particularly useful for
urinary tract infections, obtaining high concentrations in the urine.
A loading dose should be given to obtain therapeutic serum concentrations in a timely manner. Fluconazole is inactive against all strains
of C. krusei and some isolates of C. glabrata. Additionally, in centers
where fluconazole prophylaxis is used, another agent, such as amphotericin B deoxycholate, should be used for treatment. The echinocandins have excellent activity against most Candida species and have
been used successfully in patients with resistant organisms or in whom
other therapies have failed. Two trials comparing an echinocandin
with amphotericin B deoxycholate were stopped early because of low
recruitment but found similar efficacy for the two treatments among
the included patients. Several studies have described the pharmacokinetics of antifungals in infants (Table 280.1).

PROGNOSIS

Mortality after invasive candidiasis in premature infants has been consistently reported to be around 20% in large studies but can be as high
as 50% in infants <1,500 g birthweight. Candidiasis is also associated
with poor neurodevelopmental outcomes, chronic lung disease, and
severe retinopathy of prematurity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

280.2 Infections in Immunocompetent
Children and Adolescents
Jessica E. Ericson and Daniel K. Benjamin Jr.

ORAL CANDIDIASIS

Oral thrush is a superficial mucous membrane infection that affects
approximately 2–5% of normal neonates. C. albicans is the most commonly isolated species. Oral thrush can develop as early as 7-­10 days
of age. The use of antibiotics, especially in the first year of life, can lead
to recurrent or persistent thrush. It is characterized by pearly white,
curdish material visible on the tongue, palate, and buccal mucosa.
Oral thrush may be asymptomatic or can cause pain, fussiness, and
decreased feeding, leading to inadequate nutritional intake and dehydration. It is uncommon after 1 year of age but can occur in older
children treated with antibiotics. Persistent or recurrent thrush with
no obvious predisposing reason, such as recent antibiotic treatment,
warrants investigation of an underlying immunodeficiency, especially
vertically transmitted HIV infection or a primary congenital immune
defect.
Treatment of mild cases might not be necessary. When treatment is
warranted, the most commonly prescribed antifungal agent is topical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 280 u Candida 1923
Table 280.1  Dosing of Antifungal Agents Studied in Infants* with Reported Pharmacokinetic (PK) Parameters
DRUG

PK STUDIED IN INFANTS

SUGGESTED DOSE

Amphotericin B deoxycholate

Yes (multiple)

1 mg/kg/day

Amphotericin B lipid complex

Yes (single)

5 mg/kg/day

Liposomal amphotericin B

Yes (single)

5 mg/kg/day

Amphotericin B colloidal dispersion

No

5 mg/kg/day

Fluconazole†

Yes (best studied with ∼250 infant contributing PK samples)

12 mg/kg/day

Voriconazole

No – drug concentrations reported for a single infant with
neonatal candidiasis

Posaconazole

No – drug concentrations reported for a single infant with
cutaneous rhizopus infection

Micafungin‡

Yes (multiple)

10 mg/kg/day

Caspofungin§

Yes (single)

50 mg/m2/day

Anidulafungin‡

Yes (single)

1.5 mg/kg/day

*Voriconazole and posaconazole dosing have not been investigated in the nursery. Doses are those suggested by experts.
†A loading dose of 25 mg/kg of fluconazole is necessary to achieve therapeutic serum and cerebrospinal fluid concentrations in the early days of therapy.
‡Micafungin has been studied in infants <120 days of life at this dosage.
§Caspofungin and anidulafungin should generally be avoided because dosing sufficient to penetrate brain tissue has not been studied.

nystatin. For recalcitrant or recurrent infections, a single dose of fluconazole may be useful. In breastfed infants, simultaneous treatment
of infant and mother with topical nystatin or oral fluconazole may be
indicated.

DIAPER DERMATITIS

Diaper dermatitis is the most common infection caused by Candida
(see Chapter 707) and is characterized by a confluent erythematous
rash with satellite pustules. Candida diaper dermatitis often complicates other noninfectious diaper dermatitides and often occurs after a
course of oral antibiotics.
A common practice is to presumptively treat any diaper rash
that has been present for longer than 3 days with topical antifungal therapy such as nystatin, clotrimazole, or miconazole. If significant inflammation is present, the addition of hydrocortisone
1% may be useful for the first 1-­2 days, but topical corticosteroids
should be used cautiously in infants because the relatively potent
topical corticosteroid can lead to adverse effects. Frequent diaper
changes and short periods without diapers are important adjunctive treatments.

UNGUAL AND PERIUNGUAL INFECTIONS

Paronychia and onychomycosis may be caused by Candida, although
Trichophyton and Epidermophyton are more common causes. Candida onychomycosis differs from tinea infections by its propensity to
involve the fingernails and not the toenails and by the associated paronychia. Candida paronychia often responds to treatment consisting
of keeping the hands dry and using a topical antifungal agent. Psoriasis and immune dysfunction, including HIV and primary immunodeficiencies, predispose to Candida ungual infections. Ungual
infections often require systemic antifungal therapy. Once-­weekly
fluconazole for 4-­12 months is an effective treatment strategy with
fairly low toxicity.

VULVOVAGINITIS

Vulvovaginitis is a common Candida infection of pubertal and postpubertal female patients. Predisposing factors include pregnancy, use
of oral contraceptives, and use of oral antibiotics. Prepubertal children
with Candida vulvovaginitis usually have a predisposing factor such as

diabetes mellitus or prolonged antibiotic treatment. Clinical manifestations can include pain or itching, dysuria, vulvar or vaginal erythema,
and an opaque white or cheesy exudate. More than 80% of cases are
caused by C. albicans.
Candida vulvovaginitis can be effectively treated with either vaginal creams or troches of nystatin, clotrimazole, or miconazole. Oral
therapy with a single dose of fluconazole is also effective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

280.3 Infections in Immunocompromised
Children and Adolescents
Jessica E. Ericson and Daniel K. Benjamin Jr.

ETIOLOGY

Candida albicans is the most common cause of invasive candidiasis
among immunocompromised pediatric patients and is associated with
higher rates of mortality and end-­organ involvement than are non-­
albicans species.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
HIV-­Infected Children

Oral thrush and diaper dermatitis are the most common Candida infections in HIV-­infected children. Besides oral thrush, three other types of
oral Candida infections can occur in HIV-­infected children: atrophic
candidiasis, which manifests as a fiery erythema of the mucosa or loss
of papillae of the tongue; chronic hyperplastic candidiasis, which presents with oral symmetric white plaques; and angular cheilitis, in which
there is erythema and fissuring of the angles of the mouth. Topical antifungal therapy may be effective, but systemic treatment with fluconazole or itraconazole is usually necessary. Symptoms of dysphagia
or poor oral intake can indicate progression to Candida esophagitis,
requiring systemic antifungal therapy. In HIV patients, esophagitis
can also be caused by cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, reflux, or
lymphoma; Candida is the most common cause, and Candida esophagitis can occur in the absence of thrush.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1924 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Candida dermatitis and onychomycosis are more common in HIV-­
infected children. These infections are generally more severe than they
are in immunocompetent children and can require systemic antifungal
therapy.

Table 280.2  Dosing of Antifungal Agents in Children
Older Than 1 Year of Age for Treatment of
Invasive Disease

Cancer and Transplant Patients

DRUG

Fungal infections, especially Candida and Aspergillus infections,
are a significant problem in oncology patients with chemotherapy-­
associated neutropenia (see Chapter 223). Greater than 5 days of
fever during a neutropenic episode is associated with presence of
an invasive fungal infection. Accordingly, empirical antifungal
therapy should be started if fever and neutropenia persist for 5
or more days. An echinocandin should be used until sensitivity
testing results are available. High-­risk oncology patients warrant
prophylaxis against invasive Candida infection. Both fluconazole
and echinocandins are used for this indication, typically at lower
doses than those used for treatment. If an echinocandin is used for
prophylaxis, liposomal amphotericin B should be used if empirical
treatment becomes warranted.
Bone marrow transplant recipients have a much higher risk of
fungal infections because of the dramatically prolonged duration
of neutropenia. Voriconazole prophylaxis decreases the incidence
of candidemia in bone marrow transplant recipients with the additional benefit over fluconazole of mold prophylaxis. The use of
granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor reduces the duration of neutropenia after chemotherapy and is associated with decreased risk
for candidemia. When Candida infection occurs in this population,
the lung, spleen, kidney, and liver are involved in more than 50%
of cases.
Solid organ transplant recipients are also at increased risk for
superficial and invasive Candida infections. Studies in liver transplant recipients demonstrate the utility of antifungal prophylaxis with
amphotericin B deoxycholate, fluconazole, voriconazole, or caspofungin in high-­risk patients (those with prolonged surgical time, comorbidities, recent antibiotic exposure, or bile leak).

Catheter-­Associated Infections

Central venous catheter infections occur most often in oncology
patients but can affect any patient with a central catheter. Neutropenia, use of broad-­spectrum antibiotics, and parenteral alimentation
are associated with increased risk for Candida central catheter infection. Treatment typically requires removing or replacing the catheter
followed by a 2-­to 3-­week course of systemic antifungal therapy.
Removal of the central catheter in place at the time of a positive
blood culture and use of a peripheral IV or enteral support for
at least 48 hours before obtaining central access is advocated.
Removal of the original catheter followed by immediate replacement with a new central catheter in a different anatomic location is
acceptable if an interval without central access is not feasible. Delays
in catheter removal are associated with increased risks of metastatic
complications and death.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is often presumptive in neutropenic patients with prolonged fever because positive blood cultures for Candida occur only
in a minority of patients who are later found to have disseminated
infection. If isolated, Candida grows readily on routine blood culture media, with ≥90% of positive cultures identified within 72 hours.
CT scan may demonstrate findings consistent with invasive fungal
infection but also is limited by nonspecific findings and false negatives. The role of screening by CT scan has not been well defined. In
high-­risk patients, serial serum assays for (1,3)-­β-­d-­glucan, a polysaccharide component of the fungal cell wall, may contribute to the
diagnosis of invasive Candida infection. However, this test is not

SUGGESTED
DOSE

Amphotericin B deoxycholate

1 mg/kg/day

Amphotericin B lipid complex

5 mg/kg/day

Liposomal amphotericin B

5 mg/kg/day

Amphotericin B colloidal dispersion

5 mg/kg/day

Fluconazole†

12 mg/kg/day

Voriconazole*,‡

8 mg/kg every 12 hr

Micafungin

2-­4 mg/kg/day

Caspofungin

50 mg/m2/day

Anidulafungin

1.5 mg/kg/day

*Use adult dosages in children older than 12 yr of age for voriconazole and older than
8 yr of age for micafungin.
†Loading doses should be used for fluconazole (25 mg/kg), voriconazole (9 mg/kg q 12
× 24 hr), caspofungin (70 mg/m2), and anidulafungin (3 mg/kg).
‡Dosing should be adjusted based on the results of therapeutic drug monitoring.

sensitive or specific enough to be used without a careful assessment
of the limitations of the assay.

TREATMENT

Echinocandins are favored as empirical therapy for moderately or
severely ill children and for those with neutropenia; fluconazole
is acceptable for those who are infected with a susceptible organism
and are less critically ill; amphotericin B products are also acceptable.
Definitive antifungal selection should be made based on susceptibility testing results. Fluconazole is not effective against C. krusei and
some isolates of C. glabrata. C. parapsilosis has occasional resistance
to the echinocandins, but the overall rate is still low. Amphotericin B
deoxycholate is inactive against approximately 20% of the strains of C.
lusitaniae, and therefore susceptibility testing should be performed for
all strains (Table 280.2). C. auris, a species first identified in 2009 that
has caused nosocomial infections worldwide, is resistant to most antifungals. An echinocandin should be used until sensitivity results are
available.

PRIMARY IMMUNE DEFECTS

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis involves Candida infections of
the oral cavity, esophagus, and/or genital mucosa, as well as involvement of skin and nails, that is recurrent or persistent and difficult to
treat. There is a broad spectrum of genetic immune defects associated
with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis mostly related to severe T-­cell
defects or disorders of interleukin-­17 production. Genes or disorders
associated with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis include severe
combined immunodeficiency syndrome, NEMO or IKBG deficiency,
DOCK8 deficiency, STAT3 deficiency (autosomal dominant hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome), autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1,
CARD9 deficiency, STAT1 gain-­of-­function mutations, and IL17RA
mutations.
Primary immunodeficiencies associated with an increased risk of
invasive Candida infections include severe congenital neutropenia,
CARD9 deficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, and leukocyte
adhesion deficiency type 1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 281 u Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gattii 1925

Chapter 281

Cryptococcus neoformans
and Cryptococcus gattii
David L. Goldman
ETIOLOGY

More than 30 cryptococcal species have been described; however, 2
species (Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gattii) cause the
vast majority of disease in children and adults. Both C. neoformans
and C. gattii are encapsulated, facultative intracellular yeasts that are
recognized for their tendency to cause central nervous system (CNS)
infection, especially in immunocompromised patients. Although there
is significant overlap in the disease caused by these pathogens, there are
key differences in epidemiology and clinical presentation, which will
be reviewed here. Cryptococcal disease may rarely be caused by other
species (e.g., C. laurentii and C. albidus), especially in immunocompromised individuals (including neonates). These latter species will not be
covered in this chapter.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Cryptococcosis is primarily acquired from exposure to contaminated
environments. C. neoformans is distributed in temperate climates predominantly in soil contaminated with droppings from certain avian
species, including pigeons, canaries, and cockatoos. It may also be
found on rotting wood, fruits, and vegetables and may be carried by
cockroaches. Transmission from pet birds to their owners and via solid
organ transplantation of infected organs are uncommon, but have also
been described.
Disease secondary to C. neoformans occurs primarily in immunocompromised individuals and especially in those with defects in cellular immunity, though apparently normal individuals can also be
affected. A large increase in the incidence of cryptococcosis was noted
in association with the AIDS epidemic, with disease generally occurring with severe immunosuppression (CD4+ T cells <100/μL). However, since the development of effective antiretroviral therapies (ART),
the incidence of AIDS-­associated cryptococcosis has decreased dramatically, except in resource-­limited areas of the world such as sub-­
Saharan Africa, where ART is not readily available.
Other risk factors for cryptococcal infection include immunosuppression associated with organ transplantation, diabetes mellitus,
renal failure, cirrhosis, corticosteroids, rheumatologic conditions,
chemotherapeutics, and immune-­modulating monoclonal antibodies (e.g., etanercept, infliximab, and alemtuzumab). In patients who
have undergone organ transplantation, cryptococcosis is the third
most common fungal infection after candidiasis and aspergillosis.
Children with certain primary immunodeficiency diseases may also
be at increased risk for cryptococcosis, including those with hyper-­
IgM syndrome, severe combined immunodeficiency, idiopathic
CD4+ lymphopenia, autoantibodies to granulocyte-­
macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor or interferon-­γ, CD40 ligand deficiency,
and monoMAC syndrome (monocytopenia, B and natural killer cell
lymphopenia).
C. gattii was initially recognized for its tendency to cause disease
in tropical regions, especially among the native peoples of Australasia, where the organism can be found in association with eucalyptus
trees. In these regions, affected individuals are typically immunocompetent. C. gattii disease has also been observed outside these
tropical regions. An outbreak of C. gattii disease involving British
Columbia and extending into the Pacific Northwest region of the

United States was first recognized in 1999. Affected individuals were
typically adults, with disease occurring in both immunocompetent
and immunocompromised individuals. However, comorbid conditions were often present, including chronic lung and heart disease. A
disproportionate fraction of patients (relative to those infected with
C. neoformans) presented with pulmonary disease. An incubation
period ranging from 2 to 12 months is typical. Thus in the appropriate clinical context, cryptococcosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of residents of the Pacific Northwest and returning
travelers.
Overall, cryptococcosis (both caused by C. neoformans and C. gattii) is significantly less common in children than in adults. The basis
for this discrepancy is poorly understood but could be related to differences in exposure or immune response. Serologic studies suggest
that subclinical infection is common among children living in urban
areas after age 2 years. Reactivation of latent infection is thought to
be an important mechanism of cryptococcal pathogenesis. It is reasonable to postulate that children do not have enough exposures to
establish latent infection. During the early AIDS epidemic, the incidence of cryptococcosis in the United States was reported to be on
the order of 10% in adults and 1% in children. The largest series of
pediatric cryptococcosis comes from South Africa and describes 361
cases, accounting for 2% of the cryptococcosis cases over a 2-­year
period.

PATHOGENESIS

Like many fungi, C. neoformans and C. gattii survive as saprophytes
in the environment. Their virulence characteristics appear to have
evolved as an adaptive response to environmental stressors and
predators, such as amoeba. Several key factors have been identified,
including the ability to grow at 37°C, encapsulation, and melanin production. These same traits allow the organisms to successfully replicate within the host cell. The polysaccharide capsule, which is readily
recognized by India ink staining of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), is an
essential virulence factor. Disease secondary to acapsular strains is
exceedingly rare. The capsular material exhibits a variety of biologic
activities that are important in the pathogenesis of disease, including interference with opsonization, inhibition of chemotaxis, and
enhancement of nonprotective type 2 helper T cells (TH2) inflammation. Capsular material is shed by the organism into body tissues
and fluids during infection and has been implicated in the development of increased intracranial pressure (ICP), a hallmark of cryptococcal meningoencephalitis. Detection of shed capsular antigen in
the serum and CSF is key to the diagnosis of cryptococcal disease.
The organism also has the ability to undergo phenotypic variation in
response to environmental changes through a variety of mechanisms
and can form large giant cells (on the order 20 times its normal size),
which are resistant to phagocytosis. Other recognized virulence factors include a secreted urease, which may promote intraphagolysosomal survival.
In most cases, infection is believed to be acquired by inhalation of
desiccated forms of the organism, which upon deposition within the
lungs are engulfed by alveolar macrophages. An additional portal of
entry is the transplantation of infected organs. Furthermore, direct
inoculation can lead to cutaneous or ophthalmic infection. After entry
into the respiratory tract, infection can be latent and later progress (i.e.,
reactivate) in the context of immunodeficiency, in a manner similar
to tuberculosis. Alternatively, infection can immediately progress and
disseminate to produce symptomatic disease. Cell-­mediated immunity that leads to macrophage activation is the most important host
defense and is associated with granulomatous inflammation, which
effectively contains infection. The precise mechanism of entry of this
yeast into the CNS is not known, though several mechanisms have
been hypothesized, including transit via infected macrophages (Trojan
horse model), direct uptake by endothelial cells, and entry between the
tight junctions of endothelial cells.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1926 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The manifestations of cryptococcal infection reflect the route of inoculation, the infecting strain, and the immune status of the host. Sites of
infection include the lung, CNS, blood, skin, bone, eyes, and lymph
nodes.

Meningitis/Meningoencephalitis

CNS disease is the most commonly recognized manifestation of cryptococcosis. The disease is characteristically subacute or chronic (evolving over weeks to months). Although the term meningitis is commonly
used to describe CNS involvement, some degree of encephalitis is
also typically present, with occasional patients developing intracerebral masses, known as cryptococcomas. Importantly, meningeal signs
and fever (typical of other forms of meningitis) may be lacking. In a
review of pediatric cryptococcosis from Colombia, the most common
symptoms were headache (78%), fever (69%), nausea and vomiting
(66%), confusion (50%), and meningismus (38%). Other symptoms
include decreased level of consciousness, changes in personality, ataxia,
hearing deficits, and visual deficits. Increased intracranial pressure is
thought to occur as a result of impaired absorption of CSF and has
been reported to occur in more than 50% of adults with cryptococcal
meningitis.
Despite antifungal therapy, the mortality rate for cryptococcosis remains high, ranging from 15–40%. Most deaths occur within
several weeks of diagnosis. Factors associated with a poor prognosis reflect a high fungal burden and poor host response, including
altered mentation, high CSF fungal burden, low CSF white blood cell
(WBC) number (<10 cells/mm3), and failure to rapidly sterilize the
CSF. Increased ICP is a key factor in the morbidity and mortality of
cryptococcal meningitis and is especially problematic for patients
with C. gattii disease. Appropriate management of increased ICP
is therefore essential to the appropriate management of cryptococcal meningitis (see later). Postinfectious sequelae are common and
include hydrocephalus, decreased visual acuity, deafness, cranial
nerve palsies, seizures, and ataxia.

Pneumonia

Cryptococcosis is acquired via inhalation, and pneumonia is the
most commonly recognized form of disease after meningitis. As
with meningitis, pneumonia occurs in both immunocompetent and
immunocompromised individuals. Pulmonary disease can present
in isolation or in the context of disseminated disease/meningitis,
which is typical among immunocompromised individuals. Among
adults with AIDS-­associated cryptococcal pneumonia, over 90%
had concomitant CNS infection. Thus clinicians should have a
high suspicion for cryptococcal meningitis/disseminated disease in
patients with cryptococcal pneumonia, especially among immunocompromised individuals, and should pursue a workup to exclude
dissemination.
Cryptococcal pneumonia is often asymptomatic and may be
detected because of radiographs performed for other reasons. In this
regard, asymptomatic pulmonary nodules secondary to C. neoformans can be found in children with sarcomas, who are being evaluated for metastatic disease. Among symptomatic patients, a wide
array of symptoms has been reported, including fever, cough, pleuritic chest pain, and constitutional symptoms like weight loss. Severe
disease may result in respiratory failure. Chest radiographic findings
are variable and may demonstrate a poorly localized bronchopneumonia, nodules, masses, or lobar consolidations. Pulmonary cavities
and pleural effusions are rare. Immunocompromised patients with
disseminated disease can have alveolar and interstitial infiltrates that
mimic the pattern of disease seen in some patients with Pneumocystis
pneumonia.

Cutaneous Infection

Cutaneous disease occurs most commonly in the context of disseminated cryptococcosis but rarely can result from local inoculation. The

appearance of cutaneous cryptococcosis is both nondistinct and variable and includes papules, ulcers, subcutaneous nodules, and rarely,
cellulitis. The lesions are typically subacute, evolving over weeks to
months. Early lesions are often erythematous, are variably indurated
and tender, and may be single or multiple. Lesions often become
ulcerated with central necrosis and raised borders. Cutaneous cryptococcosis in immunocompromised patients can also resemble molluscum contagiosum. Given the variable and nondistinct nature of
this disease, a high suspicion of disease, especially in the appropriate
clinical context (e.g., immunocompromised host), is needed to make
the diagnosis.

Skeletal Infection

Skeletal infection occurs in approximately 5% of patients with disseminated infection but rarely in HIV-­infected patients. Interestingly,
chronic infection of the tibia was the first recognized manifestation of
cryptococcal disease and was described in 1894. Like other forms of
cryptococcosis, the onset of symptoms is insidious and chronic. Bone
involvement is typified by soft tissue swelling and tenderness, and
arthritis is characterized by effusion, erythema, and pain on motion.
Skeletal disease is unifocal in approximately 75% of cases. The vertebrae are the most common site of infection, followed by the tibia,
ileum, rib, femur, and humerus. Concomitant bone and joint disease
can result from contiguous spread.

Sepsis Syndrome

Sepsis syndrome is a rare manifestation of cryptococcosis and
occurs almost exclusively among HIV-­infected patients. Fever is
followed by respiratory distress and multiorgan system disease that
is often fatal.

Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome

Cryptococcal-­
associated immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome (C-­IRIS) occurs in the setting of AIDS and in solid
organ transplantation. Improvement of immune function resulting
from the administration of ART in AIDS patients (or the reduction of immunosuppression in transplant recipients) is thought
to enhance and dysregulate inflammation, leading to an exacerbation of symptoms. This situation is similar to IRIS seen with
other opportunistic pathogens. More commonly, C-­IRIS presents
as a worsening of symptoms in someone with a known diagnosis
of cryptococcosis, often within 1-­2 months of initiation of ART.
Occasionally, C-­IRIS, which presents as a meningitis or lymphadenitis, occurs in individuals who were never known to have cryptococcosis (unmasking-­IRIS). IRIS is particularly problematic in
CNS cryptococcosis and may result in worsening of increased ICP.
Although cases of C-­IRIS have been described in children, the
incidence is not well defined.

DIAGNOSIS

The approach to the diagnosis of cryptococcosis depends on the
organ system involved. Recovery of the fungus by culture or demonstration of the fungus in histologic sections of infected tissue or
body fluids by India ink staining is definitive. Cryptococci readily
grow on standard fungal and bacterial culture media. Colonies can
be seen within 48-­72 hours when grown aerobically at standard temperatures. The CSF profile in patients with cryptococcal meningitis
typically reveals a mild lymphocytosis and elevated protein, but findings can also be normal.
Detection of cryptococcal polysaccharide in the CSF, which can
be done by several different methods, is key to the diagnosis of CNS
infection. One of the earliest detection tests to be developed is the
latex agglutination test, which can detect cryptococcal antigen in
serum and CSF. Titers of ≥1:4 in bodily fluid strongly suggest infection, and titers of >1:1,024 reflect high burden of yeast, poor host
immune response, and greater likelihood of therapeutic failure. Serial
monitoring of cryptococcal antigen levels is not useful in guiding

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 281 u Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gattii 1927
therapy, as the polysaccharide antigen is actively shed into the tissue
and may persist for prolonged periods. Patients with localized pneumonia typically do not have elevated serum antigen levels (though
occasionally low levels of antigen, <1:4, may be detected). Higher
serum antigen levels in patients with pulmonary disease are indicative of dissemination outside the lungs. A point-­of-­care, lateral flow
assay for polysaccharide detection has been developed and has comparable sensitivity to the latex-­agglutination assay, with the advantage
of being less labor intensive. This assay provides a qualitive positive/
negative result, but can also be performed to provide a semiquantitative result. False negatives for both latex agglutination and lateral flow
assays may occur in the context of antigen excess, so samples are typically run both undiluted and diluted. False-­positive results can occur
with other fungal infections, including infection with Trichosporon
spp. and, rarely, by disinfectants. A commercially available ELISA
also allows for the detection of cryptococcal polysaccharide in body
fluids. Several PCR-­based film arrays have also been developed for
the diagnosis of cryptococcosis. These assays allow for the detection
of C. neoformans DNA in the CSF as part of a panel of meningitis/
encephalitis-­associated pathogens. Nonetheless, both false positives
and false negatives (especially in the context of low-­burden disease)
have been well documented.

TREATMENT

The choice of treatment for cryptococcosis depends on the sites of
involvement and the host immune status. These regimens have not
been rigorously studied in children and generally represent extrapolations from studies done in adults. Guidelines for the treatment of
pediatric cryptococcosis have been developed by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the World Health Organization
(WHO).

Pulmonary Disease

The immunocompetent patient with asymptomatic or mild disease
limited to the lungs should be treated with oral fluconazole (pediatric
dose 6-­12 mg/kg/day and adult dose 400 mg/day) for 6-­12 months to
prevent dissemination and progression of disease. Alternative treatments include itraconazole in solution form (pediatric dose 5-­10 mg/
kg/day divided every 12 hours and adult dose 400 mg/day), voriconazole, and posaconazole. Fluconazole therapy can also be used for
immunocompromised individuals with isolated mild to moderate
pulmonary disease in the absence of dissemination or CNS disease.
Longer maintenance therapy with fluconazole to prevent recurrence
should be considered in this cohort, especially among AIDS patients
if the CD4+ T cells remain less than 100/μL. Adjunctive surgical management of pulmonary lesions that are not responsive to surgical
management should be considered. Patients with diffuse pulmonary
disease or those with severe symptoms (e.g., acute respiratory distress syndrome) should be treated in the same manner as those with
meningitis.

Disseminated Disease and Meningitis

For more severe forms of disease, including meningitis and any form
of disseminated disease, an initial induction regimen to promote
rapid decline in fungal burden is indicated. According to Infectious
Diseases Society of America (IDSA) guidelines, induction therapy
should consist of amphotericin B (1 mg/kg/day) plus flucytosine
(100-­150 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours, assuming normal kidney function) for a minimum of 2 weeks, keeping serum flucytosine
concentrations between 40 and 60 μg/mL. Lipid amphotericin B has
replaced standard amphotericin B for the treatment of severe cryptococcosis in adults, primarily based on its lower toxicity profile.
Strong consideration should be given to the use of lipid complex
amphotericin B (3-6 mg/kg/day) in all affected pediatric patients,
especially those with underlying kidney disease or at risk for kidney

disease. Alternative induction therapies as outlined by the WHO
guidelines include (1) 1 week of amphotericin B in combination
with flucytosine, followed by 1 week of high-­dose fluconazole with
amphotericin B; and (2) 2 weeks of amphotericin B in combination
with high-­dose fluconazole. Repeat lumbar puncture is generally
recommend at the end of induction therapy to document sterilization of CSF. Longer periods of induction (4-­6 weeks) should be considered in the following scenarios: (1) immunocompetent patients
with cryptococcal meningitis, (2) meningitis secondary to C. gattii, (3) failure to sterilize CSF, and (4) neurologic complications
(including cryptococcomas). After induction, consolidation therapy with oral fluconazole (pediatric dose 10-­12 mg/kg/day, adult
dose 400-­800 mg/day) should be given for 8 weeks. In patients with
ongoing immunosuppression, maintenance fluconazole should be
used to prevent recurrence. In organ transplant recipients, current
recommendations are for 6-­12 months of maintenance therapy with
fluconazole (pediatric dose 6 mg/kg/day, adult dose 200-­400 mg/
day). In patients with AIDS, prolonged maintenance therapy should
be given. Studies in adults suggest that maintenance therapy can be
discontinued once the patient has achieved immune reconstitution
(as indicated by CD4+ T cells >100/μL and an undetectable or very
low HIV RNA level that is sustained for greater than 3 months). A
minimum of 12 months of antifungal therapy is indicated. Use of
adjuvant interferon gamma for patients with refractory cryptococcal meningitis has been described in adults, but not in pediatric
patients.
Increased ICP. Increased ICP contributes greatly to the morbidity
and mortality of cryptococcal meningitis, and aggressive management of this phenomenon is indicated. Current guidelines indicate
that in patients with increased ICP (>25 cm H2O), CSF should be
removed to establish a pressure ≤20 cm H2O or by 50% if ICP is
extremely high. Serial lumbar punctures may be needed to ensure
normalization of ICP, and ventriculoperitoneal shunts can be considered for patients with persistently elevated increased ICP. Corticosteroids, mannitol, and acetazolamide are generally not indicated in the
treatment of increased ICP, though anecdotal reports describe use in
association with cryptococcoma (in patients with C. gattii infection)
and C-­IRIS.
C-­I RIS. To prevent the development of C-­IRIS, most experts
recommend delaying the institution of ART for 4-­6 weeks after
the initiation of antifungal therapy. Recurrence of disease and
emergence of antifungal resistance should be excluded in the
context of a diagnosis of C-­IRIS. Treatment strategies have not
been well studied but generally consist of antifungal therapy along
with antiinflammatory agents (e.g., NSAIDs and corticosteroids).
Reduction of increased ICP through therapeutic lumbar puncture
may be necessary.

PREVENTION

Persons at high risk for cryptococcosis should be advised to avoid
exposures to bird droppings. Effective ART for persons with HIV
infection significantly reduces the risk of cryptococcal disease. For
adolescent patients with AIDS, regular cryptococcal antigen testing with subsequent diagnostic evaluation and therapy should be
considered for individuals with CD4+ lymphocyte counts <100/μL.
Cryptococcal antigen screening should also be done before the initiation of antiretroviral therapy in patients newly diagnosed with HIV
infection. In the absence of ability to perform regular screening, fluconazole prophylaxis for all patients with CD4+ lymphocyte counts
<100/μL can be considered. However, in children for whom the incidence of cryptococcosis is relatively low, screening and prophylaxis
are generally not needed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1928 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 282

Malassezia
Ashley M. Maranich
Members of the genus Malassezia are lipophilic yeasts that are a
significant component of the skin microbiome. They have a predilection for the sebum-­rich areas of the skin and are considered
normal skin flora. Colonization is established just after birth and
rises before puberty, with distribution (both in species and number) related to numerous factors, including age, body site, and geographic location.
The history of Malassezia nomenclature is complex and can be
confusing. Yeast forms may appear oval or round, resulting in early
designations of both Pityrosporum ovale and Pityrosporum orbiculare. Additionally, newer technologies, such as matrix-­assisted laser
desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-­
TOF MS), are allowing for an improved classification system. The
genus Malassezia has recently been assigned its own class, Malasseziomycetes, with 18 currently recognized species. Disease is facilitated by transformation of the yeast form to a hyphal form, with
clusters of thick-­walled blastospores with the hyphae producing the
characteristic spaghetti-­and-­meatballs appearance of Malassezia
spp. under light microscopy.
Malassezia can cause a number of dermatologic conditions, more
commonly in tropical environments, to include tinea versicolor (also
pityriasis versicolor) (Fig. 282.1; see Chapter 707), neonatal acne, seborrheic dermatitis, dandruff, Malassezia folliculitis, and onychomycosis and are linked with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. M. sympodialis,
M. globosa, and M. furfur are the major causes of tinea versicolor. Malassezia spp. may be isolated from sebum-­rich skin areas of asymptomatic persons, emphasizing that demonstration of the fungus does not
equate with infection.

Fig. 282.1 A young adult with tinea versicolor. Notice the character-

Invasive infections, namely catheter-­
associated fungemia, can
occur, with premature infants and immunocompromised individuals
(especially those with malignancies) the most high-­risk populations.
M. furfur is the species most commonly causing fungemia, with M.
pachydermatis implicated in neonatal intensive care unit outbreaks.
The use of lipid emulsions containing medium-­chain triglycerides
inhibits the growth of Malassezia spp. and can prevent infection.
Symptoms of catheter-­
associated fungemia are indistinguishable
from other causes of catheter-­associated infections but should be
suspected in patients, especially neonates, receiving intravenous lipid
infusions. Compared with other causes of fungal sepsis, it is unusual
for catheter-­related Malassezia fungemia to be associated with secondary focal infection.
Malassezia species do not grow readily on standard fungal media,
and successful culture requires overlaying the agar with olive oil.
Recovery of Malassezia from blood culture is optimized by supplementing the medium with olive oil or palmitic acid and allowing for
prolonged incubation for at least 2 weeks.
Topical treatment of skin-­related conditions is considered first-­
line to minimize the risk of side effects. The traditional primary
therapy for tinea versicolor is daily use of topical selenium sulfide 2.5% applied to affected areas for 10 minutes for a week.
Additional regimens for skin disorders include topical azole
creams, ketoconazole 2% shampoo applied daily for 3 days,
and terbinafine 1% cream applied 1-­2 times daily for 1-­2 weeks.
Malassezia-­associated skin diseases limited to the head and neck
can be managed with either 1% ciclopirox, ketoconazole, or zinc
pyrithione shampoos. Regardless of the agent chosen, recovery
time can be prolonged, with repigmentation not occurring for several months. Continued application of topical treatment on a
weekly or monthly basis is frequently recommended to prevent
relapse. Recurrence is common and usually responds well to the
original treatment regimen.
Oral therapy for tinea versicolor with fluconazole or itraconazole is
easier to administer (especially with large areas of skin involved) but is
more expensive, has higher side effect risks, and may be less effective
than topical therapy. Various dosing regimens have been used with
success, including fluconazole 300 mg weekly for 2-­4 weeks, fluconazole as a single 400-­mg dose, and itraconazole 200 mg daily for 5-­7
days or 100 mg daily for 2 weeks. Recent studies have examined alternative therapies, with early data suggesting that essential oils might be
a possible option for long-­term therapy of Malassezia skin infections,
with additional studies needed.
Treatment of Malassezia fungemia is complicated by the lack of
standardized susceptibility testing references. Recent consensus
recommendations name liposomal amphotericin B as first-­line
treatment for systemic Malassezia infections, with amphotericin B deoxycholate as an alternative. Additionally, the involved
catheter should be removed and any lipid infusion should be discontinued. Itraconazole, posaconazole, or voriconazole may be
alternative agents, but fluconazole should be avoided, given that
many patients with Malassezia bloodstream infections in existing
clinical series were receiving fluconazole prophylaxis at the time of
developing the infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

istic hypopigmented scaling macules. (Courtesy Ashley M. Maranich,
MD.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 283 u Aspergillus

Chapter 283

Aspergillus
William J. Steinbach
The genus Aspergillus contains approximately 250 species, but most
human disease is caused by Aspergillus fumigatus, A. flavus, A. niger, A.
terreus, and A. nidulans. Invasive disease is most commonly caused by A.
fumigatus. Most cases of Aspergillus disease (aspergillosis) are caused by
inhalation of airborne spores (conidia) that subsequently germinate into
fungal hyphae and invade host tissue. When inhaled by an immunocompetent person, conidia are rarely deleterious, presumably because they
are efficiently cleared by phagocytic cells. Macrophage-­and neutrophil-­
mediated host defenses are required for resistance to invasive disease.
Aspergillus is a relatively unusual pathogen in that it can create very
different disease states depending on the host characteristics, including allergic (hypersensitivity), saprophytic (noninvasive), chronic, or
invasive disease. Immunodeficient hosts are at risk for invasive disease,
whereas immunocompetent atopic hosts tend to develop allergic disease. Disease manifestations include primary allergic reactions; colonization of the lungs or sinuses; localized infection of the lung or skin;
chronic infection of the lung; invasive pulmonary disease; or widely
disseminated disease of the lungs, brain, skin, eye, bone, heart, and
other organs. Clinically, these syndromes often manifest with mild,
nonspecific, and late-­onset symptoms, particularly in the immunosuppressed host, complicating accurate diagnosis and timely treatment.

283.1 Allergic Disease (Hypersensitivity
Syndromes)
William J. Steinbach

ASTHMA

Attacks of atopic asthma can be triggered by inhalation of Aspergillus
conidia, producing allergic responses and subsequent bronchospasm.
Exposure to fungi, especially Aspergillus, needs to be considered as a
trigger in a patient with an asthma flare, especially in those patients
with severe or recalcitrant asthma.

ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a hypersensitivity
disease resulting from immunologic sensitization to Aspergillus antigens.
It is primarily seen in patients with asthma or cystic fibrosis. Inhalation
of conidia produces noninvasive colonization of the bronchial airways,
resulting in persistent inflammation and development of hypersensitivity inflammatory responses. Disease manifestations are the result of
abnormal immunologic responses to A. fumigatus antigens and include
wheezing, pulmonary infiltrates, bronchiectasis, and even fibrosis.
There are eight primary diagnostic criteria for ABPA: episodic
bronchial obstruction, peripheral eosinophilia, immediate cutaneous reactivity to Aspergillus antigens, precipitating IgE antibodies to
Aspergillus antigen, elevated total IgE, serum precipitin (specific IgG)
antibodies to A. fumigatus, pulmonary infiltrates, and central bronchiectasis. Secondary diagnostic criteria include repeated detection of
Aspergillus from sputum by identification of morphologically consistent fungal elements or direct culture and coughing of brown plugs
or specks. Radiologically, bronchial wall thickening, pulmonary infiltrates, and central bronchiectasis can be seen.
Treatment depends on relieving inflammation via an extended course
of systemic corticosteroids. Addition of oral antifungal agents, such as
itraconazole or voriconazole, is used to decrease the fungal burden and
diminish the inciting stimulus for inflammation. Because disease activity

1929

is correlated with serum IgE levels, these levels are used as one marker
to define duration of therapy. An area of research interest is the utility of
anti-­IgE antibody therapy in the management of ABPA.

ALLERGIC ASPERGILLUS SINUSITIS

Allergic Aspergillus sinusitis is thought to be similar in etiology to
ABPA. It has been primarily described in young adult patients with
asthma and may or may not be seen in combination with ABPA.
Patients often present with symptoms of chronic sinusitis or recurrent acute sinusitis, such as congestion, headaches, and rhinitis, and
are found to have nasal polyps and opacification of multiple sinuses
on imaging. Laboratory findings can include elevated IgE levels, precipitating antibodies to Aspergillus antigen, and immediate cutaneous
reactivity to Aspergillus antigens. Sinus tissue specimens might contain
eosinophils, Charcot-­Leyden crystals, and fungal elements consistent
with Aspergillus species. Surgical drainage is an important aspect
of treatment, often accompanied by courses of either systemic or
inhaled steroids. Use of an antifungal agent may also be considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

283.2 Saprophytic (Noninvasive) Syndromes
William J. Steinbach

PULMONARY ASPERGILLOMA

Aspergillomas are masses of fungal hyphae, cellular debris, and inflammatory cells that proliferate without vascular invasion, generally in the
setting of preexisting cavitary lesions or ectatic bronchi. These cavitary
lesions can occur as a result of infections such as tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, or resolved abscesses or secondary to congenital or acquired
defects such as pulmonary cysts or bullous emphysema. Patients may
be asymptomatic, with diagnosis made through imaging for other reasons, or may present with hemoptysis, cough, or fever. On imaging,
initially there may be thickening of the walls of a cavity, and later on
there is a solid round mass separated from the cavity wall as the fungal
ball develops. Detection of Aspergillus antibody in the serum suggests
this diagnosis. Treatment is indicated for control of complications,
such as hemoptysis. Surgical resection is the definitive treatment but
has been associated with significant risks. Systemic antifungal treatment with azole-­class agents is indicated in certain patients.

CHRONIC PULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS

Chronic aspergillosis can occur in patients with normal immune systems or mild degrees of immunosuppression, including intermittent
corticosteroids. Three major categories, each with overlapping clinical
features, have been proposed to describe different manifestations of
chronic aspergillosis. The first is chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis (CCPA), which is similar to aspergilloma, except that multiple
cavities form and expand with occupying fungal balls. The second is
chronic fibrosing pulmonary aspergillosis, where the multiple individual lesions progress to significant pulmonary fibrosis. The final is
subacute invasive aspergillosis (IA), which was previously called
chronic necrotizing pulmonary aspergillosis, a slowly progressive process found in patients with mild to moderate immune impairment.
Treatment based on consensus guidelines can sometimes involve
surgical resection, although long-­term antifungal therapy is often indicated. Management of semi-­IA is similar to that of invasive pulmonary
aspergillosis; however, the disease is more indolent, and thus there is a
greater emphasis on oral therapy. Direct instillation of antifungals into
the lesion cavity has been employed with some success.

OTOMYCOSIS

Aspergillus can colonize the external auditory canal, with possible
extension to the middle ear and mastoid air spaces if the tympanic
membrane is disrupted by concurrent bacterial infection. Symptoms include pain, itching, decreased unilateral hearing, or otorrhea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1930 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Otomycosis is more often seen in patients with impaired mucosal
immunity, such as patients with hypogammaglobulinemia, diabetes
mellitus, chronic eczema, or HIV and those using chronic steroids.
Treatments have not been well studied, but topical treatment with
acetic or boric acid instillations or oral azoles such as voriconazole,
itraconazole, and posaconazole have been described.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

283.3 Invasive Disease
William J. Steinbach
IA is primarily a disease of immunocompromised hosts, and common
risk factors in adults include cancer or chemotherapy-­induced neutropenia, particularly if severe and/or prolonged; hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, especially during the initial preengraftment phase or
if complicated by graft-­versus-­host disease; neutrophil or macrophage
dysfunction, as occurs in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)
or chronic granulomatous disease (CGD); prolonged high-­dose steroid
use; solid organ transplantation; and rarely, HIV. The most common
site of primary infection is the lung, but primary invasive infection is
also seen in the sinuses and skin and rarely elsewhere. Secondary infection can be seen after hematogenous spread, often to the skin, central
nervous system (CNS), eye, bone, and heart.

INVASIVE PULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS

Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis is the most common form of aspergillosis and plays a significant role in morbidity and mortality in the
patient populations mentioned at increased risk for IA. Presenting
symptoms can include fever despite initiation of empirical broad-­
spectrum antibacterial therapy, cough, chest pain, hemoptysis, and
pulmonary infiltrates. Patients on high-­dose steroids are less likely to
present with fever. Symptoms in these immunocompromised patients
can be very vague, and thus maintaining a high index of suspicion
when confronted with a high-­risk patient is essential.

Diagnosis

Imaging can be helpful, although no finding is pathognomonic for
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Characteristically, multiple ill-­
defined nodules can be seen, though lobar or diffuse consolidation
is not uncommon, and normal chest x-­rays do not rule out disease.
Classic radiologic signs on CT during neutropenia include the halo
sign, when angioinvasion produces a hemorrhagic nodule surrounded
by ischemia (Fig. 283.1). Early on there is a rim of ground-­glass

Fig. 283.1 Angioinvasive aspergillosis. CT section at the level of the
lower trachea shows a consolidation with an eccentric cavitation and air
crescent sign (arrows). This finding in this neutropenic patient is highly
diagnostic of angioinvasive aspergillosis. (From Franquet T. Nonneoplastic parenchymal lung disease. In: Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and
MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 36.14.)

opacification surrounding a nodule. Over time, these lesions evolve
into cavitary lesions or lesions with an air crescent sign when the lung
necroses around the fungal mass, often seen during recovery from neutropenia. Unfortunately, these findings are not specific to invasive pulmonary aspergillosis and can also be seen in other pulmonary fungal
infections, and in pulmonary hemorrhage and organizing pneumonia.
In addition, several reviews of imaging results of pediatric aspergillosis
cases suggest that cavitation and air crescent formation are less common among these patients than among adult patients. On MRI, the
typical finding for pulmonary disease is the target sign, a nodule with
a lower central signal compared with the rim-­enhancing periphery.
Conclusive diagnosis requires culture of Aspergillus from a normally
sterile site and histologic identification of tissue invasion by fungal
hyphae consistent with Aspergillus morphology. In addition, depending on the specimen type, a positive result from culture can represent
colonization rather than infection; however, all positive cultures should
be interpreted conservatively in high-­risk patients. Serology can be
useful in the diagnosis of allergic Aspergillus syndromes and in aspergilloma but is low yield for invasive disease, likely because of deficient
immune responses in the high-­risk immunocompromised population. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) can be useful, but negative culture
results cannot be used to rule out disease, owing to inadequate sensitivity. Proven disease requires histologic confirmation or microbiologic
recovery of the organism, whereas probable disease diagnosis includes
radiographic findings coupled with molecular biologic assays such as
galactomannan antigen detection either in the serum or from the BAL.
This galactomannan assay has been shown to be the most sensitive in
detecting disease in cancer patients or hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, with less utility in solid organ transplant recipients.
Earlier reports of increased false-­positive reactions in children versus
adults have been refuted, and the galactomannan assay is effective in
diagnosing IA in children. This test does possess high rates of false
negativity in patients with congenital immunodeficiency (e.g., CGD)
and invasive Aspergillus infections. The beta-­glucan assay is a nonspecific molecular fungal assay that detects the major component of the
fungal cell wall. Unlike the galactomannan assay, which is specific for
Aspergillus, the beta-­glucan assay will not discriminate which fungal
organism is infecting the patient. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)–
based assays are in development for the diagnosis of aspergillosis but
are still being optimized.

Treatment

Successful treatment of IA hinges on the ability to reconstitute normal
immune function and use of effective antifungal agents until immune
recovery can be achieved. Therefore lowering overall immunosuppression, specifically via cessation of corticosteroid use, is vital to improve
the ultimate outcome. Multiple published guidelines recommend
that primary therapy for all forms of IA is voriconazole, based on
several studies showing both improved response rates and improved
survival in patients receiving voriconazole when compared with
amphotericin B. Guideline-­recommended alternative therapies include
liposomal amphotericin B, isavuconazole, and other lipid formulations
of amphotericin B. European guidelines recommend isavuconazole
and voriconazole for treatment of pulmonary disease with a similar
strength of recommendation, mentioning fewer adverse effects with
isavuconazole than with voriconazole and use of liposomal amphotericin B as an alternative. Posaconazole is another triazole antifungal
that is approved for antifungal prophylaxis and may be considered an
alternative agent for first-­line treatment of IA.
The echinocandin class of antifungals may also a play a role in
treatment of IA, but to date, these agents are generally employed as
second-­line medications, particularly for salvage therapy. Combination
antifungal therapy has revealed disparate results. The U.S. guidelines
state that combination primary antifungal therapy with voriconazole
plus an echinocandin may be considered in select patients with documented IA; however, this is not a recommendation. Importantly,
primary therapy with an echinocandin is not recommended, but an
echinocandin can be used in the settings in which azole or polyene
antifungals are contraindicated. Unfortunately, even with newer

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 284 u Histoplasmosis (Histoplasma capsulatum)
antifungals, complete or partial response rates for treatment of IA are
only approximately 50%. To augment antifungal therapies, patients
have been treated with growth factors to increase neutrophil counts,
granulocyte transfusions, interferon-­γ, and surgery. Treatment of IA
should be continued for a minimum of 6-­12 weeks; however, many
experts feel that treatment should continue until complete clinical and
radiographic resolution of disease.

Special Populations

Patients with CGD represent a pediatric population at particular risk
for pulmonary aspergillosis. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis can be
the first serious infection identified in these patients, and the lifetime
risk of developing pulmonary aspergillosis is estimated to be 33%.
Unlike classical IA in cancer patients, the onset of symptoms is often
gradual, with slow development of fever, fatigue, pneumonia, and elevated sedimentation rate. The neutrophils of patients with CGD surround the collections of fungal elements but cannot kill them, thereby
permitting local invasion with extension of disease to the pleura, ribs,
and vertebrae, though angioinvasion is not seen. Imaging in these
patients is much less likely to reveal the halo sign, infarcts, or cavitary
lesions and instead generally shows areas of tissue destruction caused
by the ongoing inflammatory processes.

CUTANEOUS ASPERGILLOSIS

Cutaneous aspergillosis can occur as a primary disease or as a consequence of hematogenous dissemination or spread from underlying
structures. Primary cutaneous disease classically occurs at sites of skin
disruption, such as intravenous access device locations, adhesive dressings, or sites of injury or surgery. Premature infants are at particular
risk, given their immature skin and need for multiple access devices.
Cutaneous disease in transplant recipients tends to reflect hematogenous distribution from a primary site of infection, often the lungs.
Lesions are erythematous, indurated papules that progress to painful,
ulcerated, necrotic lesions. Treatment depends on the combination of
surgical debridement and antifungal therapy, with systemic voriconazole recommended as primary therapy.

INVASIVE SINONASAL DISEASE

Invasive Aspergillus sinusitis represents a difficult diagnosis because the
clinical presentation tends to be highly variable. Patients can present
with congestion, rhinorrhea, epistaxis, headache, facial pain or swelling, orbital swelling, fever, or abnormal appearance of the nasal turbinates. Because noninvasive imaging can be normal, diagnosis rests
on direct visualization via endoscopy and biopsy. Sinus mucosa may
be pale, discolored, granulating, or necrotic, depending on the stage
and extent of disease. The infection can invade adjacent structures,
including the eye and brain. This syndrome is difficult to distinguish
clinically from other types of invasive fungal disease of the sinuses such
as mucormycosis, rendering obtaining specimens for culture and histology extremely important. If the diagnosis is confirmed, treatment
should be with voriconazole similar to invasive pulmonary disease.
Because voriconazole is not active against mucormycosis, amphotericin B formulations should be considered in invasive fungal sinusitis
pending definitive identification.

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM

The primary site of Aspergillus infection tends to be the lungs, but as the
hyphae invade into the vasculature, fungal elements can dislodge and
travel through the bloodstream, permitting establishment of secondary
infection sites. One of the sites commonly involved in disseminated disease is the CNS. Cerebral aspergillosis can also arise secondary to local
extension of sinus disease. The presentation of cerebral aspergillosis is
highly variable but can include changes in mental status, seizures, paralysis, coma, and ophthalmoplegia. As the hyphae invade the CNS vasculature, hemorrhagic infarcts develop that convert to abscesses. Biopsy is
required for definitive diagnosis, but patients are often too ill to tolerate surgery. Imaging can be helpful for diagnosis, and MRI is preferred.
In general, the prognosis for CNS aspergillosis is extremely poor, likely
owing to the late onset at presentation. Reversal of immunosuppression

1931

is extremely important, when possible. Surgical resection of lesions may
be useful. Voriconazole is the best therapy, usually at high doses.

EYE

Fungal endophthalmitis and keratitis may be seen in patients with
disseminated Aspergillus infection. Pain, photophobia, and decreased
visual acuity may be present, though many patients are asymptomatic.
Emergent ophthalmologic evaluation is important when these entities
are suspected. Endophthalmitis is treated with intravitreal injection of
either amphotericin B or voriconazole along with surgical intervention
and systemic antifungal therapy with voriconazole. Keratitis requires
topical and systemic antifungal therapy.

BONE

Aspergillus osteomyelitis can occur, most commonly in the vertebrae.
Rib involvement occurs as a result of extension of disease in patients
with CGD and is most often caused by A. nidulans. Treatment depends
on the combination of surgical debridement and systemic antifungals.
Arthritis can develop after hematogenous dissemination or local extension, and treatment depends on joint drainage combined with antifungal therapy. Voriconazole is the preferred first-­line therapy.

HEART

Cardiac infection can occur as a result of surgical contamination,
secondary to disseminated infection, or after direct extension from a
contiguous focus of infection and includes endocarditis, myocarditis,
and pericarditis. Treatment requires surgical intervention in the case of
endocarditis and pericarditis, along with systemic antifungals, sometimes lifelong because of the possibility of recurrent infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 284

Histoplasmosis
(Histoplasma capsulatum)
Matthew C. Washam and
Lara A. Danziger-­Isakov
ETIOLOGY

Histoplasmosis is caused by Histoplasma capsulatum, a dimorphic fungus found in the environment as a saprobe in the mycelial (mold) form
and in tissues in the parasitic form as yeast.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Two varieties of Histoplasma cause human histoplasmosis. The most
common variety, H. capsulatum var. capsulatum, is found in soil as the
saprotrophic form throughout the midwestern United States, primarily
along the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. In parts of Kentucky and Tennessee, almost 90% of the population older than 20 years of age have
positive skin test results for histoplasmin. Sporadic cases have also
been reported in nonendemic states in patients without a travel history. Worldwide, H. capsulatum var. capsulatum is endemic to parts
of Central and South America, the Caribbean, China, India, Southeast
Asia, and the Mediterranean. The less common variety, H. capsulatum
var. duboisii, is endemic to certain areas of western and central sub-­
Saharan Africa.
H. capsulatum thrives in soil rich in nitrates such as areas that are
heavily contaminated with bird or bat droppings or decayed wood.
Fungal spores are often carried on the wings of birds. Focal outbreaks of
histoplasmosis have been reported after aerosolization of microconidia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1932 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
resulting from construction in areas previously occupied by starling
roosts or chicken coops or by chopping decayed wood or burning
bamboo exposed to a blackbird roost. Unlike birds, bats are actively
infected with Histoplasma. Focal outbreaks of histoplasmosis have also
been reported after intense exposure to bat guano in caves and along
bridges frequented by bats. Horizontal person-­to-­person transmission
does not occur, although transplacental transmission of H. capsulatum
has been reported in immunocompromised mothers.

PATHOGENESIS

Inhalation of microconidia (fungal spores) is the initial stage of
human infection. The conidia reach the alveoli, germinate, and proliferate as yeast. Alternatively, spores can remain as mold with the
potential for activation. Most infections are asymptomatic or self-­
limited. When disseminated disease occurs, any organ system can be
involved. The initial infection is a bronchopneumonia. As the initial
pulmonary lesion ages, giant cells form, followed by formation of
caseating or noncaseating granulomas and central necrosis. Granulomas contain viable yeast, and disease can relapse. At the time of spore
germination, yeast cells are phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages,
where they replicate and gain access to the reticuloendothelial system
via the pulmonary lymphatic system and hilar lymph nodes. Dissemination with splenic involvement typically follows the primary pulmonary infection. In normal hosts, specific cell-­mediated immunity
follows in approximately 2 weeks, enabling sensitized T cells to activate macrophages and kill the organism. The initial pulmonary lesion
resolves within 2-­4 months but may undergo calcification resembling
the Ghon complex of tuberculosis. Alternatively, buckshot calcifications involving the lung and spleen may be seen. Unlike tuberculosis,
reinfection with H. capsulatum may occur and can lead to exaggerated host responses in some cases.
Children with immune deficiencies, specifically deficiencies involving cell-­mediated immunity, are at increased risk for disseminated
histoplasmosis. Primary immunodeficiencies involving pathogenic
genetic variants in the interleukin (IL)-­12/interferon (IFN)-­γ pathway have been reported in children with disseminated histoplasmosis, including IL-­12Rβ1 deficiency and IFN-­γ R1 deficiency. Other
primary immunodeficiencies identified in children with disseminated
disease include STAT1 gain-­of-­function pathogenic genetic variants,
idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia, AR-­
DOCK8 deficiency, AD-­
GATA2
deficiency, and X-­linked CD40L deficiency. Children with certain secondary immunodeficiencies (cancer patients, solid organ transplant
recipients, children with HIV infection, and children receiving immunomodulatory therapy with tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-­α inhibitors)
are also at increased risk for disseminated disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Exposure to Histoplasma is common in endemic areas, although most
infections are subclinical. Less than 1% of those infected display the
following clinical manifestations:
Acute pulmonary histoplasmosis follows initial or recurrent respiratory exposure to microconidia. Symptomatic disease occurs more
often in young children; in older patients, symptoms follow exposure to large inocula in closed spaces (e.g., chicken coops or caves) or
prolonged exposure (e.g., camping on contaminated soil, chopping
decayed wood). The median incubation time is 14 days. The prodrome
is not specific and usually consists of flulike symptoms, including
headache, fever, chest pain, cough, and myalgias. Hepatosplenomegaly occurs more often in infants and young children. Symptomatic
infections may be associated with significant respiratory distress and
hypoxia and can require intubation, mechanical ventilation, and steroid therapy. Acute pulmonary disease can also manifest with a prolonged illness (10 days to 3 weeks) consisting of weight loss, dyspnea,
high fever, asthenia, and fatigue. Children with symptomatic disease
typically have a patchy bronchopneumonia; hilar lymphadenopathy is
variably present (Fig. 284.1). In young children, the pneumonia can
coalesce. Focal or buckshot calcifications are convalescent findings in
patients after acute pulmonary infection.

Fig. 284.1 Radiograph of a 5-­yr-­old child with acute pulmonary histoplasmosis showing right perihilar lymphadenopathy.

Complications of pulmonary histoplasmosis occur secondary to
exaggerated host responses to fungal antigens within the lung parenchyma or hilar lymph nodes. Histoplasmomas are of parenchymal origin and are usually asymptomatic. These fibroma-­like lesions are often
concentrically calcified and single. Rarely, these lesions produce broncholithiasis associated with “stone spitting,” wheezing, and hemoptysis. In endemic regions, these lesions can mimic parenchymal tumors
and are occasionally diagnosed at lung biopsy. Mediastinal granulomas form when reactive hilar lymph nodes coalesce and mat together.
Although these lesions are usually asymptomatic, huge granulomas can
compress the mediastinal structures, producing symptoms of esophageal, bronchial, or vena caval obstruction. Local extension and necrosis
can produce pericarditis or pleural effusions. Mediastinal fibrosis is a
rare complication of mediastinal granulomas and represents an uncontrolled fibrotic reaction arising from the hilar nodes. Structures within
the mediastinum become encased within a fibrotic mass, producing
obstructive symptomatology. Superior vena cava syndrome, pulmonary venous obstruction with a mitral stenosis–like syndrome, and
pulmonary artery obstruction with congestive heart failure have been
described. Dysphagia accompanies esophageal entrapment, and a syndrome of cough, wheeze, hemoptysis, and dyspnea accompanies bronchial obstruction. Rarely, children develop a sarcoid-­like disease with
arthritis or arthralgia, erythema nodosum, keratoconjunctivitis, iridocyclitis, and pericarditis. Pericarditis, with effusions both pericardial
and pleural, is a self-­limited benign condition that develops as a result
of an inflammatory reaction to adjacent mediastinal disease. The effusions are exudative, and the organism is rarely culturable from fluid.
Progressive disseminated histoplasmosis can occur in infants and in
children with deficient cell-­mediated immunity. Disseminated disease
may occur either during the initial acute infection in children with primary or secondary immunodeficiencies affecting T-­cell function (see
“Pathogenesis”), in infants, or as a reactivation of a latent focus of infection within the reticuloendothelial system in children who acquire an
immunosuppressive condition years after primary infection. Disseminated histoplasmosis in an HIV-­infected patient is an AIDS-­defining
illness. Fever is the most common finding and can persist for weeks
to months before the condition is diagnosed. The majority of patients
have hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and interstitial pulmonary disease. Extrapulmonary infection is a characteristic of disseminated disease and can include destructive bony lesions, Addison

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 284 u Histoplasmosis (Histoplasma capsulatum)
disease, meningitis, multifocal chorioretinitis, and endocarditis. Some
patients develop mucous membrane ulcerations and skin findings such
as nodules, ulcers, or molluscum-­like papules. A sepsis-­like syndrome
has been identified in a small number of HIV-­infected patients with
disseminated histoplasmosis and is characterized by the rapid onset of
shock, multiorgan failure, and coagulopathy. Reactive hemophagocytic
syndrome has been described in immunocompromised patients with
severe disseminated histoplasmosis. Many children with disseminated
disease experience transient hyperglobulinemia. Elevated acute-­phase
reactants and hypercalcemia are typically seen but are nonspecific.
Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia are variably present; elevated liver function tests and high serum concentrations of
angiotensin-­converting enzyme may be observed. Chest radiographs
are normal in more than half of children with disseminated disease.
Chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis is an opportunistic infection
in adult patients with centrilobular emphysema. Chronic progressive
disseminated histoplasmosis is a slowly progressive infection caused
by Histoplasma that occurs in older adults without obvious immunosuppression that is uniformly fatal if untreated. These entities are rare
in children.

DIAGNOSIS

Optimal diagnosis of suspected histoplasmosis depends on the clinical presentation and underlying immune status of the patient. Using
serum and urine antigen tests along with serum antibody tests via complement fixation and immunodiffusion yields a diagnostic sensitivity
>90% for acute pulmonary and disseminated forms of histoplasmosis.
Diagnostic testing options include the following:
Antigen detection is the most widely available diagnostic study
for patients with suspected pulmonary histoplasmosis or progressive
disseminated histoplasmosis. Current laboratory methodology uses
enzyme immunoassay (EIA) to detect H. capsulatum polysaccharide
antigen in urine, blood, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and cerebrospinal
fluid. In patients at risk for disseminated disease, antigen can be demonstrated in the urine, blood, or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in more
than 90% of cases. Antigenuria has been shown to correlate with severity of disseminated histoplasmosis. Serum, urine, and bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid from patients with acute or chronic pulmonary infections
are variably antigen positive. In one study, antigenuria was present in
83% of patients with acute pulmonary disease and 30% of patients with
subacute pulmonary disease. False-­positive results on urinary antigen
testing can occur in patients with Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioides immitis, Coccidioides posadasii, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, and
Penicillium marneffei. Testing both urine and serum samples for histoplasma antigen increases the sensitivity compared with testing only the
urine or serum alone. Sequential measurement of serum antigen levels
in patients with disseminated disease is useful for monitoring response
to therapy; persistent low-­level antigenuria may occur in some patients
who have completed therapy and have no evidence of active infection.
Antibody tests continue to be useful for the diagnosis of acute pulmonary histoplasmosis, its complications, and chronic pulmonary
disease. Serum antibody to yeast and mycelium-­associated antigens is
classically measured by complement fixation. Although titers of >1:8 are
found in more than 80% of patients with histoplasmosis, titers of ≥1:32
are most significant for the diagnosis of recent infection. Complement-­
fixation antibody titers are often not significant early in the infection
and do not become positive until 4-­6 weeks after exposure. A fourfold
increase in either yeast or mycelial-­phase titers or a single titer of ≥1:32
is presumptive evidence of active infection. Complement-­fixation titers
may be falsely positive in patients with other systemic mycoses such as
B. dermatitidis and C. immitis and may be falsely negative in immunocompromised patients. Antibody detection by immunodiffusion is
less sensitive but more specific than complement fixation and is used
to confirm questionably positive complement-­fixation titers. An EIA-­
based method that has improved sensitivity and specificity compared
with other serologic methods has been developed. The highest sensitivity for antibody testing can be achieved by combining methodologies.
Culture sensitivity of tissue or body fluid samples is generally highest for children with progressive disseminated histoplasmosis or acute

1933

pulmonary histoplasmosis caused by a large inoculum of organisms.
Histoplasma typically grows within 6 weeks on Sabouraud agar at 25°C
(77°F). Identification of tuberculate macroconidia allows for only
a presumptive diagnosis, because Sepedonium species form similar
structures. A confirmatory test using a chemiluminescent DNA probe
for H. capsulatum is necessary to establish a definitive identification.
The yeast can be recovered from blood or bone marrow in >90% of
patients with progressive disseminated histoplasmosis. Sputum cultures are rarely obtained and are variably positive in normal hosts with
acute pulmonary histoplasmosis; cultures of bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid appear to have a slightly higher yield than sputum cultures. Blood
cultures are sterile in patients with acute pulmonary histoplasmosis,
and cultures from any source are typically sterile in patients with the
sarcoid form of the disease.
Histologic examination can identify yeast forms in tissue from
patients with complicated forms of acute pulmonary disease (histoplasmoma and mediastinal granuloma). Tissue should be stained with
methenamine silver or periodic acid–Schiff stains, and yeast can be
found within or outside of macrophages. In children with disseminated
disease, organisms can be identified from bone marrow, liver, and
mucocutaneous lesions. In those who are severely ill, Wright stain of
peripheral blood can demonstrate fungal elements within leukocytes.
Examination of fibrotic tissue from children with mediastinal fibrosis
usually demonstrates no organisms.
Real-­time polymerase chain reaction has been used on formalin-­
fixed, paraffin-­embedded biopsy tissue and has an analytical sensitivity
of at least 6 pg/μL from tissue-­extracted DNA and a clinical sensitivity
and specificity of 88.9% and 100%, respectively. Although not widely
available, molecular methods may ultimately provide a more timely
and accurate diagnosis.
Skin testing is useful only for epidemiologic studies, as cutaneous
reactivity is lifelong and intradermal injection can elicit an immune
response in otherwise seronegative persons. Reagents are no longer
commercially available.

TREATMENT

Acute pulmonary histoplasmosis does not require antifungal therapy
for asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic children. Oral itraconazole
(4-­10 mg/kg/day in two divided doses, not to exceed 400 mg daily)
for 6-­12 weeks should be considered in patients with acute pulmonary
infections who fail to improve clinically within 1 month. Although it
appears to be less effective, fluconazole may be considered as an alternative therapy in children intolerant to itraconazole. Clinical experience in treating histoplasmosis with the newer azoles (voriconazole
and posaconazole) is increasing, with posaconazole having increased
in vitro activity. Patients with pulmonary histoplasmosis who become
hypoxemic or require ventilatory support should receive amphotericin
B deoxycholate (0.7-­1.0 mg/kg/day) or amphotericin B lipid complex (3-­5 mg/kg/day) until improved, and adjunctive corticosteroids
(intravenous methylprednisolone at a dose of 0.5-­1 mg/kg/day) can
be considered for 1-­2 weeks; continued therapy with oral itraconazole
for a minimum of 12 wk is also recommended. The lipid preparations
of amphotericin are not preferentially recommended in children with
pulmonary histoplasmosis, as the classic preparation is generally well
tolerated in this patient population. Patients with severe obstructive symptoms caused by granulomatous mediastinal disease may be
treated sequentially with amphotericin B followed by itraconazole for
6-­12 months, and inclusion of adjunctive corticosteroids should be
considered for the first 1-­2 weeks. Patients with milder mediastinal
disease may be treated with oral itraconazole alone. Some experts recommend that surgery be reserved for patients who fail to improve after
1 month of intensive amphotericin B therapy. Sarcoid-­like disease with
or without pericarditis may be treated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents for 2-­12 weeks.
Progressive disseminated histoplasmosis usually requires amphotericin B deoxycholate (1.0 mg/kg/day for 4-­6 weeks) or amphotericin B lipid complex (3-­5 mg/kg/day). Alternatively, amphotericin B
may be given for 2-­4 weeks followed by oral itraconazole (4-­10 mg/
kg/day in two divided doses) as maintenance therapy for 12 months,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1934 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
depending on Histoplasma antigen status. Longer therapy may be
needed in patients with severe disease, immunosuppression, or primary immunodeficiency syndromes. It is recommended to monitor
blood levels of itraconazole during treatment, aiming for a concentration of ≥1 μg/mL but <10 μg/mL to avoid potential drug toxicity. It
is also recommended to monitor urine antigen levels during therapy
and for 12 months after therapy has ended to ensure cure. Relapses
in immunocompromised patients with progressive disseminated histoplasmosis are relatively common. Lifelong suppressive therapy with
daily itraconazole (5 mg/kg/day up to adult dose of 200 mg/day) may
be required if immunosuppression cannot be reversed. For severely
immunocompromised HIV-­
infected children living in endemic
regions, itraconazole (2-­5 mg/kg every 12-­24 hours) may be used prophylactically. Care must be taken to avoid interactions between antifungal azoles and protease inhibitors.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 285

Blastomycosis
Gregory M. Gauthier and Bruce S. Klein
ETIOLOGY

The etiologic agents of blastomycosis belong to a species complex and
include Blastomyces dermatitidis, B. gilchristii, B. helicus, B. emzantsi, B.
percursus, B. parvus, and B. silverae. The latter two species (B. parvus, B.
silverae) rarely cause human infection. All Blastomyces species exhibit
thermal dimorphism in which they grow as mold and produce spores
in the soil at environmental temperature (22–25°C [71.6–77°F]) and
as pathogenic yeast at core human body temperature (37°C [98.6°F]).
Once in tissue, Blastomyces infection results in pyogranulomatous
inflammation, which is characterized by neutrophil infiltration and
granuloma formation. Blastomyces yeast can be differentiated from
other fungi by the presence of a broad-­based budding pattern between
dividing yeast cells, which occurs in all Blastomyces species.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Blastomyces species cause disease in immunocompetent and immunocompromised children. Approximately 2–13% of blastomycosis cases
occur in the pediatric population (average age: 9.1-­12.9 years; range:
19 days to 18 years). Blastomycosis of newborns and infants is rare.
In North America, the traditional geographic range of blastomycosis cases is restricted to the Midwest, southcentral, and southeastern
United States and parts of Canada bordering the Great Lakes and Saint
Lawrence River Valley. In these geographic regions, several areas are
hyperendemic for blastomycosis (e.g., Marathon and Vilas counties,
Wisconsin; central and southcentral Mississippi; Kenora, Ontario).
Outside of North America, autochthonous infections have been
reported from Africa (∼100 cases), India (<12 cases), and Israel. B. dermatitidis is not endemic to Central America, South America, Europe,
Asia, or Australia.
In North America, B. dermatitidis and B. gilchristii grow in an ecologic niche characterized by forested, sandy soils with an acidic pH
that have decaying vegetation and are near water. B. dermatitidis is
located throughout the traditional geographic range, whereas B. gilchristii is restricted to Minnesota, Wisconsin, Canada, and areas along
the St. Lawrence River. B. helicus is located in the western United States
(California, Montana, Idaho, Colorado, Nebraska, Texas) and Canada
(Saskatchewan, Alberta); however, its environmental niche remains

to be determined. In Africa, there are multiple species of Blastomyces,
including B. dermatitidis, B. gilchristii, B. percursus, and B. emzantsi.
Knowledge about the ecological niche and geographic distribution of
Blastomyces species in Africa is limited. B. percursus has been reported
from Israel.
Most Blastomyces infections are sporadic, but at least 20 outbreaks
have been reported, and most of these outbreaks have included pediatric patients. Outbreaks have been associated with construction or
outdoor activities (camping, hiking, fishing, rafting on a river, using a
community compost pile); however, some outbreaks have no identifiable risk factors other than geography. Although blastomycosis is often
thought to be an infection that primarily affects persons residing in or
visiting rural areas, outbreaks and sporadic cases of blastomycosis are
well reported in urban areas. Blastomycosis outbreak investigations in
Wisconsin suggested that persons of Hmong ethnicity are at increased
risk for the disease, which may be the result of polymorphisms in the
interleukin-­6 (IL-­6) gene. These polymorphisms result in reduced
IL-­6 cytokine production and CD4+ T lymphocytes that produce IL-­
17, which in turn, impairs activation of neutrophils and macrophages
against Blastomyces. Although persons of Hmong ethnicity are at
increased risk for blastomycosis, they do not appear to be at risk for
disseminated infection. Increased incidence of blastomycosis has also
been reported in indigenous persons living in the United States and
Canada.
The severity of infection is influenced by the size of the inhaled
inoculum and the integrity of the patient’s immune system. Solid organ
transplant recipients are at risk for severe pulmonary blastomycosis,
including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS); however, they
are not at higher risk for disseminated infection. Although blastomycosis is uncommon in persons immunosuppressed with AIDS, there
is an increased risk for dissemination to the central nervous system
(CNS). Persons receiving tumor necrosis factor-­α inhibitors are at risk
for blastomycosis, but rates of dissemination or severe disease are not
well defined.

PATHOGENESIS

The ability of mycelial fragments and spores to convert to yeast in the
lung is a crucial event in the pathogenesis of infection with Blastomyces
and other dimorphic fungi. This temperature-­dependent morphologic
shift, which is known as the phase transition, enables Blastomyces to
evade the host immune system and establish infection. In the yeast
form, the essential virulence factor BAD1 (Blastomyces adhesin-­1; formerly WI-­1) is secreted into the extracellular milieu and binds back
to chitin on the fungal cell wall. BAD1 is a multifunctional protein
that promotes binding of yeast to alveolar macrophages (via CR3 and
CD14 receptors) and lung tissue (via heparan sulfate), blocks the deposition of complement on the yeast surface, binds calcium, suppresses
the host’s ability to produce cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-­α, IL-­17,
interferon-­gamma), and inhibits activation of CD4+ T lymphocytes.
Deletion of BAD1 abolishes virulence of Blastomyces yeast in a murine
model of pulmonary infection.
The phase transition between mold and yeast forms is a complex
event that involves alteration in cell wall composition, metabolism,
intracellular signaling, and gene expression. The morphologic shift
to yeast is regulated in part by a histidine kinase known as DRK1
(dimorphism regulating kinase-­1). This sensor kinase controls not
only the conversion of mold to yeast but also spore production,
cell wall composition, and BAD1 expression; the loss of DRK1 gene
expression through gene disruption renders B. dermatitidis avirulent in a murine model of pulmonary blastomycosis. The function
of DRK1 is conserved in other thermally dimorphic fungi, including
Histoplasma capsulatum and Talaromyces marneffei (formerly Penicillium marneffei).
The phase transition is reversible, and after a drop in temperature
from 37°C (98.6°F) to 22°C (71.6°F), yeast convert to sporulating
mold. Growth as mold promotes survival in the soil, allows for sexual
reproduction to enhance genetic diversity, and facilitates transmission
to new hosts (via spores and mycelial fragments). The transition from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 285 u Blastomycosis

1935

yeast to mold is influenced by SREB (siderophore biosynthesis repressor in Blastomyces) and N-­acetylglucosamine transporters (NGT1,
NGT2). Deletion of SREB, which encodes a GATA transcription factor, results in the failure of B. dermatitidis yeast to complete the conversion to mold at 22°C. N-­Acetylglucosamine, which polymerizes to
form chitin, accelerates the transition to hyphae via NGT1 and NGT2
transporters.
Innate and adaptive immune systems are required to effectively control infection; humoral immunity is dispensable. Macrophages and
neutrophils are capable of ingesting and killing Blastomyces conidia.
In contrast, yeast are poorly killed by nonactivated macrophages, are
resistant to reactive oxygen species, and suppress nitric oxide production. Adaptive immunity is mediated by T lymphocytes (Th1 and
Th17), which activate macrophages and neutrophils to facilitate clearance of infection. After infection, cell-­mediated immunity against Blastomyces can last for at least 2 years.

to rates in adult patients (15–48%). B. dermatitidis is more likely to
cause disseminated infection, whereas B. gilchristii is more likely to
remain localized to the lungs. The skin is the most common site for
extrapulmonary blastomycosis, which is usually the result of hematogenous dissemination. Direct inoculation of B. dermatitidis into the
skin from trauma or a laboratory accident can result in primary cutaneous blastomycosis. Skin manifestations include plaques, papules,
ulcers, nodules, and verrucous lesions. Erythema nodosum is rare in
blastomycosis. Dissemination of B. dermatitidis to the bone results in
lytic destruction, pain, soft tissue swelling, sinus tract formation, and
ulceration. The ribs, skull, spine, and long bones are most commonly
affected. Patients with osteomyelitis often have pulmonary or cutaneous involvement. Vertebral osteomyelitis can be complicated by paraspinal abscess, psoas abscess, and vertebral body collapse. Extension
of long bone osteomyelitis can result in pathologic fracture or septic
arthritis. Genitourinary blastomycosis occurs in just under 10% of
adults but is rare in children.
CNS blastomycosis (brain abscess, meningitis) occurs in <10% of
immunocompetent patients but in up to 40% of persons with AIDS.
The majority of patients with CNS blastomycosis have clinically apparent infection at non-­CNS sites (e.g., lung, skin, mass lesion). Symptoms
of CNS infection include headache, altered mental status, memory loss,
seizure, cranial nerve deficits, and focal neurologic deficits. Complications include hydrocephalus, cerebral herniation, infarction, panhypopituitarism, residual weakness, and poor functioning in school.
Lumbar puncture demonstrates leukocytosis with a neutrophil or lymphocyte predominance, elevated protein, and low glucose. Growth of
Blastomyces in culture from cerebrospinal fluid occurs in less than 50%
of affected patients.
Blastomycosis can complicate pregnancy, and clinical information is limited to case reports. Disseminated infection involving
the lungs, skin, and bone is common. Spread of infection to the
placenta has been documented by histopathology; however, the
frequency of placental blastomycosis remains unknown. Transmission of Blastomyces to the fetus is uncommon and is postulated to
occur through transplacental transmission or aspiration of infected
vaginal secretions. Although clinical data are limited, blastomycosis
during pregnancy does not appear to increase the risk for congenital malformations.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 285.1 Left lung infection in a patient with symptoms resembling

acute bacterial pneumonia. Organisms of Blastomyces in the sputum
seen with potassium hydroxide preparation, and subsequent culture
confirmed the diagnosis. (From Bradsher RW Jr. Blastomycoses. In:
Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin R, et al, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed, Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Fig. 266-­5.)

The clinical manifestations of blastomycosis are diverse and include
subclinical infection, symptomatic pneumonia, and disseminated disease. Clinical disease develops 3 weeks to 3 months after inhalation of
spores or mycelial fragments. Asymptomatic or subclinical infections
are estimated to occur in 50% of patients.
The most common clinical manifestation of blastomycosis is pneumonia, which can range from acute to chronic. Acute symptoms
resemble community-­
acquired pneumonia and include fever, dyspnea, cough, chest pain, and malaise (Fig. 285.1). Respiratory failure,
including ARDS, can occur in patients with an overwhelming burden
of infection. The most common chest imaging pattern is air space consolidation with or without air bronchograms. Any lobe of the lung can
be involved, and multiple lobe involvement is not uncommon. Other
radiographic features include masslike consolidation, nodules with
cavity formation, reticulonodular pattern, and miliary disease. Hilar
adenopathy and pleural effusions occur in approximately 20% of cases.
Because the clinical and radiographic features often mimic bacterial
pneumonia, patients can be mistakenly treated with antibiotics, resulting in disease progression, which can result in disseminated disease or
respiratory failure, including ARDS. Patients with subacute or chronic
pneumonia experience fevers, chills, night sweats, cough, weight loss,
hemoptysis, dyspnea, and chest pain. Mass lesions and cavitary disease
on chest roentgenography can mimic malignancy and tuberculosis,
respectively.
Extrapulmonary blastomycosis most often affects the skin or
bone but can involve almost any organ. The incidence of extrapulmonary blastomycosis in children ranges from 38% to 50%, similar

The diagnosis of blastomycosis requires a high index of suspicion
because the clinical and radiographic manifestations can mimic other
diseases, including community-­
acquired pneumonia, tuberculosis,
and malignancy. The misdiagnosis of blastomycosis, most often as
community-­acquired pneumonia, results in a delay of therapy and
progression of disease, including dissemination and respiratory failure. In addition, absence of exposure to traditional environmental
risk factors for blastomycosis can lead to a delay in diagnosis. Blastomycosis should be included in the differential diagnosis for patients
with pneumonia who (1) live in or visit areas in which this pathogen is
endemic, (2) fail to respond to a treatment course of antibiotics, or (3)
have concomitant skin lesions or osteomyelitis. A detailed medical history regarding exposure risks (e.g., canoeing, rafting, hiking, fishing,
playing in outdoor forts, beaver dam exploration, home remodeling,
nearby road or building construction, woodpile for a wood burning
stove, and use of a community compost pile) should be obtained. In
addition, the health of family pets such as dogs should be ascertained,
as canine disease may be a harbinger of human infection. Studies from
Wisconsin and Minnesota have demonstrated that 7.7–10% of persons
with blastomycosis have a dog with concomitant or prior blastomycosis. The incidence of canine blastomycosis is 10-­fold higher than
human blastomycosis, and canine infection suggests a common source
of environmental Blastomyces exposure.
Growth of Blastomyces in culture from sputum, skin, bone, or other
clinical specimens provides a definitive diagnosis. Sputum specimens
should be stained with 10% potassium hydroxide or calcofluor white.
Histopathology shows neutrophilic infiltration with noncaseating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1936 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
granulomas (pyogranulomas). Blastomyces yeast in tissue samples
can be visualized using Gomori methenamine silver or periodic acid–
Schiff stains. Yeasts are 4-­29 μm in size, have a double refractile cell
wall, and are characterized by broad-­based budding between mother
and daughter cells.
Nonculture diagnostic techniques should be used in conjunction with fungal smears and cultures to facilitate the diagnosis
of blastomycosis. The development of a Blastomyces antigen test
has supplanted insensitive serologic methods such as complement
fixation and immunodiffusion. Urine, serum, cerebrospinal fluid,
and bronchoalveolar fluid specimens can be collected for the Blastomyces antigen test. Sensitivity of the urine antigen test ranges
from 85% to 93% and is influenced by the burden of infection.
The antigen test has similar sensitivity for B. dermatitidis and B.
gilchristii, but ability to detect other species is poorly characterized. The antigen test can cross react with other dimorphic fungi,
including Histoplasma capsulatum, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis,
and Penicillium marneffei, decreasing the specificity to 76.9–79%.
An antibody test against the BAD1 protein has been developed and
has a sensitivity of 87.8% and a specificity of 94–99%; however,
this test is not yet commercially available. Combination antigen
and BAD1 antibody testing can increase diagnostic sensitivity to
97.6%.

TREATMENT

Antifungal therapy is influenced by the severity of the infection,
involvement of the CNS, the integrity of the host’s immune system, and
pregnancy. All persons diagnosed with blastomycosis should receive
antifungal therapy. Newborns with blastomycosis should be treated
with amphotericin B deoxycholate 1 mg/kg/day. Children with mild
to moderately severe infection can be treated with itraconazole 10
mg/kg/day (maximum: 400 mg/day) for 6-­12 months. Children with
severe disease, immunodeficiency, or immunosuppression should
be treated with amphotericin B deoxycholate 0.7-­1.0 mg/kg/day or
lipid amphotericin B 3-­5 mg/kg/day until there is clinical improvement, generally 7-­14 days, and then itraconazole 10 mg/kg/day (maximum: 400 mg/day) for a total of 12 months. Central nervous system
blastomycosis requires therapy with lipid amphotericin B 5 mg/kg/day
for 4-­6 weeks, followed by itraconazole, fluconazole, or voriconazole
for ≥12 months.
All pediatric patients of childbearing age should undergo pregnancy
testing before initiation of azole antifungals. Itraconazole can increase
the risk for spontaneous abortion, and fluconazole can cause craniofacial defects resembling Antley-­Bixler syndrome. Voriconazole and
posaconazole cause skeletal abnormalities in animal models. Treatment of blastomycosis in pregnant patients consists of lipid amphotericin B 3-­5 mg/kg/day for 6-­8 weeks.
For patients receiving itraconazole, the oral antifungal of choice,
therapeutic drug monitoring should be performed 14 days into therapy (goal total itraconazole level 1-­5 μg/mL), and liver function tests
should be monitored periodically. Because of the long half-­life of itraconazole, serum drug levels can be obtained at any time of the day,
irrespective of when the drug was administered. Total itraconazole
level is determined by adding itraconazole and hydroxyitraconazole
concentrations; hydroxyitraconazole is a metabolite that possesses
antifungal activity. Voriconazole, posaconazole, and isavuconazonium sulfate have activity against B. dermatitidis. Clinical experience
with these drugs is growing, and treatment outcomes are promising. Therapeutic drug monitoring is recommended for voriconazole
and posaconazole (goal trough levels 1-­5 μg/mL) and can be considered with isavuconazonium sulfate. The echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin) should not be used to treat
blastomycosis. Serial measurement of urine antigen levels to assess
response to therapy can be a helpful adjunct in monitoring response
to antifungal therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 286

Coccidioidomycosis
(Coccidioides Species)
Felicia A. Scaggs Huang and
Rebecca C. Brady
ETIOLOGY

Coccidioidomycosis (valley fever, San Joaquin fever, desert rheumatism, coccidioidal granuloma) is caused by Coccidioides spp., a soil-­
dwelling dimorphic fungus. Coccidioides spp. grow in the environment
as spore-­
bearing (arthroconidia-­
bearing) mycelial forms. In their
parasitic form, they appear as unique, endosporulating spherules in
infected tissue. The two recognized species, C. immitis and C. posadasii,
cause clinically indistinguishable illnesses.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Coccidioides spp. inhabit soil in arid regions. C. immitis is primarily found in California’s San Joaquin Valley. C. posadasii is endemic
to southern regions of Arizona, Utah, Nevada, New Mexico, western
Texas, and regions of Mexico and Central and South America. The risk
of infection among long-­term residents in endemic regions is 3% per
year.
Population migrations into endemic areas and increasing numbers
of immunosuppressed persons have caused coccidioidomycosis to
become an important health problem. From 2000 to 2012 in California, 4,582 cases, 1,301 hospitalizations, and 11 deaths associated with
coccidioidomycosis were reported in children, who accounted for 9.2%
of total cases. From 2015 to 2016, the rate of coccidioidomycosis cases
among California children increased from 2.1 per 100,000 to 5.2 per
100,000. Case and hospitalization rates were highest in males and those
12-­17 years. Another recent California study showed that 55% of children were hospitalized, with a median length of stay of 44 days.
Infection results from inhalation of aerosolized spores. Incidence
increases during windy, dry periods that follow rainy seasons. Seismic
events, archaeologic excavations, and other activities that disturb contaminated sites have caused outbreaks. Person-­to-­person transmission
does not occur. Rarely, infections result from spores that contaminate
fomites or grow beneath casts or wound dressings of infected patients.
Infection has also resulted from transplantation of organs from infected
donors and from mother to fetus. Visitors to endemic areas can acquire
infections, and diagnosis may be delayed when they are evaluated in
nonendemic areas. Spores are highly virulent, and Coccidioides spp. are
potential agents of bioterrorism (see Chapter 763).

PATHOGENESIS

Inhaled spores reach terminal bronchioles, where they transform into
septated spherules that resist phagocytosis and within which many
endospores develop. Released endospores transform into new spherules, and the process results in an acute focus of infection. Endospores
can also disseminate lymphohematogenously. Eventually, a granulomatous reaction predominates. Both recovery and protection upon
reexposure depend on effective cellular immunity.
Children with congenital primary immunodeficiency disorders may
be at increased risk for infection; these disorders include interleukin-­
12Rβ1 deficiency, interferon-­
γR1 deficiency, and STAT1 gain-­of-­
function mutations.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical spectrum (Fig. 286.1) encompasses pulmonary and
extrapulmonary disease. Pulmonary infection occurs in 95% of
cases and can be divided into primary, complicated, and residual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 286 u Coccidioidomycosis (Coccidioides Species)

1937

Primary Pulmonary Infection
60%

40%

Asymptomatic Infection
(occasional residual
pulmonary cavity,
nodule)

Symptomatic Infection
75-85% Spontaneous recovery
5-10% Residual pulmonary
disease (cavity or nodule)
5-10% Extrapulmonary
dissemination

Fig. 286.1 Natural history of coccidioidomycosis.
infections. Approximately 60% of infections are asymptomatic.
Symptoms in children are often milder than those in adults. The
incidence of extrapulmonary dissemination in children approaches
that of adults.

Primary Coccidioidomycosis

The incubation period is 1-­4 weeks, with an average of 10-­16 days. Early
symptoms include malaise, chills, fever, and night sweats. Chest discomfort occurs in 50–70% of patients and varies from mild tightness to
severe pain. Headache and/or backache are sometimes reported. Evanescent, generalized, fine macular, erythematous or urticarial eruptions
may be seen within the first few days of infection. Erythema nodosum
can occur (more often in females) and is sometimes accompanied by
erythema multiforme, usually 3-­21 days after the onset of symptoms.
The clinical constellation of erythema nodosum, fever, chest pain, and
arthralgias (especially knees and ankles) is called desert rheumatism
and valley fever. Profound fatigue can occur and lasts weeks to months.
Of note, extrapulmonary manifestations of a primary pulmonary
infection do not necessarily represent disseminated disease. In hospitalized children, pulmonary symptoms are most common. The chest
examination is often normal even if radiographic findings are present.
Dullness to percussion, friction rub, or fine rales may be present. Pleural effusions can occur and can become large enough to compromise
respiratory status. Hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy are common (Fig. 286.2).

Complicated Pulmonary Infection

Complicated infections include severe and persistent pneumonia, progressive primary coccidioidomycosis, progressive fibrocavitary disease,
transient cavities that develop in areas of pulmonary consolidation,
and empyema that follows rupture of a cavity into the pleural space.
Some cavities persist, are thin walled and peripheral, and cause no
symptoms; occasionally there is mild hemoptysis, and rarely there is
serious hemorrhage. Rarely, acute respiratory insufficiency occurs after
intense exposure; this condition is associated with high mortality rates.

Residual Pulmonary Coccidioidomycosis

Residual pulmonary coccidioidomycosis includes fibrosis and persisting pulmonary nodules. Nodules are present in 5–7% of infections and
sometimes require differentiation from malignancy in adults.

Fig. 286.2 Chest radiograph of a 19-­yr-­old male with acute primary
coccidioidomycosis. There is prominent hilar lymphadenopathy and
mediastinal widening.

Table 286.1  Risk Factors for Poor Outcome in Patients
with Active Coccidioidomycosis
PRIMARY INFECTIONS
Severe, prolonged (≥6 wk), or progressive infection
RISK FACTORS FOR EXTRAPULMONARY DISSEMINATION
Primary or acquired cellular immune dysfunction (including
patients receiving tumor necrosis factor inhibitors or high-­dose
glucocorticoids)
Neonates, infants, the elderly
Male sex (adult)
Filipino, African, Native American, or Latin American ethnicity
Late-­stage pregnancy and early postpartum period
Standardized complement fixation antibody titer >1:16 or increasing
titer with persisting symptoms
Blood group B
Human leukocyte antigen class II allele-­DRBI*1301
Diabetes mellitus

Disseminated (Extrapulmonary) Infection

Clinically apparent dissemination occurs in 0.5% of patients. Its incidence is increased in infants; men; pregnant women who become
infected during the second and third trimesters; persons of Filipino,
African, and Latin American ancestry; and persons from other Asian
backgrounds. Primary or acquired disorders of cellular immunity
(Table 286.1) markedly increase the risk of dissemination. A convenience sample of 108 children in California reported that diagnosis
occurred a median of 57 days after symptom onset in those with disseminated infection (compared to 16 days in those with acute or pulmonary coccidioidomycosis).
Symptoms usually occur within 6 months of primary infection.
Prolonged fever, toxicity, skin lesions, subcutaneous and/or osseous cold abscesses, and laryngeal lesions can herald the onset. Skin

lesions have a predilection for the nasolabial area and appear initially
as papules, which evolve to form pustules, plaques, abscesses, and
verrucous plaques. Biopsy of these lesions demonstrates spherules.
Basilar meningitis is the most common manifestation and may
be accompanied by ventriculitis, ependymitis, cerebral vasculitis,
abscess, and syringomyelia. Headache, vomiting, meningismus, and
cranial nerve dysfunction are often present. Untreated meningitis is
almost invariably fatal. Hydrocephalus is the most common complication in surviving patients. Bone infections account for 20–50% of
extrapulmonary manifestations, are often multifocal, and can affect
adjacent structures. Miliary dissemination and peritonitis can mimic
tuberculosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1938 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
DIAGNOSIS

Nonspecific tests have limited usefulness. Most routine laboratory
evaluations are unremarkable. Complete blood count might show an
elevated eosinophil count; marked eosinophilia can accompany dissemination. As a result, a high index of suspicion is required to direct
an appropriate workup, especially in patients who have visited or reside
in an endemic area.

Culture, Histopathologic Findings, and Antigen
Detection

Any isolation of Coccidioides spp. from a patient specimen is considered definitive evidence of infection because the fungus is not part of
the normal human microbiome. However, although diagnostic, culture
is positive in only 8.3% of respiratory tract specimens and in 3.2% of
all other sites. It may take several days for a specimen to grow. Coccidioides spp. is isolated from clinical specimens as the spore-­bearing
mold form, and thus the laboratory should be informed and use special precautions when the diagnosis is suspected. Inappropriate biocontainment procedures can lead to infection of exposed laboratory
staff. The observation of endosporulating spherules in histopathologic
specimens using potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparations, calcofluor
white, or hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains is diagnostic. Periodic
acid Schiff–or Gomori–methenamine silver stains also may be used to
demonstrate the fungus.
A quantitative enzyme immunoassay (EIA) (MiraVista Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) that detects coccidioidal galactomannan in
urine, serum, plasma, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), or bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid has excellent specificity and is positive in 70% of patients
with severe infections. Although the EIA can cross react with other
endemic mycoses, interpretation is often straightforward because
there is negligible geographic overlap with areas endemic for other
mycoses. In addition, a real-­time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assay has been developed to directly detect the fungus in tissue samples. The specificity is high, but sensitivity is not greater than that of
routine cultures. Presently, Coccidioides spp. PCR is available through
reference laboratories.
CSF analysis should be performed in patients with suspected
dissemination. Findings in meningitis are similar to those seen
with tuberculous meningitis (see Chapter 261). Eosinophilic
pleocytosis may be present. Fungal stains and culture are usually
negative. Volumes of 10 mL in adults have improved the yield of
culture.

Serology

Serologic tests provide valuable diagnostic information but may be
falsely negative early in self-­limited infections and in immunocompromised patients. Three major methods are used, including EIA,
complement fixation (CF), and immunodiffusion. EIA and CF tests are
best done in experienced reference laboratories because false-­positive
results may be reported.
Immunoglobulin (Ig) M–specific antibody becomes measurable in
50% of infected patients 1 week after onset and in 90% of infected
patients by 3 weeks. EIA is sensitive and can detect IgM and IgG
antibody. It is less specific than other methods; confirmation with
immunodiffusion or CF may be needed. IgG antibodies measured by
CF appear between the second and third week but can take several
months; follow-­up testing is needed if tests are negative and clinical
suspicion persists. In the presence of CF titers of 1:2 or 1:4, a positive
immunodiffusion test can help corroborate significance because it is
less sensitive but more specific than EIA. IgG-­specific antibody can
persist for months, with titers elevated in proportion to the severity of illness. CF titers >1:16 are suggestive of dissemination. Direct
comparison of the results of CF (IgG) antibody tests measured by
different methodologies should be interpreted with caution. IgG antibody titers used to monitor disease activity should be tested concurrently with serum samples taken earlier in the illness using the same
methodology.

A

B
Fig. 286.3 A, Chest radiograph revealing a chronic cavitary lesion in
the right lung of a female with coccidioidomycosis. B, CT showing the
same cavity in the right lung.

C. immitis antibody is present in CSF in 95% of patients with meningitis and is usually diagnostic. Rarely, “spillover” in patients without
meningitis but with high IgG titers in serum can be present in CSF. Isolation of Coccidioides spp. from CSF culture of patients with meningitis
is uncommon, although culture of large volumes of CSF may improve
sensitivity.

Imaging Procedures

During primary infection, chest radiography may be normal or demonstrate consolidation, single or multiple circumscribed lesions, or soft
pulmonary densities. Pulmonary infiltrates in the upper lobes are more
common in coccidioidal infection than in classic bacterial pneumonia.
Hilar and subcarinal lymphadenopathy is often present (see Fig. 286.2).
Cavities tend to be thin walled (Fig. 286.3). Pleural effusions vary in
size. The presence of miliary or reticulonodular lesions is prognostically unfavorable. Isolated or multiple osseous lesions are usually lytic
and affect cancellous bone. Lesions can affect adjacent structures, and
vertebral lesions can affect the spinal cord.

TREATMENT

Based on the few rigorous clinical trials performed in adults and
the opinions of experts in the management of coccidioidomycosis,
consensus treatment guidelines have been developed (Table 286.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 286 u Coccidioidomycosis (Coccidioides Species)
Table 286.2  Indications for Treatment of
Coccidioidomycosis in Adults
INDICATION

TREATMENT

Acute pneumonia, mild

Observe without antifungal
treatment at 1-­to 3-­mo
intervals for 2 yr; some experts
recommend antifungal
treatment

Weight loss >10%; night sweats
>3 wk; infiltrates at least half
of one lung or parts of both
lungs; prominent or persistent
hilar lymphadenopathy;
complement fixation titers
>1:16; inability to work,
symptoms >2 mo

Treat with an azole daily for
3-­6 mo, with follow-­up at 1-­to
3-­mo intervals for 2 yr

Uncomplicated acute
pneumonia, special
circumstances:
immunosuppression, late
pregnancy, Filipino or African
ancestry, age >55 yr, other
chronic diseases (diabetes,
cardiopulmonary disease),
symptoms >2 mo

Treat with an azole daily for
3-­6 mo, with follow-­up at 1-­to
3-­mo intervals for 2 yr
Treat with amphotericin B if in
late pregnancy

Diffuse pneumonia:
reticulonodular or miliary
infiltrates suggest underlying
immunodeficiency and possible
fungemia

Treat initially with amphotericin
B if significant hypoxia or rapid
deterioration, followed by an
azole for ≥1 yr
In mild cases, an azole for ≥1 yr

Chronic pneumonia

Treat with an azole for ≥1 yr

Disseminated disease,
nonmeningeal

Treat with an azole for ≥1 yr
except in severe or rapidly
worsening cases, for
which amphotericin B is
recommended

Disseminated disease,
meningeal

Treat with fluconazole (some add
intrathecal amphotericin B) and
treat indefinitely

Consultation with experts in an area of endemicity should be considered when formulating a management plan. Many patients with mild
primary coccidioidomycosis do not require antifungal therapy. However, those at risk of severe or complicated disease should receive
treatment.
Treatment is recommended for HIV-­infected patients with active
coccidioidomycosis and CD4 counts <250/μL. After successful treatment, antifungals may be stopped if the CD4 count exceeds 250/μL.
Treatment should be continued if the CD4 count remains less than
250/μL and should be given indefinitely in all HIV-­infected patients
with coccidioidal meningitis. Patients with other forms of chronic
immunosuppression (e.g., solid organ transplant recipients) may also
require lifelong therapy.
First-­line agents include oral and intravenous preparations of fluconazole (6-12 mg/kg; max 400-1200 mg/day) and itraconazole (2-5 mg/
kg PO twice daily; max 400 mg/day). Fluconazole is often the first-­line
therapy because it has high bioavailability and few side effects. Serum
concentrations of itraconazole should be monitored.
Amphotericin B is preferred for initial treatment of severe infections. Amphotericin B deoxycholate is less costly than lipid formulations and is often well tolerated in children. Once a daily dose of
amphotericin B deoxycholate of 0.5-­1.5 mg/kg/day is achieved, the
frequency of administration can be reduced to 3 times weekly. The
recommended total dosage ranges from 15-­45 mg/kg and is determined by the clinical response. Lipid formulations of amphotericin are

1939

recommended for patients with impaired renal function, for patients
receiving other nephrotoxic agents, or if amphotericin B deoxycholate
is not tolerated. Some experts prefer liposomal amphotericin to treat
central nervous system infections because it achieves higher levels
in brain parenchyma. Amphotericin B preparations do not cross the
blood-­brain barrier to effectively treat Coccidioides spp., but they can
mask the signs of meningitis. Infections during pregnancy should be
treated with amphotericin B, because the azoles are potentially teratogenic. Isavuconazole, voriconazole, and posaconazole have been used
successfully as salvage therapy.

Primary Pulmonary Infection

Primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis resolves in 95% of patients
without risk factors for dissemination; antifungal therapy does not
lessen the frequency of dissemination or pulmonary residua. When it
is elected to defer antifungal therapy, visits are recommended at 1-­to
3-­month intervals for 2 years and as needed.
Patients with significant or prolonged symptoms are more likely to
incur benefit from antifungal agents, but there are no established criteria upon which to base the decision. Table 286.2 summarizes commonly
used indicators in adults. A treatment trial in adults with primary respiratory infections examined outcomes of antifungal therapy prescribed
on the basis of severity and compared them with an untreated group
with less severe symptoms; complications occurred only in patients in
the treatment group and only in those in whom treatment was stopped.
If treatment is elected, a 3-­to 6-­month course of fluconazole (12 mg/
kg/day) or itraconazole (10 mg/kg/day) is recommended.

Diffuse Pneumonia

Diffuse reticulonodular densities or miliary infiltrates, sometimes
accompanied by severe illness, can occur in dissemination or after
exposure to a large fungal inoculum. In this setting, amphotericin B
is recommended for initial treatment, followed thereafter by extended
treatment with high-­dose fluconazole (see Table 286.2).

Disseminated (Extrapulmonary) Infection

For nonmeningeal infection (see Table 286.2), oral fluconazole and
itraconazole are effective for treating disseminated coccidioidomycosis
that is not extensive, is not progressing rapidly, and has not affected
the central nervous system. Some experts recommend higher doses for
adults than were used in clinical trials. A subgroup analysis showed a
tendency for improved response of skeletal infections that were treated
with itraconazole. Amphotericin B deoxycholate is used as an alternative, especially if there is rapid worsening and lesions are in critical
locations. Voriconazole has been used successfully as salvage therapy.
The optimal duration of therapy with the azoles has not been clearly
defined. Late relapses have occurred after lengthy treatment and favorable clinical response.

Meningitis

Therapy with oral or IV fluconazole is currently preferred for coccidioidal meningitis. In adults, a dosage of 400-­1,200 mg/day is recommended. For children, the dose is 12 mg/kg/day. Some experts use
intrathecal, intraventricular, or intracisternally administered amphotericin B in addition to an azole, believing that the clinical response
may be faster. Patients who respond to the azole should continue
treatment indefinitely. Hydrocephalus is common and not necessarily
a marker of treatment failure. In the event of treatment failure with
azoles, intrathecal amphotericin B deoxycholate is indicated, with or
without the azole. Cerebral vasculitis can occur and may predispose to
cerebral ischemia, infarction, or hemorrhage. The efficacy of high-­dose
steroids is unresolved. Salvage therapy with isavuconazole or voriconazole has been effective.

Surgical Management

If a pulmonary cavity is located peripherally or there is recurrent
bleeding or pleural extension, excision may be needed. Infrequently,
bronchopleural fistula or recurrent cavitation occurs as a surgical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1940 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
complication; rarely, dissemination can result. Perioperative intravenous amphotericin B may be considered. Drainage of cold abscesses,
synovectomy, and curettage or excision of osseous lesions are sometimes needed. Surgical consultation is appropriate if vertebral involvement is identified to evaluate for spinal cord involvement. Local and
systemic administration of amphotericin B can be used to treat coccidioidal articular disease.

Monitoring

Patients should be followed closely because late relapses can occur
despite treatment, especially in those who are immunosuppressed
or have severe manifestations. Testing for CF antibodies should be
obtained every 12 weeks during treatment. Most titers decline as the
patient improves and ultimately become undetectable. However, titers
may remain positive in recovered patients. Progressive or disseminated
disease should be considered when titers are persistently elevated
(>1:32). These individuals may need thorough physical examinations
and imaging studies. After completion of therapy, patients should
be evaluated yearly for at least 2 years because some patients relapse
(28% of adults who completed 12 months of fluconazole, 18% for
itraconazole).

Refractory Disease

In patients who do not improve clinically on appropriate therapy,
develop new symptoms, or have persistently elevated CF titers, investigations are indicated for complicated and disseminated disease. Evaluations should assess for joint effusions, skin lesions, and neurologic
dysfunction. Consultation with a physician experienced in the management of coccidioidal infections should be considered.

PREVENTION

Prevention relies on education about ways to reduce exposure. Physicians practicing in nonendemic regions should incorporate careful
travel histories when evaluating patients with symptoms compatible
with coccidioidomycosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 287

Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis
Andrew P. Steenhoff
ETIOLOGY

Paracoccidioidomycosis (South American or Brazilian blastomycosis,
Lutz-­Splendore-­Almeida disease) is the most common systemic mycosis in Latin America. It is a fungal infection that is endemic in South
America, with cases also reported in Mexico and Central America. Brazil
accounts for more than 80% of all reported cases. The etiologic agent,
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, is a thermally dimorphic fungus found in
the environment in the mycelial (mold) form and in tissues as yeast.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

P. brasiliensis is a soil-­inhabiting microorganism and is ecologically
unique to Central and South America. Endemic outbreaks occur
mainly in the tropical rainforests of Brazil, with cases scattered in
Argentina, Colombia, and Venezuela. There is an increased incidence

in areas with moderately high altitude, with high humidity and rainfall,
and where coffee and tobacco are grown. Armadillos appear to be a
natural reservoir for P. brasiliensis. The most common route of infection is by inhalation of conidia. The disease is not usually thought to
be contagious, and person-­to-­person transmission has not been confirmed. Paracoccidioidomycosis is more common among boys after
puberty because of the role of estrogen in preventing the transition of
conidia to the yeast form. Children account for <10% of the total number of cases.

PATHOGENESIS

Invasion of P. brasiliensis into the human body is based on a myriad of
fungal components and strategies to bypass host defense mechanisms.
With the emergence of CRISPR technology and full access to diverse
databanks (such as genomes, transcriptomes, proteomes, metabolomes, lipidomes), investigators are poised to better understand the
virulence processes of P. brasiliensis, hopefully allowing translation
into benefits for patients.
The entry route into the body is via the respiratory tract, and
the lungs are the site of primary infection, although not all patients
have respiratory symptoms. Once the conidia or hyphal fragments
reach the alveoli, yeast transformation takes place. The infection
then spreads to the mucous membranes of the nose, mouth, and
gastrointestinal tract. Cell-­
mediated immunity, mainly through
lymphocytes and the production of Th-­1 cytokines, is crucial to
containing the infection. Tumor necrosis factor-­α and interferon-­γ
activated macrophages are responsible for intracellular killing
of P. brasiliensis. If the initial immune response is not successful,
the response may shift toward a Th-­2 pattern, which is unable to
contain the infection, resulting in clinical progression. The yeast
can disseminate by the lymphohematogenous route to skin, lymph
nodes, and other organs and remain dormant in lymph nodes, producing a latent infection with reactivation occurring later in life.
There are cases of patients who developed disease 30 or more years
after leaving an endemic region.
Histopathologically, the yeastlike cells are round, with the parent cell
being quite large and surrounded by small buds, giving it the appearance of a ship’s wheel. A mixed suppurative and granulomatous inflammatory reaction with areas of necrosis is seen in pulmonary infections.
In chronic infections, fibrosis and calcification may be seen. Mucocutaneous infections are typified by ulceration and pseudoepitheliomatous
hyperplasia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

There are two clinical forms of disease. The acute form (juvenile
paracoccidioidomycosis) is rare, occurs almost exclusively in children and persons with impaired immunity, and targets the reticuloendothelial system. Pulmonary symptoms may be absent, although
chest radiographs often show patchy, confluent, or nodular densities. Patients typically present acutely with fever, malaise, wasting,
lymphadenopathy, and abdominal enlargement from intraabdominal
lymphadenopathy. Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly are nearly constant. Localized bony lesions have been reported in children and can
progress to systemic disease. Multifocal osteomyelitis, arthritis, and
pericardial effusions can also occur. Nonspecific laboratory findings
include anemia, eosinophilia, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Acute
paracoccidioidomycosis has a 25% mortality rate. Hepatic involvement associated with jaundice and hypoalbuminemia may confer a
worse prognosis.
Adults develop a chronic progressive illness that manifests initially
with flulike symptoms, fever, and weight loss (adult paracoccidioidomycosis). Pulmonary infection develops with dyspnea, cough, chest
pain, and hemoptysis. Findings on physical examination are scant,
although chest radiographs can show infiltrates that are disproportionate with mild clinical findings. Mucositis involving the mouth and its
structures as well as the nose can manifest as localized pain, change in
voice, or dysphagia. Lesions can extend beyond the oral cavity onto
the skin. Generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 288 u Sporotrichosis (Sporothrix schenckii)
adrenal involvement (seen in 15–50% of cases) can lead to Addison
disease. Meningoencephalitis and central nervous system granulomas
can occur as presenting or secondary symptoms. Adults with extensive
exposure to soil, such as farmers, are most likely to develop the chronic
form of the disease.

DIAGNOSIS

Demonstration of the fungus by direct wet mount (potassium hydroxide) preparation of sputum, exudate, or pus supports the diagnosis in
many cases. Histopathologic examination of biopsy specimens using
special fungal staining techniques is also diagnostic. Immunohistochemistry using monoclonal antibodies to specific glycoproteins can
also be done on tissue sections. Culture of the fungus on Sabouraud
dextrose or yeast extract agar confirms the diagnosis. Antibodies to
P. brasiliensis can be demonstrated in most patients. Serial antibody
titers and lymphocyte proliferative responses to fungal antigens are
useful for monitoring the response to therapy. The 43-­kDa glycoprotein (gp43) is present in sera of more than 90% of patients with paracoccidioidomycosis by immunodiffusion (the most commonly used
diagnostic test) and in 100% of patients by immunoblotting. A latex
particle agglutination test using pooled crude fungal exoantigens is
being developed for the detection of anti–P. brasiliensis antibodies
and has shown 92% agreement with the immunodiffusion test. Newer
diagnostic methods that might prove to be very useful in the future
include polymerase chain reaction, detection of gp43, and capture
enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay to detect specific immunoglobulin E in patient sera. Skin testing with paracoccidioidin is not
reliable, because 30–50% of patients with active disease are nonreactive initially, and a positive test indicates previous exposure but not
necessarily active disease.

TREATMENT

Itraconazole (5-­10 mg/kg/day with a maximum dose of 200 mg/
day) orally for 6 months is the treatment of choice for paracoccidioidomycosis. Fluconazole has also been used, but high doses
(≥600 mg/day) and longer treatment periods are required. A small
number of patients have been treated with other azoles, including
voriconazole, posaconazole, and isavuconazole. These drugs are
potential substitutes for itraconazole but are more costly and can
have interactions with other drugs. Terbinafine is an allylamine
that has potent in vitro activity against P. brasiliensis and has been
used for successful treatment of paracoccidioidomycosis. Amphotericin B is recommended for disseminated disease and if other
therapies fail. Therapy with sulfonamide compounds, including
sulfadiazine, TMP-­SMX (trimethoprim 8-­10 mg/kg/day to maximum of 160 mg, sulfamethoxazole 40-­50 mg/kg/day to maximum
of 800 mg), and dapsone, have been used historically and are generally less expensive than the newer azoles and allylamines. The
primary disadvantage is that the treatment course is very long,
lasting months to years, depending on the agent selected. Relapse
can occur after any form of therapy, including with amphotericin
B. In selected patients with intense inflammation in sites such as
the central nervous system or with lung lesions causing respiratory
insufficiency, there is some evidence that use of prednisone for 1-­2
weeks concomitantly with antifungal therapy reduces inflammation more effectively and may be of benefit. Occasionally children
develop paradoxical clinical worsening during treatment, including
new lymph node enlargement, fistula formation, fever, and weight
loss. In this circumstance, steroids are also recommended.
Two therapies currently under investigation include the use of
curcumin, an antioxidant found in the Indian spice turmeric, and
the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine. Curcumin was found to have
more antifungal activity than fluconazole against P. brasiliensis when
studied in vitro using human buccal epithelial cells. Cyclosporine
blocks the thermodimorphism of P. brasiliensis. Animal models demonstrate that fungal whole cells, purified antigens, peptides, and DNA
vaccines have great potential toward the development of a vaccine for
use in humans.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1941

Chapter 288

Sporotrichosis (Sporothrix
schenckii)
Andrew P. Steenhoff
ETIOLOGY

Sporotrichosis is a rare fungal infection that occurs worldwide, both
sporadically and in outbreaks, and is caused by Sporothrix schenckii,
which exhibits temperature dimorphism, existing as a mold at environmental temperatures (25–30°C [77–86°F]) and as a yeast in vivo (37°C
[98.6°F]). S. schenckii comprises a group of cryptic, phylogenetically
related species, including S. brasiliensis, S. chilensis, S. globosa, S. luriei,
S. mexicana, and S. pallida. S brasiliensis is the most virulent species.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

S. schenckii is found throughout the world, but most cases of sporotrichosis are reported from South America, Central America, and Asia,
including Japan, India, and China. In the United States, the majority
of cases have occurred in the Midwest, particularly in areas along the
Mississippi and Missouri rivers. The fungus is found in decaying vegetation and has been isolated most commonly from sphagnum moss,
rosebushes, barberry, straw, and some types of hay. Sporotrichosis can
occur as an occupational disease among farmers, gardeners, veterinarians, and laboratory workers. Transmission from bites and scratches of
animals, most commonly cats and armadillos, has occurred. Reports of
human-­to-­human transmission are rare. Sporotrichosis has rarely been
reported in infants. The mechanism of transmission in children may be
zoonotic but usually is unclear. In one endemic area of Peru, the incidence of infection is greater in children than in adults; risk factors for
infection in these children are playing in crop fields, living in houses
with dirt floors, and owning a cat.

PATHOGENESIS

Disease in humans usually follows cutaneous inoculation of the fungus
into a minor wound. Pulmonary infection can result from the inhalation of large numbers of spores. Disseminated infection is unusual but
can occur in immunocompromised patients after ingestion or inhalation of spores. The cellular immune response to S. schenckii infection
is both neutrophilic and monocytic. Histologically, the coexistence of
noncaseating granulomas and microabscess formation is characteristic. T-­cell–mediated immunity appears to be important in limiting
infection, and antibody does not protect against infection. As a result of
the paucity of organisms, it is usually difficult to demonstrate the fungi
in biopsy specimens.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cutaneous sporotrichosis is the most common form of disease in all
age-­groups. Cutaneous disease may either be lymphocutaneous or
fixed cutaneous, the former being much more common (Fig. 288.1).
Lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis accounts for more than 75% of
reported cases in children and occurs after traumatic subcutaneous
inoculation. After a variable and often prolonged incubation period (1-­
12 weeks), an isolated, painless erythematous papule develops at the
inoculation site. The initial lesion is usually on an extremity in adults
but is often on the face in children. The original papule enlarges and
ulcerates. Although the infection might remain limited to the inoculation site (fixed cutaneous form), satellite lesions follow lymphangitic
spread and appear as multiple tender subcutaneous nodules tracking
along the lymphatic channels that drain the lesion. These secondary
nodules are subcutaneous granulomas that adhere to the overlying skin
and subsequently ulcerate. Sporotrichosis does not heal spontaneously,
and these ulcerative lesions can persist for years if untreated. Systemic
signs and symptoms are uncommon.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1942 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Therapy with azoles or a saturated solution of potassium iodide
should not be used in pregnant women. Amphotericin B can be used
safely for cases of pulmonary or disseminated disease in pregnancy.
Pregnant patients with cutaneous disease can be treated with local
hyperthermia or can have therapy delayed until the pregnancy is completed. Hyperthermia involves heating the affected area to 42–45°C
(107.6–113°F) using water baths or heating pads and works by inhibiting growth of the fungus. Dissemination to the fetus does not occur,
and the disease is not worsened by pregnancy. Surgical debridement
has a role in the treatment of some cases of sporotrichosis, particularly in osteoarticular disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
Fig. 288.1 Sporotrichosis. Erythematous papules and nodules on the

plantar surface with early lymphangitic (sporotrichoid) spread. (From
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 17.48.)

Extracutaneous sporotrichosis is rare in children, and most cases
are reported in adults with underlying medical conditions, including
AIDS and other immunosuppressing diseases. The most common form
of extracutaneous sporotrichosis involves infection of the bones and
joints. Pulmonary sporotrichosis usually manifests as a chronic pneumonitis similar to the presentation of pulmonary tuberculosis. Erythema nodosum is an immunoreactive manifestation.

DIAGNOSIS

Cutaneous and lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis must be differentiated
from other causes of nodular lymphangitis, including atypical mycobacterial infection, nocardiosis, leishmaniasis, tularemia, melioidosis,
cutaneous anthrax, and other systemic mycoses, including coccidioidomycosis. Definitive diagnosis requires isolation of the fungus from
the site of infection by culture. Special histologic staining such as periodic acid–Schiff and methenamine silver is required to identify yeast
forms in tissues, which are typically oval or cigar-­shaped. In spite of
special staining techniques, diagnostic yield from biopsy specimens is
low because of the small number of organisms present in the tissues.
In cases of disseminated disease, demonstration of serum antibody
against S. schenckii–related antigens can be diagnostically useful. Serologic testing is not commercially available but is offered by specialized
laboratories, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in the United States.

TREATMENT

Although comparative trials and extensive experience in children are
not available, itraconazole is the recommended treatment of choice
for infections outside the central nervous system. The recommended
dosage for children is 5-­10 mg/kg/day orally, with an initial maximum
dose of 200 mg daily, which may be increased up to 400 mg daily if
there is no initial response. Alternatively, younger children with
cutaneous disease only may be treated with a saturated solution of
potassium iodide (1 drop, 3 times daily by mouth, increasing as tolerated to a maximum of 1 drop/kg of body weight or 40-­50 drops, 3
times daily, whichever is lowest). Adverse reactions, usually in the form
of nausea and vomiting, should be managed with temporary cessation
of therapy and reinstitution at a lower dosage. Therapy is continued
2-­4 weeks after cutaneous lesions have resolved, which usually takes at
least 6-­12 weeks. Terbinafine has been used successfully to treat cutaneous sporotrichosis but is reported to have lower cure rates and
higher relapse rates than itraconazole. Further clinical efficacy data
are needed to routinely recommend its use. Amphotericin B is the
treatment of choice for pulmonary infections, disseminated infections, central nervous system disease, and infections in immunocompromised persons. Oral fluconazole 12 mg/kg daily (maximum
dose, 400-­800 mg daily) can be used if other agents are not tolerated.
Posaconazole shows promise, but further data are needed.

Chapter 289

Mucormycosis
Rachel L. Wattier and William J. Steinbach
ETIOLOGY

Mucormycosis refers to opportunistic invasive fungal infections
caused by fungi of the order Mucorales. These organisms are found
commonly in soil and decaying organic matter and are distributed
worldwide. Mucormycosis was previously called zygomycosis, but
this terminology has been abandoned because of reclassification of
organisms using molecular phylogenetic analysis. The most common disease-­causing genera of Mucorales are Rhizopus, Mucor, and
Lichtheimia (formerly Absidia). Infections caused by organisms of
the genera Rhizomucor, Cunninghamella, Saksenaea, Apophysomyces, and others are less common. Mucormycosis in humans is characterized by a rapidly evolving course, tissue necrosis, and blood
vessel invasion.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Mucormycosis is primarily a disease of persons with underlying conditions that impair host immunity, though it can sometimes manifest with cutaneous and soft tissue infections at sites of trauma in
immunocompetent hosts. Predisposing factors include poorly controlled diabetes, especially if complicated by ketoacidosis, and profound immunocompromise resulting from therapy for hematologic
malignancies (especially with prolonged neutropenia), stem cell
or organ transplantation, and/or high-­dose corticosteroid therapy.
Other risk factors include iron overload and prematurity. Mucormycosis may develop as a breakthrough infection in patients receiving voriconazole antifungal prophylaxis; voriconazole lacks activity
against the Mucorales. Therefore breakthrough infections or nonresponse to voriconazole should prompt increased consideration of
mucormycosis.
Mucormycosis is the second most common invasive mold infection
in immunocompromised hosts after aspergillosis, and its incidence is
increasing because of an increase in the number and improved survival
of immunocompromised persons at risk. A contemporary review of
reported pediatric cases from 2008 to 2017 found a 32% case fatality
rate across all included cases. Mortality rates vary depending on disease manifestations of mucormycosis and underlying patient conditions, with worse outcomes observed in patients with more extensive
disease manifestations and those with irreversible predisposing risk
factors. However, observational studies suggest that pediatric patients
with mucormycosis generally have more favorable outcomes compared
to adults and that outcomes may be improving over time with contemporary therapeutic approaches.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 289 u Mucormycosis

A

B

C

1943

D

Fig. 289.1 Radiographic findings in mucormycosis. A, CT scan shows left maxillary sinus air-­fluid level, similar to bacterial sinusitis. B, Magnetic

resonance image reveals T2 signal hyperintensity in the left pterygoid musculature (arrow) in conjunction with a left maxillary sinus air-­fluid level. C,
Multiple heterogeneous nodular and consolidative lesions with a large pulmonary vessel infarct and modest pleural effusions are shown in a patient
with cancer and pulmonary mucormycosis. D, Contrast-­enhanced CT scan demonstrates a cavity within a dense infiltrate in a patient with acute myelogenous leukemia and pulmonary mucormycosis. (Courtesy Dr. Edith Marom, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.)

PATHOGENESIS

Spores can be inhaled from the environment into the upper and/or
lower airways, inoculated at sites of cutaneous trauma, or, less commonly, ingested. If, because of impaired immune response, spores
are not cleared by macrophages and neutrophils, they germinate into
hyphae, resulting in local invasion and tissue destruction. Mucormycosis is characterized by extensive angioinvasion, resulting in thrombosis, infarction, and tissue necrosis, which can limit the delivery of
antifungal agents and leukocytes to the site of infection and contribute
to dissemination of the infection to other organs.
Many of the Mucorales can scavenge iron, an element essential for
cell growth, from the host. The iron chelator deferoxamine paradoxically increases iron availability and uptake by members of the Mucorales. Acidosis diminishes the phagocytic and chemotactic ability of
neutrophils while increasing the availability of unbound iron, likely
explaining the susceptibility to mucormycosis among individuals with
uncontrolled acidosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Mucormycosis can occur as any of several clinical syndromes, including
rhinocerebral, pulmonary, cutaneous or subcutaneous, gastrointestinal,
or disseminated disease. The initial symptoms and signs of each may be
subtle and not easily distinguishable from other infections, so it is important to have a high index of suspicion for the disease in patients at risk.
Rhinocerebral mucormycosis is the most common form and can
involve the palate, sinuses, orbit, and/or adjacent structures with
potential progression to the brain. Initial symptoms are similar to
sinusitis and include headache, retroorbital pain, fever, and nasal discharge. Infection can evolve rapidly or be slowly progressive. Orbital
involvement manifests as periorbital edema, proptosis, ptosis, and/
or ophthalmoplegia. The nasal discharge may be dark and bloody;
involved tissues become red, then violaceous, and then black as vessel
thrombosis and tissue necrosis occur. Extension beyond the nasal cavity into the mouth is common and may be apparent as palatal lesion(s).
Destructive paranasal sinusitis with bone involvement and possible
intracranial extension can be demonstrated by computed tomography
(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Fig. 289.1). Rhinocerebral mucormycosis can be complicated by cavernous sinus thrombosis
or thrombosis of the internal carotid artery. Intracranial extension can
occur directly from the nasal cavity and sinuses, usually to the frontal
or frontotemporal lobes, or hematogenously, commonly involving the
occipital lobe or brainstem.
Pulmonary mucormycosis usually occurs in profoundly neutropenic patients and presents similarly to other pulmonary invasive mold
infections. Manifestations can include fever, tachypnea, productive
cough, pleuritic chest pain, and hemoptysis; however, initial symptoms may be minimal. A wide range of pulmonary radiographic findings, including pulmonary nodules, consolidation, cavitary lesion(s),
and lung infarct(s), are recognized (see Fig. 289.1). Although the
radiographic findings overlap with other pulmonary invasive fungal

Fig. 289.2 Cutaneous presentation of mucormycosis. Chronic, non-

healing ulcer with necrosis after traumatic inoculation. (From Kontoyiannis DP, Lewis RE. Agents of mucormycosis and entomophthoramycosis.
In Bennett JF, Dolin R, Blaser MJ (eds). Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s
Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015. Fig. 260-6A; Courtesy Drs. Gerald Bodey and Saud Ahmed,
University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.)

infections, the presence of multiple nodules (≥10), pleural effusion(s),
or the reverse halo sign, a focal area of ground-­glass opacity surrounded
by a ring of consolidation, is more suggestive of mucormycosis.
Cutaneous and soft tissue mucormycosis can be primary, resulting from direct inoculation at sites of trauma, including burns, surgical
sites, or vascular access sites, or secondary, resulting from hematogenous dissemination to the skin from another primary site. Primary
cutaneous lesions manifest initially as painful erythematous papules
that ulcerate, leaving a black necrotic center. In contrast, secondary
cutaneous lesions from hematogenous seeding tend to be nodular, with
minimal destruction of the epidermis. Either may be invasive locally,
progressing through multiple tissue layers, including muscle, fascia,
and bone (Fig. 289.2), with accompanying tissue necrosis.
Gastrointestinal mucormycosis is the least common form of disease except in preterm neonates, in whom it is the most commonly
reported form of mucormycosis. Manifestations include abdominal
pain, nausea, vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, obstruction, and
perforation. Any part of the gastrointestinal tract can be involved, with
the stomach followed by colon and ileum being the most commonly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1944 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
affected. The clinical presentation in neonates mimics necrotizing
enterocolitis, sometimes with a palpable abdominal mass. Recognition
of gastrointestinal mucormycosis is challenging given its rarity and
overlap in presentation with other gastrointestinal diseases. It is associated with particularly high mortality and commonly not diagnosed
until postmortem examination.
Disseminated mucormycosis can develop from any site of primary
disease but is more commonly associated with initial pulmonary disease. It carries the highest mortality rates seen with mucormycosis,
especially among immunocompromised persons. The clinical presentation varies based on the involved sites. Dissemination of mucormycosis to the brain is of particular concern and alters management and
prognosis, so many experts recommend brain imaging routinely, even
in the absence of neurologic symptoms.

DIAGNOSIS

All forms of mucormycosis are considered medically emergent, and
some (e.g., rhinocerebral) are also surgical emergencies. Diagnostic
evaluation and initiation of treatment should be pursued simultaneously with a coordinated multidisciplinary approach. The diagnosis
depends on early recognition of compatible clinical findings in a patient
with predisposing risk factors. Once mucormycosis is suspected, cross-­
sectional imaging should be performed to define the site(s) of disease as
indicated based on the clinical presentation, and tissue from the site of
disease should be obtained for diagnostic evaluation, along with initial
surgical debridement for rhinocerebral or cutaneous mucormycosis.
The diagnosis relies on direct morphologic identification of mycotic
elements from culture or tissue biopsy specimens. Mucorales appear as
broad (5-­25 μm in diameter), infrequently septate (denoted as aseptate
or pauci-­septate on pathology), thin-­walled hyphae, branching irregularly at right angles when stained with Gomori methenamine silver
(GMS) or hematoxylin and eosin. Organisms may be challenging to
identify reliably by morphology from tissue specimens; immunohistochemistry or molecular diagnostic tests can provide more reliable
identification to the species level.
Mucorales can be cultured on standard laboratory media; however,
cultures from nontissue specimens, such as bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid, have poor sensitivity. Mucorales hyphae can also be easily disrupted, decreasing the yield of cultures. Submitting fresh tissue with
careful handling to avoid disruption (e.g., grinding) can improve yield.
When an organism is visualized by histopathology but not recovered in
culture, molecular methods may improve detection. Though Mucorales can be culture contaminants, isolation in a susceptible host should
prompt consideration of clinical disease. Noninvasive fungal biomarkers, such as galactomannan and 1,3-­β-­d-­glucan, do not detect the causative agents of mucormycosis. Though molecular tests are available
to detect Mucorales and other fungal pathogens directly from blood
samples, these have not yet been sufficiently validated to replace tissue-­
based diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Though mucormycosis can be aggressive and difficult to treat, with
high mortality rates, more favorable outcomes can be achieved via
early recognition and prompt institution of medical therapy combined
with extensive surgical debridement of devitalized tissue to the extent
possible. It is essential to reverse predisposing factors, such as neutropenia, hyperglycemia, and/or acidosis, and to withdraw immunosuppression or deferoxamine therapy, if applicable.
Given the rarity of mucormycosis, there are few clinical trials to
guide optimal therapy. Based on clinical experience, observational
data, and small clinical trials, the European Confederation of Medical
Microbiology and the Mycoses Study Group published “global guidelines” for mucormycosis in 2019. Lipid formulations of amphotericin
B, with preference for liposomal amphotericin B, are strongly recommended as first-­line therapy for all forms of mucormycosis in all
age-­groups. It is recommended to initiate therapy with the full dose of
liposomal amphotericin B of at least 5 mg/kg/day, with consideration
up to 10 mg/kg/day, and 10 mg/kg/day is recommended for treatment
of central nervous system infection. Other antifungals with activity

against the Mucorales include isavuconazole (administered as the prodrug isavuconazonium sulfate) and posaconazole; however, there is
less experience with these antifungals for initial or “primary therapy”
of mucormycosis, and their activity can vary based on causative species
and specific antifungal susceptibility patterns. Guidelines moderately
recommend primary therapy with IV formulations of either posaconazole or isavuconazole in patients with significant preexisting renal
impairment, because of potential nephrotoxicity with amphotericin B
formulations. However, some experts prefer liposomal amphotericin B
for patients with severe or progressive mucormycosis even in the setting of renal impairment.
There is increasing pharmacokinetic and safety data supporting the use of isavuconazole and posaconazole in pediatric patients,
though posaconazole pharmacokinetics vary by formulation, and the
immediate-­release oral suspension does not reliably achieve optimal
target concentrations. Therefore IV or delayed-­release formulations
of posaconazole are preferred. Isavuconazole or posaconazole is recommended for specific roles in the treatment of mucormycosis, the
most established role being for “salvage therapy” in patients who
either do not respond adequately to initial amphotericin B–based
therapy or who develop intolerance precluding continuation of
amphotericin B-­based therapy. In the case of inadequate response,
many experts recommend combination therapy, including liposomal amphotericin B with either isavuconazole or posaconazole, so
that the “backbone” therapy with liposomal amphotericin B can also
be continued. Given the rapidly progressive course and severe outcomes associated with mucormycosis, primary combination therapy (a
regimen with multiple antifungal agents from the beginning) is also
frequently used in practice. However, there is currently insufficient
evidence to determine whether initial combination therapy is beneficial over monotherapy with liposomal amphotericin B. The results of
animal model studies and observational clinical studies have varied,
and some of the better-­quality observational studies have not shown
a clear benefit. Combination therapy with liposomal amphotericin
B and isavuconazole or posaconazole is therefore marginally recommended in the global mucormycosis guidelines. Some clinicians
have given combination therapy with an echinocandin antifungal (e.g.,
caspofungin) added to amphotericin B–based therapy based on animal
model data and limited clinical studies showing potential benefit with
this combination. However, this combination has been less preferred
recently, partly because echinocandins lack intrinsic activity against
the Mucorales and because increasing data favor isavuconazole or
posaconazole for salvage therapy.
Given the complex considerations when selecting and monitoring
antifungal therapy for mucormycosis, and also considering surgical
approaches, which are well-­established for rhinocerebral and cutaneous mucormycosis and favored when possible for localized pulmonary
mucormycosis, a multidisciplinary approach with expert guidance is
necessary. Patients with mucormycosis should be monitored with frequent repeat imaging to evaluate their response to therapy, and multiple
surgical procedures are often necessary to achieve stabilization of disease.
The duration of antifungal therapy is individualized but is usually
continued until all clinical and radiographic findings have resolved and
the patient shows reconstitution or significant improvement of their
immune response. Patients with a good response to initial IV antifungal therapy may be converted to maintenance therapy with enteral isavuconazole or posaconazole.
Various adjunctive therapies have been reported for mucormycosis;
the most commonly used are treatments such as hematopoietic growth
factors to reverse neutropenia as a predisposing factor. Hyperbaric
oxygen has been used anecdotally as an adjunctive therapy but is not
well established and not routinely recommended. Iron chelation with
deferasirox has been tried as salvage therapy in refractory mucormycosis but is currently not recommended because of adverse outcomes
in a small clinical trial. The overall emphasis of disease management
should remain on optimizing the antifungal and surgical therapies and
reversing any modifiable predisposing conditions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 290 u Pneumocystis jirovecii

Chapter 290

Pneumocystis jirovecii
Francis Gigliotti and Terry W. Wright
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (interstitial plasma cell pneumonitis) in an immunocompromised person is a life-­threatening infection.
Primary infection in the immunocompetent individual is usually subclinical and goes unrecognized. The disease most likely results from
new or repeat acquisition of the organism rather than reactivation of
latent organisms. Even in the most severe cases, with rare exceptions,
the pathogen remains localized to the lungs.

ETIOLOGY

The genus Pneumocystis contains a group of common extracellular
fungal pathogens, which are found worldwide and exist exclusively
in the lungs of mammalian hosts as obligate biotrophs. The initial
taxonomic placement of Pneumocystis was ambiguous. However, comparative genomics definitively positioned Pneumocystis among the
ascomycetous fungi, despite sharing certain morphologic features and
drug susceptibility profiles with protozoa. Detailed information on the
basic biology and life cycle of Pneumocystis is incomplete because of the
inability to grow these organisms in culture. However, phenotypic and
genotypic analyses show that the Pneumocystis organisms infecting each
individual mammalian host are unique and restricted to that host. Current knowledge suggests that a distinct Pneumocystis evolved in each
host species and ultimately adapted to its specific host in a manner that
prevented transmission and replication in heterologous host species.
The clear biological distinction of Pneumocystis from different mammalian hosts led to the division of Pneumocystis into multiple species
that are named according to the host from which they are derived. Current convention uses the name P. jirovecii to refer to the Pneumocystis
species infecting humans, whereas those infecting rats and mice are
designated P. carinii and P. murina, respectively. Clinicians should be
aware that the term P. carinii was originally used for all Pneumocystis
regardless of host species of origin and may sometimes refer to human-­
derived Pneumocystis in older medical literature.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

P. jirovecii is found worldwide, but a natural habitat outside of the
human host has not been identified. Serologic surveys show that most
humans are exposed to P. jirovecii before 4 years of age, and polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) analyses has confirmed the prevalence of P. jirovecii in both children and adults. Full genome sequencing of three
Pneumocystis species, including P. jirovecii, revealed that Pneumocystis has lost critical genes required for autonomous survival and
growth. Thus currently available evidence suggests that P. jirovecii only
lives in the lungs of humans and that it persists in the human population through repeat subclinical or mild infection of immunocompetent
adults and children. Gene loss helps to explain the inability to either
culture Pneumocystis or identify a natural reservoir outside the host.
The universal prevalence of P. jirovecii in the human population likely
explains why P. jirovecii is a common opportunistic infection in immunocompromised people not receiving prophylaxis.
The mode of Pneumocystis transmission to humans is undefined,
but animal-­to-­animal airborne transmission has been clearly demonstrated. Animal-­to-­human transmission is unlikely because of the stringent host-­species restriction of Pneumocystis species. Person-­to-­person
transmission is likely but has not been directly proven. However, the
appearance of geographically clustered Pneumocystis cases caused by
genetically similar P. jirovecii strains supports the occurrence of community spread among immunocompromised patients. In addition, P.
jirovecii has been detected in air samples collected in close proximity
to patients with Pneumocystis pneumonia. Thus it seems likely that P.
jirovecii is passed from human to human through an airborne route.

1945

Most humans are infected with P. jirovecii during early childhood.
In the immunocompetent child, these infections are usually asymptomatic or mild and indistinguishable from other common childhood
respiratory infections. Pneumonia caused by P. jirovecii occurs almost
exclusively in severely immunocompromised hosts, including those
with congenital or acquired immunodeficiency disorders, malignancies, or transplanted organs. Patients with primary immunodeficiency
diseases at risk for infection include severe combined immunodeficiency disease, X-­linked CD40 ligand deficiency, major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency, nuclear factor kappa B essential
modulator (NEMO) deficiency, dedicator of cytokinesis 8 (DOCK8)
deficiency, Wiskott-­
Aldrich syndrome, and caspase recruitment
domain 11 (CARD11) deficiency. P. jirovecii can be found in the lungs
of infants who have died with the diagnosis of sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS). However, further study concluded that P. jirovecii is
likely not the cause of SIDS but instead that there is overlap in the timing of the primary P. jirovecii infection and the onset of SIDS. Recent
studies have described pathologic changes in the lungs of infants during primary infection and have suggested a possible association of P.
jirovecii with respiratory distress syndrome in preterm infants.
Without chemoprophylaxis, approximately 40% of infants and
children with AIDS, 70% of adults with AIDS, 12% of children with
leukemia, and 10% of patients with organ transplants develop P. jirovecii pneumonia. Epidemics that occurred among debilitated infants
in Europe during and after World War II are attributed to malnutrition. Currently, the use of novel immunosuppressive agents for the
treatment of inflammatory syndromes, autoimmune disease, and
malignancy has expanded the at-­risk population. For example, the
addition of anti–tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy to the management of patients with inflammatory bowel disease or rheumatoid
arthritis has resulted in a demonstrable increase in P. jirovecii pneumonia in these patient populations. The use of rituximab or ibrutinib in
patients with hematologic malignancies also increases the risk of Pneumocystis pneumonia.

PATHOGENESIS

Two forms of P. jirovecii are found in the alveolar spaces: the cyst form
(or ascus), which are 5-­8 μm in diameter and contain up to eight pleomorphic intracystic bodies (sporozoites or ascospores); and trophic
forms (or trophozoites), which are 2-­5 μm cells derived from excysted
sporozoites. The names sporozoite and trophozoite were based on the
morphologic similarities to protozoa. However, the inclusion of Pneumocystis among the fungi led to the adoption of names such as ascus
and ascospore, which are derived from fungal terminology. The cyst
form accounts for 5–10% of the Pneumocystis in the lung. The cyst
has a thick wall composed of β-­glucan, which is thought to be a major
driver of pulmonary inflammation during Pneumocystis pneumonia.
P. jirovecii trophic forms typically constitute approximately 90% of the
Pneumocystis in the lungs and have the ability to suppress inflammation induced by the cyst form. Trophic forms attach firmly to the type 1
pneumocytes lining the alveoli, possibly by adhesive bridging proteins
such as fibronectin or mannose-­dependent ligands. The consequences
of this interaction are unclear, but it may provide signals or nutrients
to Pneumocystis to stimulate growth. As the infection progresses, this
interaction may contribute to the characteristic alveolar damage.
Control of P. jirovecii infection in immunocompetent people
requires functional cell-­mediated immunity, and patients with AIDS
show an increased incidence of Pneumocystis pneumonia as CD4+
T-­
lymphocyte counts decrease. Before widespread prophylaxis of
AIDS patients, life-­threatening Pneumocystis pneumonia occurred in
a high percentage of these patients when CD4+ T cell counts dropped
below 200 cells/mm3. CD4+ T cell counts provide a useful indicator in both older children and adults of the need for prophylaxis
against Pneumocystis pneumonia. Although normally functioning
CD4+ T cells are central to controlling P. jirovecii infection, the final
effector pathway for destruction of P. jirovecii is poorly understood but
likely requires macrophages. CD4+ T cells may activate macrophages
for phagocytosis and clearance of Pneumocystis through local cytokine
secretion, and also provide help for the production of specific antibody.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1946 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Anti-­Pneumocystis antibody has the potential to facilitate fungal clearance through opsonization, complement activation, or interfering with
Pneumocystis binding to lung epithelial cells.
Clinical investigation as well as work in animal models has revealed
that the host’s immune response to Pneumocystis infection is a major
contributor to the pathogenesis of Pneumocystis pneumonia. Human
studies found that the severity of disease correlates with the degree of
lung inflammation but not with fungal burden. Furthermore, patients
with profound AIDS-­related immunosuppression present with higher
P. jirovecii burdens but better lung function than non-­AIDS patients
with Pneumocystis pneumonia and with greater retained immune function. A classic AIDS-­related presentation of Pneumocystis pneumonia
can be modeled in CD4+ T cell–depleted rodents and simian immune
virus–infected nonhuman primates. In the absence of CD4+ T cells a
progressive accumulation of CD8+ T cells occurs in a likely attempt
to fight the infection. These cells do not provide effective host defense
against Pneumocystis, but instead directly contribute to Pneumocystis
pneumonia–related immunopathogenesis and lung injury. Similar to
humans with Pneumocystis pneumonia, polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) also accumulate in the lungs of animals as Pneumocystis
pneumonia progresses. These phagocytes do not contribute meaningfully to either Pneumocystis eradication or immunopathogenesis.
However, as is the case in human patients, there is a strong correlation
between the number of PMNs in the lung and the severity of disease.
In the complete absence of an adaptive immune response, as can be
modeled in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice, Pneumocystis infection produces little alteration in lung histology or function
until late in the course of the disease. However, if congenic lymphocytes
are transferred to Pneumocystis-­infected SCID mice, an acute CD4+ T
cell–dependent immune response is mounted against the Pneumocystis. There is rapid onset of pulmonary inflammation, surfactant
dysfunction, severe respiratory impairment, and significant hypoxia,
mimicking the characteristic changes of Pneumocystis pneumonia in
humans. The functional CD4+ T cells generate an effective immune
response against the existing infection, but also cause inflammation
and lung injury. CD8+ T cells are typically ineffective in the eradication
of Pneumocystis but may modulate the CD4+ T cell response to lessen
the immune-­mediated damage. The functional interactions of T cell
subsets in patients with differing and often fluctuating immune status are likely responsible for the variations in presentation and outcome of Pneumocystis pneumonia.

paradoxical deterioration thought to be associated with the restoration
of immune function. This condition is referred to as immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome and is most commonly seen in patients
with newly diagnosed AIDS who present with P. jirovecii pneumonia
and who have a rapid response to antiretroviral therapy that is instituted at the same time as anti-­Pneumocystis therapy. It can also occur
in stem cell transplant recipients who engraft while infected with P.
jirovecii.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

The chest radiograph reveals bilateral diffuse interstitial or alveolar
ground glass infiltrates (Fig. 290.1). The earliest densities are perihilar,
and progression proceeds peripherally, sparing the apical areas until
last. The arterial oxygen tension (Pao2) is invariably decreased. The
major role of the laboratory in establishing a diagnosis of P. jirovecii
pneumonia is to identify organisms in lung specimens by a variety of
methods. Definitive diagnosis requires visualization of P. jirovecii
in the lung in the presence of clinical signs and symptoms of the
infection. Organisms can be detected in specimens collected by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), tracheal aspirate, transbronchial lung biopsy,
bronchial brushings, percutaneous transthoracic needle aspiration,
and open lung biopsy. Hypertonic saline–induced sputum samples
are helpful if P. jirovecii is found, but the absence of the organisms in
induced sputum does not exclude the infection and BAL should be
performed. Open lung biopsy is the most reliable method, although
BAL is more practical in most cases. Estimates of the diagnostic yield
of the various specimens are 20–40% for induced sputum, 50–60% for
tracheal aspirate, 75–95% for BAL, 75–85% for transbronchial biopsy,
and 90–100% for open lung biopsy.
Once obtained, the specimens are typically stained with one of four
commonly used stains: Grocott-­Gomori silver stain and toluidine blue
stain for the cyst form, polychrome stains such as Giemsa stain for the
trophic forms and ascospores, and the fluorescein-­labeled monoclonal
antibody stains for both trophic forms and cysts. Many clinical laboratories have adopted polymerase chain reaction analysis of respiratory specimens for the diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia.
Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels are often elevated during
Pneumocystis pneumonia, and although elevated LDH is not a specific
or definitive diagnosis, high levels should raise suspicion.

PATHOLOGY

The histopathologic features of P. jirovecii pneumonia are of two types.
The first type is infantile interstitial plasma cell pneumonitis, which
was observed in epidemic outbreaks in debilitated infants 3-­6 months
of age. Extensive infiltration with thickening of the alveolar septum
occurs, and plasma cells are prominent. The second type is a diffuse
desquamative alveolar pneumonitis found in immunocompromised
children and adults. The alveoli contain large numbers of P. jirovecii in
a foamy exudate with alveolar macrophages active in the phagocytosis
of organisms. The alveolar septum is not infiltrated to the extent it is in
the infantile type, and plasma cells are usually absent.

B

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

There are at least three distinct clinical presentations of P. jirovecii
pneumonia. In patients with profound congenital immunodeficiency
or in AIDS patients with very few CD4+ T cells, the onset of hypoxia
and symptoms is subtle and often without fever, with tachypnea progressing to nasal flaring; intercostal, suprasternal, and infrasternal
retractions; and cyanosis in severe cases. In children and adults with
immunodeficiency resulting from immunosuppressive medications,
the onset of hypoxia and symptoms is often more abrupt, with fever,
tachypnea, dyspnea, and cough, progressing to severe respiratory compromise. This type accounts for the majority of cases, although the
severity of clinical expression can vary. Rales are usually not detected
on physical examination. The third pattern of Pneumocystis pneumonia is reported in severely immunocompromised patients who appear
to be responding to therapy but then have an acute and seemingly

A

C

Fig. 290.1 Pneumocystis jirovecii infection in a 17-­yr-­old male with

acute lymphoblastic leukemia and immunodeficiency, who presented
with dyspnea, fever, nonproductive cough, and decreased white blood
cell counts. A, Radiograph shows diffuse bilateral interstitial opacity
throughout the lungs. B, Contrast-­enhanced computed tomography
confirms the bilateral patchy and ground-­glass opacities in both lungs.
The diagnosis was confirmed by a positive polymerase chain reaction
test from bronchial lavage fluid. C, CT in a different patient demonstrates a typical “crazy paving” pattern in both upper lobes. (From
Westra SJ, Yikilmaz A, Lee EY. Pulmonary infection. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 54.30.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 291 u Other Pathogenic Fungi
TREATMENT

The recommended therapy for P. jirovecii pneumonia is trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) (15-­20 mg TMP and 75-­100 mg SMX/
kg/day in four divided doses) administered intravenously or orally if
there is mild disease and no malabsorption or diarrhea. The duration
of treatment is 3 weeks for patients with AIDS and 2 weeks for other
patients. Unfortunately, adverse reactions often occur with TMP-­SMX,
especially rash and neutropenia in patients with AIDS. For patients
who cannot tolerate or who fail to respond to TMP-­SMX after 5-­7
days, pentamidine isethionate (4 mg/kg/day as a single dose IV) may
be used. Adverse reactions are frequent and include renal and hepatic
dysfunction, hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia, rash, and thrombocytopenia. Atovaquone (750 mg twice daily with food, for patients >13
years of age) is an alternative treatment that has been used primarily in
adults with mild to moderate disease. Limited experience is available
for younger children. Pharmacokinetic studies of atovaquone show
that a dose of 30 mg/kg/day PO in two divided doses for children 0-­3
months of age and older than 2 years of age is adequate and safe; a
dose of 45 mg/kg/day PO in two divided doses is needed for children
between 4 months and 2 years of age. Other effective therapies include
trimetrexate glucuronate or combinations of trimethoprim plus dapsone or clindamycin plus primaquine. The combination of caspofungin
and TMP-­SMX is also being assessed as a treatment for Pneumocystis
pneumonia and may help control inflammation in some patients.
Some studies in adults suggest that administration of corticosteroids as adjunctive therapy to suppress the inflammatory response
increases the chances for survival in moderate and severe cases of P.
jirovecii pneumonia. The recommended regimen of corticosteroids for
adolescents older than 13 years of age and for adults is oral prednisone,
80 mg/day PO in two divided doses on days 1-­5, 40 mg/day PO once
daily on days 6-­10, and 20 mg/day PO once daily on days 11-­21. A
reasonable regimen for children is oral prednisone, 2 mg/kg/day for the
first 7-­10 days, followed by a tapering regimen for the next 10-­14 days.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Basic supportive care is dictated by the condition of the patient, with
careful attention to maintain appropriate hydration and oxygenation.
Only 5–10% of patients with AIDS require mechanical ventilation
compared with 50–60% of patients without AIDS, consistent with the
hypothesis that the patient’s ability to mount an immune/inflammatory
response correlates with severity and outcome of Pneumocystis pneumonia. There are anecdotal reports of giving surfactant to children
with severe P. jirovecii pneumonia, although the use of surfactant to
treat adult-­type respiratory distress syndrome is controversial.

COMPLICATIONS

Most complications occur as adverse events associated with the treatment drugs or as a consequence of mechanical ventilation. The most
severe pulmonary complication of P. jirovecii pneumonia is adult-­type
respiratory distress syndrome. Rarely, P. jirovecii infection affects extrapulmonary sites (e.g., retina, spleen, and bone marrow), but such infections are usually not symptomatic and also respond to treatment.

PROGNOSIS

Without treatment, P. jirovecii pneumonitis is fatal in almost all
immunocompromised hosts within 3-­4 weeks of onset. The mortality rate varies with patient population and is related to inflammatory response rather than organism burden. Patients with AIDS have
a mortality rate of 5–10%, and patients with other diseases such as
malignancies have mortality rates as high as 20–25%. Patients who
require mechanical ventilation have mortality rates of 60–90%.
Patients remain at risk for P. jirovecii pneumonia as long as they
are immunocompromised. Continuous prophylaxis should be initiated or reinstituted at the end of therapy for patients with AIDS (see
Chapter 322).

PREVENTION

Patients at high risk for P. jirovecii pneumonia should be placed on
chemoprophylaxis. Prophylaxis in infants born to HIV-­
infected

1947

mothers and for HIV-­infected infants and children is based on age
and CD4 cell counts (see Chapter 322). Because CD4 counts fluctuate rapidly during the first year of life, infants born to HIV-­infected
mothers should be placed on prophylaxis during the first year of life
until HIV infection is ruled out. Patients with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, patients receiving intensive immunosuppressive
therapy for cancer or other diseases, and organ transplant recipients
are also candidates for prophylaxis. TMP-­SMX (5 mg/kg TMP and
25 mg SMX/kg PO once daily or divided into two doses daily) is the
drug of choice and may be given for 3 consecutive days each week
or, alternatively, each day. Alternatives for prophylaxis include dapsone (2 mg/kg/day PO, maximum: 100 mg/dose; or 4 mg/kg PO once
weekly, maximum: 200 mg/dose), atovaquone (30 mg/kg/day PO for
infants 1-­3 months and ≥24 months of age; 45 mg/kg/day for infants
and toddlers 4-­23 months of age), and aerosolized pentamidine (300
mg/mo by Respirgard II nebulizer), but all of these agents are inferior
to TMP-­SMX. Finally, limited clinical experience suggests that pentamidine can be given intravenously once monthly to prevent P. jirovecii pneumonia. Prophylaxis must be continued as long as the patient
remains immunocompromised. Some patients with AIDS who reconstitute adequate immunity during highly active antiretroviral therapy
may have prophylaxis withdrawn. Recent animal studies suggest that
vaccines may be effective at preventing Pneumocystis pneumonia in
immunocompromised hosts, but to date none have been tested in
humans.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 291

Other Pathogenic Fungi
William J. Steinbach
Less common fungi that were once innocent or only contaminants are
now emerging as lethal pathogens in a world of increasingly immunocompromised patients. Although there are reports of countless
previously considered nonpathogenic fungi infecting severely immunocompromised patients, this chapter focuses on the most common
and relevant miscellaneous fungi causing disease.

PHAEOHYPHOMYCOSIS: CLADOPHIALOPHORA
BANTIANA, BIPOLARIS SPP., AND OTHERS

Phaeohyphomycosis is a heterogeneous group of fungal species commonly found in the soil and characterized by dematiaceous (darkly pigmented brown or black) hyphal forms in tissue. This staining can help
distinguish between Aspergillus infections, and hyphae often appear
more fragmented that seen with Aspergillus infections. The characteristic color of the hyphae is related to the presence of melanin in the
fungal cell wall, which likely plays a role in fungal pathogenesis. Phaeo
comes from Greek, meaning “dark,” and has been commonly used to
describe infections with these fungi as phaeohyphomycosis. It has been
suggested that the term dematiaceous is not appropriate given its etymologic derivation from the Greek deme, meaning “bundle,” although
it has become fairly entrenched in medical mycologic literature. The
term melanized is also used, given its specific meaning.
Phaeohyphomycosis has been attributed to more than 150 species of
fungi. Among the most prevalent causes of human infection are Alternaria alternata, Acrophialophora fusispora, Aureobasidium pullulans,
Bipolaris spp., Curvularia spp., Chaetomium spp., Cladophialophora

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1948 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
bantiana, Exserohilum, Fonsecaea, Hortaea werneckii, Neoscytalidium
dimidiatum, Verruconis gallopava (previously Ochroconis gallopava),
Phaeoacremonium, Phoma, Pyrenochaeta, Rhinocladiella, Veronaea
botryosa, Wangiella dermatitidis (previously Exophiala dermatitidis),
and Phialophora spp.
In the multicenter CDC-­funded epidemiologic TRANSNET study,
26 cases of phaeohyphomycosis were identified in hematopoietic stem
cell transplant (HSCT) recipients analyzed, representing 2.6% of all
reported invasive fungal disease in the HSCT cohort. The median time
from transplant to diagnosis was 100 days, and 92% of cases were seen
in allogeneic HSCT recipients. The mortality rate was 42% at 90 days
after diagnosis. There was a higher incidence of phaeohyphomycosis
noted from transplant centers in the southern United States versus
other regions of the country. Phaeohyphomycosis also represented
2.5% of the overall number of invasive fungal disease in solid organ
transplant (SOT) recipients in the TRANSNET study. The median time
from transplant to diagnosis was much longer at 18 months, and 53%
of cases were specifically diagnosed in lung transplant recipients. There
was a 10% mortality rate at 90 days after diagnosis. Overall, cutaneous disease was more common in SOT recipients, whereas pulmonary disease was more common in hematopoietic stem cell transplant
recipients. In this series, bloodstream and central nervous system
(CNS) infections were seen only in hematopoietic stem cell transplant
recipients.
Historically, organisms causing phaeohyphomycosis have been
largely associated with cutaneous and subcutaneous infections occurring mostly in immunocompetent persons in tropical and subtropical
regions. However, they have emerged with increasing frequency as
causes of invasive disease in immunocompromised persons worldwide. Infections can manifest as a range of clinical entities, including
localized cutaneous infection and subcutaneous nodules, mycetomas
(localized infections involving the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissue,
fascia, and bone, often of the lower extremities, and characterized by
mycotic granules), chromoblastomycosis (sclerotic bodies in tissues
usually seen in tropical regions), keratitis, pulmonary infections, localized deep infections, cerebral abscesses, disseminated infection, allergic fungal sinusitis, and allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis.
C. bantiana is the etiology for the majority of CNS phaeohyphomycosis, including patients that may have no apparent immunosuppression. CNS disease commonly presents with a headache and a focal
neurologic deficit, frequently a hemiparesis, or seizures. The most
common CNS manifestation is a solitary brain abscess. Though the
pathophysiology is not well understood, these are thought to originate
via hematogenous dissemination from occult pulmonary or cutaneous
foci.
Diagnosis of phaeohyphomycosis relies on pathologic examination of cultures and biopsies, often with expert gross and microscopic
examination required. There are no serologic or antigen tests to detect
these fungi in blood or tissue, and PCR is in its infancy for this group
of organisms. Almost all allergic disease and eosinophilia is caused by
either Bipolaris spp. or Curvularia spp.

Treatment

Treatment recommendations for the rare molds causing phaeohyphomycosis are unfortunately primarily based on in vitro susceptibility data, case reports, and expert opinion. Recommendations can be
found in European and Australian guidelines and the American Transplant Society Infectious Diseases Community of Practice Guidelines.
European antifungal treatment guidelines highlight the sparse data on
preferred therapy, including in vitro data, limited animal model studies, and expert opinion. There are no clearly defined standard therapies, but the guideline panel generally recommended voriconazole,
posaconazole, or itraconazole, because those agents demonstrate
the most consistent in vitro antifungal activity against this group of
fungi. Specifically, voriconazole is likely the best for CNS infections
because of its excellent CNS penetration. For invasive infections,
surgery is crucial to the overall treatment. For phaeohyphomycosis,
there is substantial variability in susceptibility both between and within

species of a given genus, making correct species identification and susceptibility testing especially critical in guiding therapy for these infections. Combination therapy is suggested in some circumstances for
disseminated or CNS infection and for organisms for which no single
agent has predictably favorable activity.
Therapy for CNS infections with C. bantiana is often unsuccessful
despite susceptibility of this organism to several antifungal agents,
and it is unclear whether antifungal therapy alters outcome, because
survival without complete abscess resection is exceedingly rare. Some
experts recommend combination therapy, particularly for cases in
which the abscess cannot be completely resected. Surgery is particularly important for brain abscesses secondary to C. bantiana infection;
regardless of host immune status and antifungal therapy, survival is
extremely poor if the abscess is not completely resected. If an invasive
mold infection is associated with an intravenous catheter or a peritoneal dialysis catheter, removal of the catheter is recommended.
Including only culture-­positive cases of CNS phaeohyphomycosis,
the survival rate for this infection is only 35%. A series of 30 cases
revealed those patients with single, encapsulated CNS lesions did much
better than those with multifocal disease. However, no patient who did
not undergo surgery survived. Whether patients underwent neurosurgery alone or with antifungal therapy, the most important factor for
cure was resectability of the lesion; antifungal therapy itself was not
associated with improved survival.

HYALOHYPHOMYCOSIS: FUSARIUM AND
SCEDOSPORIUM SPP. AND OTHERS

In contrast to phaeohyphomycosis, hyalohyphomycosis refers to infections caused by hyaline (colorless, nonpigmented, nonmelanized)
septate fungal hyphae. The major hyalohyphomycotic pathogens are
Fusarium spp., Scedosporium spp., Paecilomyces spp., Trichoderma
spp., Acremonium spp., Scopulariopsis spp., and Purpureocillium spp.
These species are often misidentified as Aspergillus spp., but they can
be differentiated by their conidia and phialide morphologies. This section focuses on Fusarium and Scedosporium spp., which are usually the
third and fourth most common invasive mold diseases in immunocompromised hosts, after invasive aspergillosis and mucormycosis.
The majority of human cases of fusariosis are caused by members
of the Fusarium solani, Fusarium oxysporum, and Fusarium fujikuroi
spp. complexes, with the F. solani spp. complex demonstrating greater
pathogenicity. Nomenclature of organisms causing scedosporiosis
can be confusing and has undergone recent changes. The genus name
Pseudallescheria applies to the sexual state (teleomorph) whereas Scedosporium applies to the asexual state (anamorph) of these organisms.
Scedosporium apiospermum was once thought to be the anamorph
of Pseudallescheria boydii, but these organisms are now known to be
distinct species. The S. apiospermum spp. complex encompasses S.
apiospermum, Scedosporium boydii, Scedosporium aurantiacum, Scedosporium dehoogii, and Scedosporium minutispora. The organism
formerly known as Scedosporium prolificans is now renamed Lomentospora prolificans and is phylogenetically distinct from the Scedosporium spp.
In addition to the usual airborne and cutaneous inoculation routes
of acquisition common to other invasive molds, Fusarium can be transmitted via contaminated water sources (e.g., shower heads) and can
cause infection associated with intravenous catheters. Both Fusarium
and Scedosporium/Lomentospora spp. can cause infection in immunocompetent hosts, primarily localized infections such as keratitis
or onychomycosis. In immunocompromised patients, Fusarium can
disseminate from initially localized infections such as onychomycosis or intertrigo. The major predisposing factors for invasive disease
are profound and prolonged neutropenia and severe cell-­mediated
immunodeficiency.
Among HSCT recipients in the TRANSNET study, fusariosis
accounted for 3% of invasive fungal disease. Identified risk factors
for fusariosis in HSCT recipients include history of cytomegalovirus
infection, receipt of an umbilical cord blood transplant (compared
with other stem cell sources), receipt of antithymocyte globulin, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 291 u Other Pathogenic Fungi
hyperglycemia. Risk factors specific to development of fusariosis
beyond day 40 after transplant include graft-­versus-­host disease and
prior invasive mold disease. Scedosporiosis is less common among
HSCT recipients compared with fusariosis, with only 16 cases identified in the TRANSNET study compared with 31 cases of fusariosis and
77 cases of mucormycosis. Among 1208 invasive fungal infections in
the TRANSNET study of SOT recipients, there were 6 cases of fusariosis and 11 cases of scedosporiasis, compared with 28 cases of mucormycosis. In a literature review of L. prolificans cases, SOT recipients
constituted 8.6% of cases. Scedosporiasis is most common among lung
transplant recipients, in whom colonization of the airways can occur
pretransplantation (particularly in patients with cystic fibrosis), or
posttransplantation, and may progress to invasive infection. Among
patients undergoing therapy for cancer, fusariosis primarily occurs in
those with hematologic malignancy, especially acute myelogenous leukemia. In a single center study of 44 cases, the most commonly identified risk factors for fusariosis in patients with hematologic malignancy
were active leukemia, prolonged and profound neutropenia, and high-­
dose corticosteroid exposure.

Clinical Presentations

The most common sites of invasive fusariosis in immunocompromised
persons are the skin (60–80% of cases), lungs (50–80% of cases), and
sinuses (20–30% of cases). Fusarium can develop yeastlike adventitious
sporulation within infected tissue, which facilitates dissemination, seen
in 70% of cases. Unlike other molds that infrequently cause detectable
fungemia and are difficult to recover in standard blood culture media,
blood cultures are positive for Fusarium in 40–50% of cases.
Radiographic series comparing findings of pulmonary fusariosis to
those of invasive aspergillosis and mucormycosis note that the halo sign
(a nodule surrounded by ground glass opacity) is frequently absent in
cases of fusariosis. Cutaneous lesions of invasive fusariosis are distinctive, consisting of painful, circular macules or papules, usually with
central necrosis and surrounding erythema. Appearance of cutaneous
lesions in invasive fusariosis is usually secondary to hematogenous dissemination to the skin, rather than direct inoculation into the skin.
Invasive disease caused by S. apiospermum spp. complex most frequently involves the skin, lungs, and CNS. CNS disease develops in
the context of hematogenous dissemination and can manifest as brain
abscess(es) or meningoencephalitis. Other manifestations include
sinusitis and endogenous endophthalmitis. Skin lesions of S. apiospermum spp. complex can manifest as nodules, erythematous or
violaceous papules, or bullae, which may develop necrosis. They are
usually secondary to hematogenous dissemination rather than primary
cutaneous lesions from direct inoculation of the skin. Lymphangitic or
sporotrichoid spreading patterns have been described. Blood cultures
are positive in approximately 30% of cases of invasive infection with S.
apiospermum spp. complex. Similar manifestations are seen in invasive
L. prolificans infections, but the propensity to disseminate is higher and
positive blood cultures are reported in over 50% of cases. Hematogenous dissemination of L. prolificans to the CNS is common.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis of fusariosis or scedosporiasis requires isolation and identification of the causative organism from the affected site(s). The causative
organisms have thin septate hyphae with acute angle branching; they
are not morphologically distinguishable from Aspergillus when examined in tissue. Culture is necessary for definitive identification of these
organisms, though distinguishing between Fusarium spp. complexes
may be difficult using conventional methods. Organisms causing fusariosis and scedosporiosis can be detected in conventional blood cultures; however, they may be initially reported out as “yeast” because of
the appearance of conidia produced by adventitious sporulation.
The Aspergillus serum galactomannan assay is positive in approximately half of patients with invasive fusariosis and detection of serum

1949

galactomannan above threshold has been shown to precede diagnosis
of invasive fusariosis in a high prevalence setting.

Treatment

Treatment recommendations for fusariosis and scedosporiasis are provided in European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) and European Confederation of Medical Mycology
(ECMM) joint guidelines, and in Australian consensus guidelines. The
optimal therapy is unknown; recommendations are primarily based
on case reports, clinical experience, and in vitro data, given a lack of
clinical trials for these rare diseases. The ESCMID/ECMM guidelines
recommend voriconazole or a lipid-­based amphotericin B formulation for treatment of fusariosis, with preference for voriconazole.
Australian guidelines do not state a preference for either agent on the
basis of inadequate data. Voriconazole treatment has been associated
with higher treatment responses and improved survival, though these
should be interpreted with caution because of potential confounding
by earlier diagnosis or other interventions.
Because in vitro susceptibility of Fusarium isolates to both voriconazole and amphotericin B varies widely, some experts routinely use
combination therapy with voriconazole and lipid-­based amphotericin B to ensure that at least one agent is active. Some reports describe
successful combination therapy with terbinafine and either liposomal amphotericin B or voriconazole, and in vitro data show synergy
between terbinafine and voriconazole. Isavuconazole has been studied
in few adult cases; based on in vitro susceptibilities it appears to be less
active than voriconazole. Fusarium spp. are resistant to the echinocandins and to itraconazole.
The activity of antifungal agents against members of the S. apiospermum spp. complex is variable, and there are species-­based differences
in susceptibility pattern. Amphotericin B–based therapy is not recommended due to in vitro resistance and poor clinical responses. Voriconazole is the most active agent and the recommended first-­line therapy.
In a large observational study, the response rate to voriconazole therapy
for S. apiospermum infections was 66%. The echinocandins, itraconazole, and posaconazole have variable activity. Isavuconazole is active
in vitro but so far has been studied in only a handful of adults with
scedosporiasis, limiting conclusions about its utility.
L. prolificans is highly resistant to all antifungal agents currently
available. Successful treatment of infections caused by this organism
depends on reversal of predisposing conditions and aggressive surgical debridement. Voriconazole is the antifungal with best demonstrated activity, but minimum inhibitory concentrations tend to be
high and clinical responses to voriconazole therapy are suboptimal.
Combination therapy is typically used, including voriconazole and
other agents; successful outcomes have been reported with voriconazole or posaconazole and terbinafine or voriconazole with an
echinocandin. Australian guidelines recommend the combination of
voriconazole with terbinafine. However, terbinafine is highly protein-­
bound with distribution primarily to skin and adipose tissue, leading
some experts to doubt its utility in treating systemic fungal infections.
There have been reports of combination therapy including miltefosine, which is typically used in the treatment of leishmaniasis but
demonstrates some in vitro antifungal activity against L. prolificans.
It is important to recognize that publication bias likely has an impact
on reporting of outcomes and no particular antifungal regimen has
convincing evidence to support efficacy against L. prolificans.
Surgical debridement of infected and necrotic tissue is recommended to facilitate cure, particularly in L. prolificans infection, for
which surgery and immune reconstitution are the primary effective therapies. Removal of intravenous catheters is recommended for
catheter-­associated fusariosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1950 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Section 13

Viral Infections
Chapter 292

Principles of Antiviral
Therapy
Mark R. Schleiss
Antiviral chemotherapy typically requires a delicate balance between
targeting critical steps in viral replication without interfering with host
cellular function. Because viruses require cellular functions to complete replication, many antiviral agents exert significant host cellular
toxicity, a limitation that has hindered antiviral drug development. In
spite of this limitation, a number of agents are licensed for use against
viruses, particularly herpesviruses, respiratory viruses, and hepatitis
viruses (Table 292.1).
In making the decision to commence antiviral drugs, it is important
for the clinician to obtain appropriate diagnostic specimens, which
can help clarify the antiviral of choice. The choice of a specific antiviral
is based on the recommended agent of choice for a particular clinical condition, pharmacokinetics, toxicities, cost, and the potential for
development of resistance (Table 292.2). Intercurrent conditions in the
patient, such as renal insufficiency, should also be considered. Clinicians must monitor antiviral therapy closely for adverse events or toxicities, both anticipated and unanticipated.
In vitro sensitivity testing of virus isolates to antiviral compounds
usually involves a complex tissue culture system. The potency of an
antiviral is determined by the 50% inhibitory dose (ID50), which
is the antiviral concentration required to inhibit the growth in cell
culture of a standardized viral inoculum by 50%. Because of the
complexity of these assays, the results vary widely, and the actual
relationship between antiviral sensitivity testing and antiviral
therapy outcomes is sometimes unclear. Because these assays are
often not readily available and take considerable time to complete,
genotypic analysis for antiviral susceptibility is increasingly being
offered. Such assays may be useful for patients on long-­term antiviral therapy.
Clinical context is essential in making decisions about antiviral treatment, along with knowledge of a patient’s immune status.
For example, antiviral treatment is rarely if ever indicated in an
immunocompetent child shedding cytomegalovirus (CMV) but
may be lifesaving when administered to an immunocompromised
solid organ transplant (SOT) or hematopoietic stem cell transplant
(HSCT) patient. Antivirals can be used with a variety of clinical
goals in mind. Antivirals can be used for treatment of active end-­
organ disease, as prophylaxis to prevent viral infection or disease,
or as preemptive therapy aimed at reducing risk of progression to
disease (i.e., a positive signal indicating viral replication but in the
absence of clinical evidence of end-­organ disease). In preemptive
therapy, a patient will usually have a positive signal for polymerase
chain reaction–based identification of viral nucleic acids in a clinical sample (blood or body fluid) but have no symptoms. However,
SOT and HSCT patients are at high risk of developing disease in
this setting (particularly due to CMV infection), a scenario that
warrants preemptive treatment with an antiviral agent. In contrast,
prophylaxis is administered to seropositive patients who are at risk
to reactivate latent viral infection but do not yet have evidence of
active viral replication or shedding.

A fundamental concept important in the understanding of the
mechanism of action of most antivirals is that viruses must use host
cell components to replicate. Thus mechanisms of action for antiviral
compounds must be selective to virus-­specific functions whenever
possible, and antiviral agents may have significant toxicities to the host
if these compounds impact cellular physiology. Some of the more commonly targeted sites of action for antiviral agents include viral entry,
absorption, penetration, and uncoating (amantadine, rimantadine);
transcription or replication of the viral genome (acyclovir, valacyclovir, cidofovir, famciclovir, letermovir, maribavir, penciclovir, foscarnet,
ganciclovir, valganciclovir, ribavirin, trifluridine); viral protein synthesis (interferons [IFNs]) or protein modification (protease inhibitors);
and viral assembly, release, or deaggregation (baloxavir, oseltamivir,
peramivir, zanamivir, IFNs).
An understudied and underappreciated issue in antiviral therapy is
emergence of resistance, particularly in the setting of high viral load,
high intrinsic viral mutation rate, and prolonged or repeated courses
of antiviral therapy. Resistant viruses are more likely to develop or be
selected for in immunocompromised patients because these patients
are more likely to have multiple or long-­term exposures to an antiviral
agent.

ANTIVIRALS USED FOR HERPESVIRUSES

The herpesviruses are important pediatric pathogens, particularly in
newborns and immunocompromised children. Most of the licensed
antivirals are nucleoside analogs that inhibit viral DNA polymerase,
inducing premature chain termination during viral DNA synthesis in
infected cells.

Acyclovir

Acyclovir is a safe and effective therapy for herpes simplex virus (HSV)
infections. The favorable safety profile of acyclovir derives from its
requirement for activation to its active form via phosphorylation by
a viral enzyme, thymidine kinase (TK). Thus acyclovir can be activated only in cells already infected with HSV that express the viral TK
enzyme, a strategy that maximizes selectivity and reduces the potential
for cellular toxicity in uninfected cells. Acyclovir is most active against
HSV and is also active against varicella-­zoster virus (VZV); therapy is
indicated for infections with these viruses in a variety of clinical settings. Activity of acyclovir against CMV is less pronounced, and activity against Epstein-­Barr virus is minimal, both in vitro and clinically.
Therefore, under most circumstances, acyclovir should not be used to
treat CMV or Epstein-­Barr virus infections.
The biggest impact of acyclovir in clinical practice is in the treatment of primary and recurrent genital HSV infections. Oral nucleoside therapy plays an important role in the management of acute
primary genital herpes, treatment of episodic symptomatic reactivations, and prophylaxis against reactivation. Acyclovir is also indicated in the management of suspected or proven HSV encephalitis in
patients of all ages and for treatment of neonatal HSV infection, with
or without central nervous system (CNS) involvement. With respect
to neonatal HSV infection, the routine empirical use of acyclovir
against presumptive or possible HSV infection in infants admitted
with fever and no focus in the first 4 weeks of life is controversial.
Acyclovir should be used routinely in infants born to women with
risk factors for primary genital herpes or infants presenting with
any combination of vesicular lesions, seizures, meningoencephalitis, hepatitis, pneumonia, or disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Some experts advocate the initiation of acyclovir in all febrile neonates. Other experts have argued that a selective approach based on
the history and physical examination is more appropriate when making decisions about the use of acyclovir in febrile infants. Given the
safety of the drug, prudence would dictate the use of acyclovir in such
patients if HSV infection cannot be excluded.
Acyclovir is indicated for the treatment of primary HSV gingivostomatitis and for primary genital HSV infection. Long-­term suppressive
therapy for genital HSV and for recurrent oropharyngeal infections
(herpes labialis) is also effective. Acyclovir is also recommended for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 292 u Principles of Antiviral Therapy

1951

Table 292.1  Currently Licensed Antiviral Drugs
ANTIVIRAL

TRADE NAME

MECHANISM OF ACTION/COMMENTS

Acyclovir

Zovirax

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase

Adefovir

Hepsera

Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor

Amantadine*

Symmetrel

Blocks M2 protein ion channel

Baloxavir

Xofluza

Inhibits polymerase acidic endonuclease, blocking viral replication

BMS-­791325

Beclabuvir

Inhibitor of HCV NS5B
Evaluated in combination with asunaprevir and daclatasvir; active
against HCV genotype 1

Boceprevir†

Victrelis

Inhibitor of HCV NS3 serine protease
Active against HCV genotype 1

Cidofovir

Vistide

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase

Daclatasvir

Daklinza

Inhibitor of HCV NS5A
Used in varying combinations with sofosbuvir, ribavirin, and
interferon

Dasabuvir

Exviera

Inhibitor of HCV NS5B
Used together with the combination medication ombitasvir/
paritaprevir/ritonavir (Viekira Pak)
Activity limited to HCV genotype 1

Elbasvir

(Zepatier)

Inhibitor of HCV NS5A
Used in combination with the NS3/4A protease inhibitor grazoprevir
under the trade name Zepatier, either with or without ribavirin

Entecavir

Baraclude

Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
Active against HBV

Famciclovir†

Generic

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase

Fomivirsen‡

Vitravene

Phosphorothioate oligonucleotide inhibits viral replication via
antisense mechanism

Foscarnet

Foscavir

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase and reverse transcriptase at
pyrophosphate-­binding site

Ganciclovir

Cytovene

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase

Grazoprevir

Zepatier

Inhibitor of HCV NS3-­4A serine protease
Used in combination with elbasvir under the trade name Zepatier,
either with or without ribavirin

Idoxuridine Ophthalmic†

Herplex

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase

Interferon-­α

Intron-­A (interferon-­α2b)
Roferon-­A (interferon-­α2a)
Infergen (interferon alfacon-­1)

Produces multiple effector proteins that exert antiviral effects; also
directly interacts with immune system components

Interferon-­α2b plus ribavirin

Rebetron

Not established

Lamivudine (3TC)

Epivir

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase and reverse transcriptase; active
against HBV
With dolutegravir, Dovato; with tenofovir, Delstrigo; with zidovudine,
Combivir; with abacavir and dolutegravir, Triumeq.

Ledipasvir

(with Sofosbuvir: Harvoni)

Inhibitor of HCV NS5A

Letermovir

Prevymis

Prophylaxis against CMV following HSCT

Maribavir

Livtencity

Treatment of refractory CMV disease when treated with conventional
antiviral therapy

Molnupiravir

Lagevrio

Treatment of SARS-­CoV-­2
Induces viral RNA mutations during replication

Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir

Paxlovid

Treatment of SARS-­CoV-­2
Protease inhibitor

Ombitasvir

(Viekira Pak)

Inhibitor of HCV NS5A
Used in combination with paritaprevir, ritonavir and dasabuvir in
Viekira Pak
Active against HCV genotype 1
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1952 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 292.1  Currently Licensed Antiviral Drugs—cont’d
ANTIVIRAL

TRADE NAME

MECHANISM OF ACTION/COMMENTS

Oseltamivir

Tamiflu

Neuraminidase inhibitor; interference with deaggregation and
release of viral progeny

Paritaprevir

(Viekira Pak)
(Technivie†/Viekirax)

Inhibitor of HCV NS3-­4A serine protease
Used in combination with ombitasvir, ritonavir and dasabuvir (Viekira Pak),
or in combination with ombitasvir and ritonavir (Technivie†/Viekirax)

Pegylated interferon

PEG-­Intron (α2b), Pegasys (α2a)

Same as interferon

Penciclovir (topical)

Denavir

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase

Peramivir

Rapivab

Neuraminidase inhibitor

Remdesivir

Veklury

Treatment of SARS-­CoV-­2
Inhibits viral RNA polymerase

Ribavirin

Virazole, Rebetol, Copegus

Interference with viral messenger RNA

Rimantadine*

Flumadine

Blocks M2 protein ion channel

Simeprevir†

Olysio

Inhibitor of HCV NS3-­4A serine protease
Active against genotype 1 ± genotype 4
Used in combinations with sofosbuvir or ribavirin and pegylated
interferon-­alfa†

Sofosbuvir

(Harvoni)

Inhibitor of HCV NS5B
Used in combination with ledipasvir (Harvoni)
Approved in children >6 years of age and >17 kg

Telaprevir†

Incivek
Incivo
VX-­950

Inhibitor of HCV NS3-­4A serine protease
Active against HCV genotype 1
No longer available in United States

Telbivudine†

Tyzeka

Interferes with HBV DNA replication
No longer available in United States

Tenofovir

Viread
Vemlidy

Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
Active against HBV

Trifluridine

Viroptic

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase

Valacyclovir

Valtrex

Same as acyclovir

Valganciclovir

Valcyte

Same as ganciclovir

Velpatasvir

(Epclusa, Sofosvel, Velpanat)

Inhibitor of HCV NS5A
Used in combination with sofosbuvir (Epclusa, Sofosvel, Velpanat)
Active against all 6 HCV genotypes

Vidarabine

Ara-­A

Inhibits viral DNA polymerase (and to lesser extent, cellular DNA
polymerase)

Zanamivir

Relenza

Neuraminidase inhibitor; interference with deaggregation and
release of viral progeny

FDA-­APPROVED COMBINATION THERAPIES WITH INTERFERONS
Interferon-­α2b + ribavirin
Rebetron (Intron-­A plus Rebetol†
[ribavirin])

Discontinuation of Rebetol announced by FDA in 2019

Interferon-­α2a + ribavirin

Roferon-­A† + ribavirin

Discontinuation of Roferon announced by manufacturer in 2020

Pegylated interferon-­α2b +
ribavirin (3 yr and older)

PEG-­Intron
PegIntron
Sylatron
ViraferonPeg
PEG-­Intron/Rebetol (with ribavirin)

Indicated for chronic hepatitis C

Pegylated interferon-­α2a ±
ribavirin (5 yr and older)

Pegasys + Copegus

Approved for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C (in combination
with ribavirin) and treatment of chronic hepatitis B (can be used
alone)
Has been used in the treatment of mycosis fungoides (a T-­cell
lymphoma)

*No longer recommended by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for treatment of influenza.
†No longer marketed in United States.
‡No longer available.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 292 u Principles of Antiviral Therapy

1953

Table 292.2  Antiviral Therapies for Non-­HIV Clinical Conditions*
*VIRUS

CLINICAL SYNDROME

Influenza A and B

ANTIVIRAL AGENT OF CHOICE

ALTERNATIVE ANTIVIRAL AGENTS

Treatment

Oseltamivir (>2 wk old)

Zanamivir (>7 yr old)
Peramivir (>2 yr old)
Baloxavir (>12 yr old)

Prophylaxis

Oseltamivir (>3 mo old)

Zanamivir (>5 yr old)

Respiratory syncytial
virus

Bronchiolitis or pneumonia in
high-­risk host

Ribavirin aerosol

COVID-­19

Pneumonia
MIS-­C†

Remdesivir

Adenovirus

In immunocompromised
patients:
Pneumonia
Viremia
Nephritis
Hemorrhagic cystitis

Cidofovir

CMV

Congenital CMV infection
(symptomatic disease)

Valganciclovir (long-­term oral
valganciclovir may improve
developmental and hearing
outcomes)

Ganciclovir

Retinitis in AIDS patients

Valganciclovir

Ganciclovir
Cidofovir
Foscarnet
Ganciclovir ocular insert

Pneumonitis, colitis; esophagitis
in immunocompromised
patients

Ganciclovir (IV)

Foscarnet
Cidofovir
Valganciclovir
Maribavir

Prophylaxis for HSCT or SOT

Acyclovir (high-­dose; oral)

Valganciclovir
Letermovir

Neonatal herpes

Acyclovir (IV)

Suppressive therapy following
neonatal herpes

Acyclovir (PO)

HSV encephalitis

Acyclovir (IV)

HSV gingivostomatitis

Acyclovir (PO)

Acyclovir (IV)
Valacyclovir (PO)

First episode genital infection

Acyclovir (PO)

Valacyclovir

HSV

Nirmatrelvir-ritonavir
Molnupiravir

Acyclovir (IV) (severe disease)
Recurrent genital herpes

Acyclovir (PO)

Valacyclovir

Suppression of genital herpes

Acyclovir (PO)

Valacyclovir

Cutaneous HSV (whitlow, herpes
gladiatorum)

Acyclovir (PO)

Penciclovir (topical)

Eczema herpeticum

Acyclovir (PO)

Acyclovir (IV) (severe disease)

Mucocutaneous infection in
immunocompromised host
(mild)

Acyclovir (IV)

Acyclovir (PO) (if outpatient therapy
acceptable)

Mucocutaneous infection in
immunocompromised host
(moderate to severe)

Acyclovir (IV)

HSV prophylaxis in bone marrow
transplant recipients

Acyclovir (IV)

Valacyclovir

Acyclovir-­resistant HSV

Foscarnet

Cidofovir

Keratitis or keratoconjunctivitis

Trifluridine

Vidarabine
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1954 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 292.2  Antiviral Therapies for Non-­HIV Clinical Conditions*—cont’d
*VIRUS
Varicella-­zoster virus

CLINICAL SYNDROME

ANTIVIRAL AGENT OF CHOICE

Chickenpox, healthy child

Supportive care

Chickenpox,
immunocompromised child

Acyclovir (IV)

Zoster (not ophthalmic branch of
trigeminal nerve), healthy child

Supportive care

Zoster (ophthalmic branch of
trigeminal nerve), healthy child

Acyclovir (IV)

Zoster, immunocompromised
child

Acyclovir (IV)

ALTERNATIVE ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
Acyclovir (PO)

Acyclovir (PO)

Valacyclovir

*For antiviral agents for hepatitis B and hepatitis C, see Table 292.1.
†For MIS-­C, adjunctive therapies also include steroids, immunomodulatory therapy; see Chapter 449.1.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus.

less commonly encountered HSV infections, including herpetic whitlow, eczema herpeticum, and herpes gladiatorum. In addition, acyclovir is commonly used for prophylaxis against HSV reactivation in SOT
and HSCT patients. Severe end-­organ HSV disease, including disseminated infection, is occasionally encountered in immunocompromised
or pregnant patients, representing another clinical scenario in which
acyclovir therapy is warranted.
Acyclovir modifies the course of primary VZV infection, although
the effect is modest. Acyclovir or another nucleoside analog should
always be used in localized or disseminated VZV infections in immunocompromised patients. Primary VZV infection in pregnancy is
another setting in which acyclovir is indicated; this is a high-­risk scenario and can be associated with a substantial risk of maternal mortality, particularly if pneumonia is present.
Acyclovir is available in topical (5% ointment), parenteral, and oral
formulations, including an oral suspension formulation for pediatric
use. Topical therapy has little role in pediatric practice and should be
avoided in favor of alternative modes of delivery, particularly in infants
with vesicular lesions compatible with herpetic infection, where topical
therapy should never be used. The bioavailability of oral formulations
is modest, with only 15–30% of the oral dose being absorbed. There is
widespread tissue distribution after systemic administration, and high
concentrations of drug are achieved in the kidneys, lungs, liver, myocardium, and skin vesicles. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are approximately 50% of plasma concentrations. Acyclovir crosses the placenta,
and breast milk concentrations are approximately 3 times plasma concentrations, although there are no data on efficacy of in utero therapy
or impact of acyclovir therapy on nursing infants. Acyclovir therapy in
a nursing mother is not a contraindication to breastfeeding. The main
route of elimination is renal, and dosage adjustments are necessary for
renal insufficiency. Hemodialysis also eliminates acyclovir.
Acyclovir has an exceptional safety profile. Toxicity is observed typically only in exceptional circumstances: for example, if administered
by rapid infusion to a dehydrated patient or a patient with underlying renal insufficiency, acyclovir can crystallize in renal tubules and
produce a reversible obstructive uropathy. High doses of acyclovir are
associated with neurotoxicity, and prolonged use can cause neutropenia. The favorable safety profile of acyclovir is underscored by recent
studies of its safe use during pregnancy, and suppressive therapy in
pregnant women with histories of recurrent genital HSV infection, typically with valacyclovir (see later), has become standard of care among
many obstetricians. One uncommon but important complication of
long-­term use of acyclovir is the selection for acyclovir-­resistant HSV
strains, which usually occurs from pathogenic variants in the HSV TK
gene. Resistance is rarely observed in pediatric practice but should be
considered in any patient who has been on long-­term antiviral therapy
and who has an HSV or VZV infection that fails to clinically respond
to acyclovir therapy.

Valacyclovir

Valacyclovir is the l-­valyl ester of acyclovir and is rapidly converted
to acyclovir after oral administration. This agent has a safety and
activity profile similar to that of acyclovir but has a bioavailability of
>50%, 3-­5–fold greater than that of acyclovir. Plasma concentrations
approach those observed with intravenous acyclovir. Valacyclovir is
available only for oral administration. A suspension formulation is not
commercially available, but an oral suspension (25 mg/mL or 50 mg/
mL) may be prepared extemporaneously from 500-­mg caplets for use
in pediatric patients for whom a solid dosage form is not appropriate. Suppressive therapy with valacyclovir is commonly prescribed in
the second and third trimesters of pregnancy in women who have a
clinical history of recurrent genital herpes. It is important to be aware
that perinatal transmission of HSV can occur, leading to symptomatic
disease in spite of maternal antenatal antiviral prophylaxis. In such settings, the possibility of emergence of acyclovir-­resistant virus should
be considered.

Penciclovir and Famciclovir

Penciclovir is an acyclic nucleoside analog that, like acyclovir,
inhibits the viral DNA polymerase after phosphorylation to its
active form. Compared with acyclovir, penciclovir has a substantially longer intracellular half-­life, which in theory can confer superior antiviral activity at the intracellular level; however, there is no
evidence that this effect confers clinical superiority. Penciclovir is
licensed only as a topical formulation (1% penciclovir cream), and
this formulation is indicated for therapy of cutaneous HSV infections. Topical therapy for primary or recurrent herpes labialis or
cutaneous HSV infection is an appropriate use of penciclovir in
children older than 2 years of age.
Famciclovir is the prodrug formulation (diacetyl ester) of penciclovir. After oral administration, famciclovir is deacetylated to the parent
drug, penciclovir. The efficacy of famciclovir for HSV and VZV infections appeared equivalent to that of acyclovir, although the pharmacokinetic profile was more favorable. As of 2016, the drug has been
discontinued.

Ganciclovir and Valganciclovir

Ganciclovir is a nucleoside analog with structural similarity to that of
acyclovir. Like acyclovir, ganciclovir must be phosphorylated for antiviral activity, which is targeted against the viral polymerase. The gene
responsible for ganciclovir phosphorylation is not TK but rather the
virally encoded UL97 phosphotransferase gene. Antiviral resistance
in CMV can be observed with prolonged use of nucleoside antivirals,
and resistance should be considered in patients on long-­term therapy
who appear to fail to respond clinically and virologically. Ganciclovir is broadly active against many herpesviruses, including HSV and
VZV, but is most valuable for its activity against CMV. Ganciclovir was

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 292 u Principles of Antiviral Therapy

1955

the first antiviral agent licensed specifically to treat and prevent CMV
infection. It is indicated for prophylaxis against and therapy of CMV
infections in high-­risk patients, including HIV-­infected patients and
SOT or HSCT recipients. Of particular importance is the use of ganciclovir in the management of CMV retinitis, a sight-­threatening complication of HIV infection. Ganciclovir is also of benefit for newborns
with symptomatic congenital CMV infection and may be of value in
partially ameliorating the sensorineural hearing loss and developmental disabilities that are common complications of congenital CMV
infection.
Ganciclovir is supplied in parenteral and oral (as the prodrug, valganciclovir) formulations. Ganciclovir ocular implants are also available for the management of CMV retinitis. The bioavailability of oral
ganciclovir is poor, <10%, and therefore oral ganciclovir therapy has
been supplanted by the oral prodrug valganciclovir, which is well
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and quickly converted to ganciclovir by intestinal or hepatic metabolism. Bioavailability of ganciclovir (from valganciclovir) is approximately 60% from tablet and solution
formulations. Significant concentrations are found in the aqueous
humor, subretinal fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain tissue (enough
to inhibit susceptible strains of CMV). Subretinal concentrations are
comparable with plasma concentrations, but intravitreal concentrations are lower. Drug concentrations in the CNS range from 24% to
70% of plasma concentrations. The main route of elimination is renal,
and dosage adjustments are necessary for renal insufficiency. Dose
reduction is proportional to the creatinine clearance. Hemodialysis
efficiently eliminates ganciclovir, so administration of additional doses
after dialysis is necessary.
Ganciclovir has several important toxicities. Reversible myelosuppression is the most important toxicity and commonly requires either
discontinuation of therapy or the intercurrent administration of granulocyte colony–stimulating factor. There are also the theoretical risks of
carcinogenicity and gonadal toxicity; although these effects have been
observed in some animal models, they have never been observed in
patients. The decision to administer ganciclovir to a pediatric patient
is complex and should be made in consultation with a pediatric infectious disease specialist.

warranted in some settings of BK reactivation after HSCT and SOT.
Cidofovir is useful in the management of adenovirus infections in the
immunocompromised host. Cidofovir is also useful in the management of CMV disease caused by strains with documented ganciclovir
resistance.
Cidofovir is administered intravenously and is cleared renally by
tubular secretion. Extensive prehydration and co-­administration
of probenecid are recommended. Nephrotoxicity is commonly
encountered, even with appropriate prehydration; cidofovir must
be co-­
administered with care with other nephrotoxic medications. Other potential toxicities include reproductive toxicity and
carcinogenesis.

Foscarnet

Letermovir is a highly orally bioavailable agent with a novel mechanism
of antiviral action, functioning through interference with the viral terminase complex. This agent demonstrates substantial promise as an
alternative to more toxic antivirals in patients at high risk for CMV
disease, particularly in the transplantation setting. It is licensed for
prophylaxis for CMV infection and disease in adult CMV-­seropositive
recipients of allogeneic HSCT.

Foscarnet has a unique profile, insofar as it is not a nucleoside analog but rather a pyrophosphate analog. The drug has broad activity
against most herpesviruses. Like the nucleoside analogs, foscarnet
inhibits viral DNA polymerase. On the other hand, foscarnet does
not require phosphorylation to exert its antiviral activity, thus differing from the nucleoside analogs. It binds to a different site on the
viral DNA polymerase to exert its antiviral effect and therefore retains
activity against strains of HSV and CMV that are resistant to nucleoside analogs. Its clinical utility is as a second-­line agent for management of CMV infections in high-­risk patients who cannot tolerate
ganciclovir and as an alternative for patients with persistent or refractory HSV, CMV, or VZV disease with suspected or documented antiviral drug resistance.
Foscarnet is available only as a parenteral formulation and is a toxic
agent that must be administered cautiously. Nephrotoxicity is common,
and reversible renal insufficiency is often observed, as evidenced by an
increase in serum creatinine. Abnormalities in calcium and phosphorus homeostasis are common, and electrolytes and renal function must
be monitored carefully during treatment.

Cidofovir

Cidofovir is an acyclic nucleotide analog that requires phosphorylation
to its active form, cidofovir diphosphate, to exert its antiviral effect.
Analogous to penciclovir, it has an extended intracellular half-­life that
contributes to its prolonged antiviral activity. Cidofovir is active against
HSV, VZV, and CMV. In contrast to most of the other agents with activity against herpesviruses, cidofovir also exhibits broad-­spectrum activity against other DNA viruses, most notably the poxviruses. Cidofovir
has activity against the BK virus, a polyomavirus, and therapy may be

Trifluridine

Trifluridine is a pyrimidine nucleoside analog with activity against
HSV, CMV, and adenovirus. It is formulated as a 1% ophthalmic solution and approved for topical use in the treatment of HSV keratitis and
keratoconjunctivitis. Trifluridine is the treatment of choice for HSV
keratitis, a disease that should always be managed in consultation with
an ophthalmologist.

Vidarabine

Vidarabine is a nucleoside analog that has activity against HSV. It was
the first parenteral antiviral agent for HSV infection, although it is no
longer available for intravenous administration. A topical preparation
remains available to treat HSV keratitis and is considered a second-­line
agent for this indication.

Fomivirsen

Fomivirsen is an anti-­CMV compound that was used as a second-­
line agent for CMV retinitis by direct injection into the vitreous
space. It is an antisense 21-­mer DNA oligonucleotide that binds
directly to complementary messenger RNA. This agent is of interest because it was the first antisense antiviral agent approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The drug is no longer
marketed.

Letermovir

Maribavir

Maribavir is a licensed orally bioavailable agent that targets the CMV
gene product UL97, in the process blocking viral replication. The drug
is indicated to treat patients >12 years of age who weigh >35 kg and
have evidence of posttransplant CMV infection and/or disease that
does not respond to other antiviral agents.

ANTIVIRALS USED FOR RESPIRATORY VIRAL
INFECTIONS

Antiviral therapies are available for many respiratory pathogens,
including respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza A, and influenza
B. Antiviral therapy for respiratory viral infections is of particular value
for infants, children with chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised children.

Ribavirin

Ribavirin is a guanosine analog that has broad-­
spectrum activity against a variety of viruses, particularly RNA viruses. Its precise
mechanism of action is incompletely understood but is probably
related to interference with viral messenger RNA processing and
translation. Ribavirin is available in oral, parenteral, and aerosolized
formulations. Although intravenous ribavirin is highly effective in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1956 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
the management of Lassa fever and other hemorrhagic fevers, this
formulation is not licensed for use in the United States. The only
licensed formulations in the United States are an aqueous formulation for aerosol administration (indicated for RSV infection) and
an oral formulation that is combined with IFN-­α for the treatment
of hepatitis C. (For more information about antivirals for hepatitis,
see Chapter 406.) Administration of ribavirin by aerosol should be
considered for serious RSV lower respiratory tract disease in immunocompromised children, young infants with serious RSV-­associated
illness, and high-­risk infants and children (children with chronic
lung disease or cyanotic congenital heart disease). In vitro testing
and uncontrolled clinical studies also suggest efficacy of aerosolized
ribavirin for parainfluenza, influenza, and measles infections.
Ribavirin is generally nontoxic, particularly when administered by
aerosol. Oral ribavirin is used in combination with other agents for
therapy of hepatitis C (discussed later). There is no role for the use of
oral ribavirin in the treatment of community-­acquired viral respiratory tract infections. Ribavirin and its metabolites concentrate in red
blood cells and can persist for several weeks and, in rare instances,
may be associated with anemia. Conjunctivitis and bronchospasm
have been reported after exposure to aerosolized drug. Care must
be taken when using aerosolized ribavirin in children undergoing
mechanical ventilation to avoid precipitation of particles in ventilator
tubing; the drug is not formally approved for use in the mechanically ventilated patient, although there is published experience with
this approach, which can be considered for mechanically ventilated
patients, particularly in a “high-­dose, short-­duration” regimen (6
g/100 mL water given for a period of 2 hours 3 times a day). Concerns regarding potential teratogenicity from animal studies have not
been borne out in clinical practice, although care should be taken to
prevent inadvertent exposure to aerosolized drug in pregnant healthcare providers.

Amantadine and Rimantadine

Amantadine and rimantadine are tricyclic amines (adamantanes)
that share structural similarity. Both were indicated for prophylaxis
and therapy of influenza A. The mechanism of action of the tricyclic amines against influenza A virus was unclear, but they appeared
to exert their antiviral effect at the level of uncoating of the virus.
Both agents are extremely well absorbed after oral administration
and are eliminated via the kidneys (90% of the dose is unchanged),
necessitating dosage adjustments for renal insufficiency. The toxicities of the tricyclic amines are modest and include CNS adverse
effects such as anxiety, difficulty concentrating, and lightheadedness and gastrointestinal adverse effects such as nausea and loss of
appetite.
Although these agents are still manufactured and available, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) no longer recommends
the use of the adamantane agents in treatment or prophylaxis against
influenza, because of the emergence of widespread resistance.

Oseltamivir, Peramivir, Zanamivir (Neuraminidase
Inhibitors)

These agents are active against both influenza A and B, although the
importance of this broader spectrum of antiinfluenza activity in disease control is modest because influenza B infection is typically a
much milder illness. Emerging strains of influenza, including H5N1
and the 2009 to 2010 pandemic strain, H1N1 (swine flu), are susceptible to oseltamivir and zanamivir but resistant to amantadine.
Therefore these agents have emerged as the antivirals of choice for
influenza infection. These agents have no appreciable activity against
other respiratory viruses. The mechanism of antiviral activity of oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir is via inhibition of the influenza
neuraminidase. Unfortunately, oseltamivir resistance may occur as
a result of a mutation in 2009 H1N1 viruses, resulting in treatment
failure.
Zanamivir has poor oral bioavailability and is licensed only for inhalational administration. With inhaled administration, >75% of the dose

is deposited in the oropharynx and much of it is swallowed. The actual
amount distributed to the airways and lungs depends on factors such as
the patient’s inspiratory flow. Approximately 13% of the dose appears
to be distributed to the airways and lungs, with approximately 10% of
the inhaled dose distributed systemically. Local respiratory mucosal
drug concentrations greatly exceed the drug concentration needed to
inhibit influenza A and B viruses. Elimination is via the kidneys, and
no dosage adjustment is necessary with renal insufficiency, because the
amount systemically absorbed is low.
Oseltamivir is administered as an esterified prodrug that has high
oral bioavailability. It is eliminated by tubular secretion, and dosage
adjustment is required for patients with renal insufficiency. Gastrointestinal adverse effects, including nausea and vomiting, are occasionally
observed. The drug is indicated for both treatment and prophylaxis.
The usual adult dosage for treatment of influenza is 75 mg twice daily
for 5 days. Treatment should be initiated within 2 days of the appearance of symptoms. Recommended treatment dosages for children vary
by age and weight. The recommended dose for children younger than
1 year of age is 3 mg/kg/dose twice a day. For children older than 1
year of age, doses are 30 mg twice a day for children weighing ≤15
kg, 45 mg twice a day for children weighing 15-­23 kg, 60 mg twice
a day for those weighing 23-­40 kg, and 75 mg twice a day for children weighing ≥40 kg. Dosages for chemoprophylaxis are the same for
each weight group in children older than 1 year, but the drug should
be administered only once daily rather than twice daily. Oseltamivir
is FDA approved for therapy of influenza A and B treatment in children 2 weeks of age and older, whereas zanamivir is recommended for
treatment of children 7 years of age and older. Current treatment and
dosage recommendations for treatment of influenza in children and
for chemoprophylaxis are available at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/highri
sk/children-­antiviral.htm. Oseltamivir has been described to produce
neuropsychiatric (narcolepsy) and psychologic (suicidal events) side
effects in some patient populations; the drug should be discontinued
if behavioral or psychiatric side effects are observed. In late 2014 the
FDA approved the neuraminidase inhibitor peramivir for treatment
of influenza in pediatrics. It is available as a single-­dose, intravenous
option. The drug is currently approved for use in children >2 years.
The dose is 12 mg/kg dose, up to 600 mg maximum, by intravenous
infusion for a minimum of 15 minutes in children from 2 to 12 years.
Children 13 and older should receive the adult dose (600 mg IV in a
single, one-­time dose).

Baloxavir

Baloxavir is dosed as baloxavir marboxil, a prodrug that is converted
by hydrolysis to baloxavir, the active agent. It is active against influenza
A and B. Baloxavir inhibits the endonuclease activity of the influenza
polymerase acidic (PA) protein, in the process inhibiting virus replication. It is administered as a single dose of 40 mg in individuals 40-­80
kg, and 80 mg in those >80 kg.
Oral baloxavir marboxil (Xofluza) is approved by the FDA for treatment of acute uncomplicated influenza within 2 days of illness onset in
people ≥12 years. The safety and efficacy of baloxavir for the treatment
of influenza have been established in pediatric patients ≥12 years and
older weighing at least 40 kg. Safety and efficacy in patients <12 years or
weighing less than 40 kg have not been established. Baloxavir efficacy is
based on clinical trials in outpatients 12 to 64 years of age; people with
underlying medical conditions and adults >65 years were not included
in the initial published clinical trials. There are no available data for
baloxavir treatment of hospitalized patients with influenza.

ANTIVIRALS USED FOR COVID-­19

The advent of the COVID-­19 pandemic has necessitated the urgent
development of antivirals active against the SARS-­CoV-­2 virus. Remdesivir is an adenosine analog that was originally developed as a therapeutic
option for Ebola virus. It is metabolized to its active metabolite, remdesivir triphosphate, which is a structural analog of adenosine triphosphate and results in delayed chain termination during viral replication.
It reduces early-­stage COVID-­19 mortality and the need for mechanical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 292 u Principles of Antiviral Therapy
ventilation among hospitalized COVID-­19 patients. The dose for pediatric patients less than 12 years of age and weighing at least 3 kg (and <40
kg) is a single loading dose of 5 mg/kg on day 1 followed by 2.5 mg/kg
once daily for up to 5 days; for hospitalized patients requiring invasive
mechanical ventilation and/or ECMO, up to 10 days total therapy can
be administered. Paxlovid (also variably referred to as ritonavir-­boosted
nirmatrelvir) is a therapeutic combination consisting of two compounds:
nirmatrelvir, an oral inhibitor of SARS-­CoV-­2 protease, and ritonavir,
an inhibitor of the HIV-­1 protease. Ritonavir is also a potent inhibitor
of cytochrome P-­450 (CYP) 3A; thus its inclusion results in higher levels of PF-­07321332. In patients with SARS-­CoV-­2 infection who were
treated with Paxlovid within 3 days of symptom onset, hospitalization
and mortality rates were statistically significantly lower compared with
placebo. The FDA Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) includes treatment of children over 12 years of age with a body weight of >40 kg, with
a suggested dose of 300 mg nirmatrelvir (two 150-­mg tablets) with 100
mg ritonavir (one 100-­mg tablet), with all three tablets taken together,
twice daily, by oral administration, for 5 days. Molnupiravir (Lagevrio)
was originally developed as an influenza antiviral agent. It is a prodrug
of a synthetic nucleoside hydroxycytidine derivative. Its antiviral effect is
mediated by the introduction of copying errors during the SARS-­CoV-­2
RNA replication cycle. The reported efficacy against hospitalization or
death in an adult study of mild or moderate COVID-­19 disease was
approximately 30%. The drug is not authorized for patients <18 years
of age because of concerns that it may affect cartilage and bone growth.

ANTIVIRALS USED FOR HEPATITIS

Seven antiviral agents have been approved by the FDA for treatment
of adults with chronic hepatitis B in the United States. These agents are
categorized as either IFN-­α2b and peginterferon-­α2a) or nucleoside
or nucleotide analogs (lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, tenofovir, telbivudine). Lamivudine is currently considered the first-­line therapy in
adult patients, but experience in children is limited. In 2012 tenofovir
was FDA approved for children with chronic hepatitis B age ≥12 years
weighing >35 kg. Entecavir was approved in the United States for use
in children 2 years and older with chronic HBV and evidence of active
viral replication and disease activity and, with IFN-­α, is emerging as a
first-­line antiviral regimen for children with hepatitis B who are candidates for antiviral therapy.
Adefovir demonstrates a favorable safety profile and is less likely
to select for resistance than lamivudine, but virologic response was
limited to adolescent patients and was lower than that of lamivudine. Most experts recommend watchful waiting of children with
chronic hepatitis B infection, because current therapies are only
modestly effective at best and evidence of long-­term benefit is
scant. Young children are often thought to be immune tolerant of
hepatitis B infection (i.e., they have viral DNA present in serum but
normal transaminase levels and no evidence of active hepatitis).
These children should have transaminases and viral load monitored but are not typically considered to be candidates for antiviral
therapy.
Various formulations of IFNs and ribavirin have been approved
by the FDA to treat adults and children with chronic hepatitis C
(see Tables 292.1 and 292.2). The impact of hepatitis C genotype
had formerly been a major issue in treatment response. Previous
studies using ribavirin and pegylated IFNs demonstrated significant genotype-­dependent differences in responsiveness to antiviral
therapy; patients with genotype 1 had the lowest levels of sustained
virologic response, and patients with genotype 2 or 3 had the highest
response. The development of novel and highly effective antivirals for
HCV has revolutionized the care of hepatitis C patients. Novel drugs
include ledipasvir, sofosbuvir, daclatasvir, elbasvir, beclabuvir, grazoprevir, paritaprevir, ombitasvir, velpatasvir, and dasabuvir. Ledipasvir, ombitasvir, daclatasvir, elbasvir, and velpatasvir inhibit the virally
encoded phosphoprotein NS5A, which is involved in viral replication, assembly, and secretion, whereas sofosbuvir is metabolized to

1957

a uridine triphosphate mimic, which functions as an RNA chain
terminator when incorporated into the nascent RNA by the NS5B
polymerase enzyme. Dasabuvir and beclabuvir are also NS5B inhibitors. Paritaprevir and grazoprevir inhibit the nonstructural protein 3
(NS3/4) serine protease, a viral nonstructural protein that is the 70-­
kDa cleavage product of the hepatitis C virus polyprotein.
Sofosbuvir in a fixed-­dose combination was originally licensed for
treatment of hepatitis C in adults. It is highly effective (>90%) for hepatitis C genotypes 1 through 6. In 2020, it was licensed for treatment
in children ages 6 years and older and weighing at least 17 kilograms
for any of the six HCV genotypes in patients without cirrhosis or with
mild cirrhosis. Epclusa in combination with ribavirin is indicated for
the treatment of pediatric patients 6 years and older or weighing at least
17 kilograms with severe cirrhosis.

ANTIVIRAL IMMUNE GLOBULINS

Immune globulins are useful adjuncts in the management of viral disease. However, they are most valuable when administered as prophylaxis against infection and disease in high-­risk patients; their value as
therapeutic agents in the setting of established infection is less clear.
Varicella-­zoster immune globulin (human) is valuable for prophylaxis against VZV in high-­risk children, particularly newborns and
immunocompromised children (see Chapter 300). CMV immune
globulin is warranted for children at high risk for CMV disease, particularly SOT and HSCT patients, and can play a role in preventing
injury to the infected fetus when administered to the pregnant patient
(see Chapter 302). Palivizumab, a monoclonal antibody with anti-­RSV
activity, is effective for preventing severe RSV lower respiratory tract
disease in high-­risk premature infants and has replaced RSV immune
globulin (see Chapter 307). Hepatitis B immune globulin is indicated
in infants born to hepatitis B surface antigen–positive mothers (see
Chapter 406). A variety of monoclonal antibodies had received FDA
EUA clearance for prophylaxis and/or therapy of SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, including bamlanivimab (LY-­CoV555; administered alone or in
combination with etesevimab), the combination of casirivimab and
imdevimab (REGEN-­
COV), and the combination of tixagevimab
(AZD8895) and cilgavimab (AZD1061), also known as Evusheld. As
of late 2023, these products are no longer available due to their lack of
effectiveness against emerging circulating variants of the SARS-CoV-2
virus. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC)
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices has also recently
recommended the routine use of nirsevimab, a monoclonal antibody
targeting the prefusion conformation of the RSV F protein, for the
prevention of RSV lower respiratory tract disease (see Chapter 307).
Treatment is recommended for newborns and infants younger than 8
months of age during, or entering, their first RSV season, as well as
for children up to 24 months of age at increased risk of developing
RSV disease entering their second RSV season. A single dose of 50 mg
administered intramuscularly is recommended for infants <5 kg, and
100 mg is recommended for infants ≥5 kg. Nirsevimab should not be
given to children ≥8 months and older who are not at increased risk of
severe RSV disease. For the 2023-24 respiratory virus season, and in
light of shortage and distribution issues with nirsevimab, the CDC has
recommended (https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2023/han00499.asp)
assigning the highest priority for nirsevimab 100 mg doses for infants
at the highest risk for severe RSV disease: young infants (age <6 months
and >5 kg) and infants with underlying conditions that place them
at highest risk for severe RSV disease. The CDC also recommended
that providers not use nirsevimab in palivizumab-eligible children
ages 8–19 months for the 2023–24 RSV season; instead, they should
receive palivizumab per American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/152/1/
e2023061803/192153/Palivizumab-Prophylaxis-in-Infants-and-Young
?autologincheck=redirected).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1958 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Measles is highly contagious, but endemic transmission has been
interrupted in the United States as a result of widespread vaccination; imported cases have resulted in epidemics in the United States
in unimmunized or partially immunized individuals. In some areas of
the world, measles remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality
in children (Fig. 293.1).

number of cases since 1992, with 89% of cases in unvaccinated or
unknown vaccination status, and 10% of cases requiring hospitalization. There were 22 outbreaks in 17 states (7 were multistate outbreaks),
and 85% of cases were in close-­knit, isolated communities where standard control measures that generally quickly contain outbreaks were
difficult to implement.
Population levels of measles immunity of ∼95% are required to interrupt the endemic spread of measles. In the United States this can be
achieved through the current two-­dose immunization strategies when
coverage rates are high (>90% one-­dose coverage at 12-­15 months and
>95% two-­dose coverage in school-­age children). Although measles-­
mumps-­rubella coverage remains high (∼95% for 2011–2020), pockets
of lower coverage rates exist because of reluctance of parents to vaccinate their children. This variability in vaccination has contributed to
outbreaks among children in recent years.

ETIOLOGY

TRANSMISSION

Chapter 293

Measles
Hayley A. Gans

Measles virus is a negative sense single-­stranded, lipid-­enveloped RNA
virus in the family Paramyxoviridae and genus Morbillivirus. Other
members of the genus Morbillivirus affect a variety of mammals, such
as rinderpest virus in cattle and distemper virus in dogs, but humans
are the only host of measles virus. Of the six major structural proteins of
measles virus, the two most important in terms of induction of immunity are the hemagglutinin (H) protein and the fusion (F) protein. The
neutralizing antibodies are directed against the H protein, and antibodies to the F protein limit proliferation of the virus during infection.
Small variations in genetic composition have also been identified that
result in no effect on protective immunity but provide molecular markers that can distinguish between viral types. Related genotypes have
been grouped by clades, and the World Health Organization (WHO)
recognizes 8 clades, A-­H, and 23 genotypes. These markers have been
useful in the evaluation of endemic and epidemic spread of measles.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The measles vaccine has changed the epidemiology of measles dramatically. Once worldwide in distribution, endemic transmission of
measles has been interrupted in many countries where there is widespread vaccine coverage. Historically, measles caused universal infection in childhood in the United States, with 90% of children acquiring
the infection before 15 years of age. Morbidity and mortality associated with measles decreased before the introduction of the vaccine as a
result of improvements in healthcare and nutrition. However, the incidence declined dramatically following the introduction of the measles
vaccine in 1963. The attack rate fell from 313 cases per 100,000 population in 1956–1960 to 1.3 cases per 100,000 in 1982–1988.
A nationwide indigenous measles outbreak occurred in the United
States in 1989–1991, resulting in more than 55,000 cases, 11,000 hospitalizations, and 123 deaths, demonstrating that the infection had not
yet been controlled. This resurgence was attributed to vaccine failure
in a small number of school-­age children, low coverage of preschool-­
age children, and more rapid waning of maternal antibodies in infants
born to mothers who had never experienced wild-­type measles infection. Implementation of the two-­dose vaccine policy and more intensive immunization strategies resulted in interruption of endemic
transmission, and in 2000 measles was declared eliminated from the
United States.
Measles continues to be imported into the United States; therefore
continued maintenance of >90% immunity through vaccination is
necessary to prevent widespread outbreaks from occurring (see Fig.
293.1).
Since elimination in 2000, there have been several measles epidemics, with the two largest occurring in 2014 with 667 cases and in 2019
with 1,282 cases. In 2014 there were 23 outbreaks reported, compared
with a median of 4 outbreaks reported annually during 2001–2010.
The majority of cases were associated with importations from other
countries (returning tourists, adoptees, refugees), particularly from
the Philippines, with prior year epidemics associated with epidemics
in the WHO European Region. Measles cases were largely restricted to
unvaccinated individuals. The epidemic in 2019 resulted in the highest

The portal of entry of measles virus is through the respiratory tract
or conjunctivae following contact with large droplets or small-­droplet
aerosols in which the virus is suspended. Individuals are infectious
from 3 days before to up to 4-­6 days after the onset of rash. Approximately 90% of exposed susceptible individuals experience measles.
Face-­to-­face contact is not necessary, because viable virus may be suspended in air for as long as 2 hours after the source case leaves a room.
Secondary cases from spread of aerosolized virus have been reported
in airplanes, physicians’ offices, and hospitals.

PATHOLOGY

Measles infection causes necrosis of the respiratory tract epithelium
and an accompanying lymphocytic infiltrate. Measles produces a
small-­vessel vasculitis on the skin and on the oral mucous membranes.
Histology of the rash and exanthem reveals intracellular edema and
dyskeratosis associated with formation of epidermal syncytial giant
cells with up to 26 nuclei. Viral particles have been identified within
these giant cells. In lymphoreticular tissue, lymphoid hyperplasia is
prominent. Fusion of infected cells results in multinucleated giant
cells, the Warthin-­Finkeldey giant cells that are pathognomonic for
measles, with up to 100 nuclei and intracytoplasmic and intranuclear
inclusions.

PATHOGENESIS

Measles infection consists of four phases: incubation period, prodromal illness, exanthematous phase, and recovery. During incubation,
measles virus migrates to regional lymph nodes. A primary viremia
ensues that disseminates the virus to the reticuloendothelial system. A
secondary viremia spreads virus to body surfaces. The prodromal illness begins after the secondary viremia and is associated with epithelial
necrosis and giant cell formation in body tissues. Cells are killed by
cell-­to-­cell plasma membrane fusion associated with viral replication
that occurs in many body tissues, including cells of the central nervous
system. Virus shedding begins in the prodromal phase. With onset of
the rash, antibody production begins, and viral replication and symptoms begin to subside. Measles virus also infects CD4+ T cells, resulting
in suppression of the Th1 immune response and a multitude of other
immunosuppressive effects.
Measles virus attaches to specific cell receptors to infect host cells.
Studies in primates show that the initial targets for measles virus are
alveolar macrophages, dendritic cells, and lymphocytes. The cell receptor in these cells appears to be the signaling lymphocyte-­activating
molecule CD150. Subsequently, respiratory epithelial cells become
infected by attachment to the PVRL4 receptor (Nectin4), which is
expressed on cells in the trachea, oral mucosa, nasopharynx, and lungs.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Measles is a serious infection characterized by high fever, an enanthem,
cough, coryza, conjunctivitis, and a prominent exanthem (Fig. 293.2).
After an incubation period of 8-­12 days, the prodromal phase begins
with a mild fever followed by the onset of conjunctivitis with photophobia, coryza, a prominent cough, and increasing fever. Koplik spots

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 293 u Measles

1959

MCV1 coverage in infants, 2015

<50% (four countries or 2%)
50–79% (38 countries or 20%)
80–89% (33 countries or 17%)

A

Goal
AFR
AMR

EMR
EUR

SEAR
WPR

100·0

10·0
5·0

2015 measles incidence goal

1·0

1·5
Annual number of measles deaths (millions)

1000·0

Estimated annual number of global measles deaths, 2000–15

1·0

0·5

Year

00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15

20

20

B

Estimated number of measles deaths
95% upper confidence limit
95% lower confidence limit

0

0·1

00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15

Measles incidence per million population (log scale)

Global measles incidence by WHO region, 2000–15

≥90% (119 countries or 61%)
Not available

C

Year

Fig. 293.1 Progress toward achieving global measles milestones for measles vaccine coverage (A), measles incidence (B), and measles mortality

(C). A, Milestone 1: increase routine coverage with the first dose of measles-­containing vaccine (MCV1) for children age 1 yr to ≥90% nationally and
≥80% in every district. Progress: The number of countries with ≥90% MCV1 coverage increased from 84 (44%) in 2000 to 119 (61%) in 2015. Among
countries with ≥90% MCV1 coverage nationally, the percentage with ≥80% coverage in every district was only 39% of 119 countries in 2015. B, Milestone 2: reduce global measles incidence to <5 cases/1 million population. Progress: reported global annual measles incidence decreased 75% from
2000 to 2015, but only the Region of the Americas achieved the milestone of <5 cases/1 million population. C, Milestone 3: reduce global measles
mortality by 95% from the 2000 estimate. Progress: the number of estimated global annual measles deaths decreased 79% from 2000 to 2015. AFR,
African Region; AMR, Region of the Americas; EMR, Eastern Mediterranean Region; EUR, European Region; SEAR, South-­East Asia Region; WPR,
Western Pacific Region. (From Moss WJ. Measles. Lancet. 2017;390:2490–2502. Fig. 2; with data from Patel MK, Gacic-­Dobo M, Strebel PM, et al.
Progress toward regional measles elimination—worldwide, 2000–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:1228–1233.)

represent the enanthem and are the pathognomonic sign of measles,
appearing 1-­4 days before the onset of the rash (Fig. 293.3). They first
appear as discrete red lesions with bluish-­white spots in the center on
the inner aspects of the cheeks at the level of the premolars. They may
spread to involve the lips, hard palate, and gingiva. They also may occur
in conjunctival folds and in the vaginal mucosa. Koplik spots have been
reported in 50–70% of measles cases but probably occur in the great
majority.
Symptoms increase in intensity for 2-­4 days until the first day of the
rash. The rash begins on the forehead (around the hairline), behind the
ears, and on the upper neck as a red maculopapular eruption. It then
spreads downward to the torso and extremities, reaching the palms and
soles in up to 50% of cases. The exanthem frequently becomes confluent on the face and upper trunk (Fig. 293.4).

With the onset of the rash, symptoms begin to subside. The rash
fades over about 7 days in the same progression as it evolved, often
leaving a fine desquamation of skin in its wake. Of the major symptoms
of measles, the cough lasts the longest, often up to 10 days. In more
severe cases, generalized lymphadenopathy may be present, with cervical and occipital lymph nodes especially prominent.

MODIFIED MEASLES INFECTION

In individuals with passively acquired antibody, such as infants and
recipients of blood products, a subclinical form of measles may occur.
The rash may be indistinct, brief, or, rarely, entirely absent. Similarly,
some individuals who have been vaccinated may have a rash but few
other symptoms after exposure to measles. Persons with modified measles are not considered highly contagious.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Temperature (°C)

1960 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Disease course

Complications

Fever

Neurological:
ADEM, MIBE,
SSPE
Otitis media

40
39
38
37

Keratoconjunctivitis
(blindness)
Stomatitis
Laryngitis (croup)

Rash
Pneumonia
Koplik’s spots
Adverse
pregnancy
outcomes

Conjunctivitis

Diarrhea

Coryza
Death
Cough
1

A

Incubation
phase

2 3

Prodromal
phase

4

5

6

7

8 9

Rash phase

10
Convalescent
phase

B

Fig. 293.2 Measles disease course (A) and complications (B). ADEM, Acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis; MIBE, measles inclusion body encephalitis; SSPE,
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis. (Modified from
Moss WJ. Measles. Lancet. 2017;390:2490–2502. Fig.
4.)

Fig. 293.3 Koplik spots on the buccal mucosa during the third day of

rash. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]. Public
health image library, image 4500. https://phil.cdc.gov/Details.aspx?p
id=4500.)

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The diagnosis of measles is almost always based on clinical and epidemiologic findings. Laboratory findings in the acute phase include reduction
in the total white blood cell count, with lymphocytes decreased more
than neutrophils. However, absolute neutropenia has been known to
occur. In measles not complicated by bacterial infection, the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and C-­reactive protein level are usually normal.

DIAGNOSIS

Isolation of measles from blood, urine, or respiratory secretions can
be accomplished by culture at the CDC or local or state laboratories.
Molecular detection by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be performed on specimens from nasopharyngeal aspirates, throat swabs, or
urine. Serologic confirmation is most conveniently made by identification of immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibody in serum. IgM antibody
appears 1-­2 days after the onset of the rash and remains detectable
for about 1 month. If a serum specimen is collected <72 hours after
onset of rash and is negative for measles antibody, a second specimen
should be obtained. Serologic confirmation may also be made by demonstration of a fourfold rise in IgG antibodies in acute and convalescent specimens collected 2-­4 weeks apart. Collection of both a throat
swab specimen for PCR and a serum specimen for IgM detection is
recommended from all patients with clinical features compatible with
measles. In addition, samples should be sent to local state public health
laboratories or the CDC for genotyping.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Typical measles is unlikely to be confused with other illnesses, especially if Koplik spots are observed. Measles in the later stages or

Fig. 293.4 A child with measles displaying the characteristic red blotchy
pattern on his face and body. (From Kremer JR, Muller CP. Measles in Europe—there is room for improvement. Lancet. 2009;373:356–358.)

modified or atypical infections may be confused with a number of
other exanthematous immune-­
mediated illnesses and infections,
including rubella, adenovirus infection, enterovirus infection, and
Epstein-­Barr virus infection. Exanthem subitum (in infants) and
erythema infectiosum (in older children) may also be confused with
measles. Mycoplasma pneumoniae and group A Streptococcus may
also produce rashes similar to that of measles. Kawasaki syndrome
can cause many of the same findings as measles but lacks discrete
intraoral lesions (Koplik spots) and a severe prodromal cough and
typically leads to elevations of neutrophils and acute-­phase reactants.
In addition, the characteristic thrombocytosis of Kawasaki syndrome
is absent in measles (see Chapter 208). Drug eruptions may occasionally be mistaken for measles.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 293 u Measles

1961

TABLE 293.1  Complications by Age for Reported Measles Cases, United States, 1987–2000

COMPLICATION

OVERALL
(67,032 CASES
WITH AGE
INFORMATION)

NO. (%) OF PERSONS WITH COMPLICATION BY AGE GROUP
<5 YR
(N = 28,730)

5-­9 YR
(N = 6,492)

10-­19 YR
(N = 18,580)

20-­29 YR
(N = 9,161)

<30 YR
(N = 4,069)

Any

19,480 (29.1)

11,883 (41.4)

1,173 (18.1)

2,369 (12.8)

2,656 (29.0)

1,399 (34.4)

Death

177 (0.3)

97 (0.3)

9 (0.1)

18 (0.1)

26 (0.3)

27 (0.7)

Diarrhea

5,482 (8.2)

3,294 (11.5)

408 (6.3)

627 (3.4)

767 (8.4)

386 (9.5)

Encephalitis

97 (0.1)

43 (0.2)

9 (0.1)

13 (0.1)

21 (0.2)

11 (0.3)

Hospitalization

12,876 (19.2)

7,470 (26.0)

612 (9.4)

1,612 (8.7)

2,075 (22.7)

1,107 (27.2)

Otitis media

4,879 (7.3)

4,009 (14.0)

305 (4.7)

338 (1.8)

157 (1.7)

70 (1.7)

Pneumonia

3,959 (5.9)

2,480 (8.6)

183 (2.8)

363 (2.0)

554 (6.1)

379 (9.3)

From Perry RT, Halsey NA. The clinical significance of measles: a review. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;189(Suppl. 1):S4–S16.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications of measles are largely attributable to the pathogenic
effects of the virus on the respiratory tract and immune system (Table
293.1, see Fig. 293.2). Several factors make complications more likely.
Morbidity and mortality from measles are greatest in individuals
younger than 5 years of age (especially <1 year of age) and older than
20 years of age. In resource poor countries, higher case fatality rates
have been associated with crowding, possibly attributable to larger
inoculum doses after household exposure. Severe malnutrition in
children results in a suboptimal immune response and higher morbidity and mortality with measles infection. Low serum retinol levels
in children with measles are associated with higher measles morbidity and mortality in developing countries and in the United States.
Measles infection lowers serum retinol concentrations, so subclinical
cases of hyporetinolemia may be made symptomatic during measles.
Measles infection in immunocompromised persons is associated
with increased morbidity and mortality. Among patients with malignancy in whom measles develops, pneumonitis occurs in 58% and
encephalitis occurs in 20%.
Pneumonia is the most common cause of death in measles. It may
manifest as giant cell pneumonia caused directly by the viral infection
or as superimposed bacterial infection. The most common bacterial
pathogens are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and
Staphylococcus aureus. Following severe measles pneumonia, the final
common pathway to a fatal outcome is often the development of bronchiolitis obliterans.
Croup, tracheitis, and bronchiolitis are common complications in
infants and toddlers with measles. The clinical severity of these complications frequently requires intubation and ventilatory support until
the infection resolves.
Acute otitis media is the most common complication of measles and
was of particularly high incidence during the epidemic of the late 1980s
and early 1990s because of the relatively young age of affected children.
Sinusitis and mastoiditis also occur as complications. Viral and/or bacterial tracheitis is seen and can be life-­threatening. Retropharyngeal
abscess has also been reported.
Measles infection is known to suppress skin test responsiveness to
purified tuberculin antigen. There may be a higher rate of activation
of pulmonary tuberculosis in populations of individuals infected with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis who are then exposed to measles.
Diarrhea and vomiting are common symptoms associated with acute
measles, and diffuse giant cell formation is found in the epithelium
in the gastrointestinal tract. Dehydration is a common consequence,
especially in young infants and children. Appendicitis or abdominal
pain may occur from obstruction of the appendiceal lumen by lymphoid hyperplasia.
Febrile seizures occur in <3% of children with measles. Encephalitis following measles is a long-­associated complication, often with

an unfavorable outcome. Rates of 1-­3 in 1,000 cases of measles
have been reported, with greater numbers occurring in adolescents
and adults than in preschool-­or school-­age children. Encephalitis
is a postinfectious, immunologically mediated process and is not
the result of a direct effect by the virus. Clinical onset begins during the exanthem and manifests as seizures (56%), lethargy (46%),
coma (28%), and irritability (26%). Findings in cerebrospinal fluid
include lymphocytic pleocytosis in 85% of cases and elevated protein concentrations. Approximately 15% of patients with measles
encephalitis die. Another 20–40% of patients suffer long-­
term
sequelae, including cognitive impairment, motor disabilities, and
deafness.
Measles encephalitis in immunocompromised patients results from
direct damage to the brain by the virus. Subacute measles encephalitis
manifests 1-­10 months after measles in immunocompromised patients,
particularly those with AIDS, lymphoreticular malignancies, and
immunosuppressive therapy. Signs and symptoms include seizures,
myoclonus, stupor, and coma. In addition to intracellular inclusions,
abundant viral nucleocapsids and viral antigen are seen in brain tissue. Progressive disease and death almost always occur. A severe form
of encephalitis called measles inclusion-­body encephalitis (MIBE) is
being increasingly recognized in immunocompromised hosts, typically occurring within a year of infection or vaccination and almost
universally resulting in death. Although the pathophysiology is incompletely understood, the measles viruses implicated in MIBE are usually
replication-­defective, with their genomes possessing numerous mutations. Diagnosis is confirmed by detection of virus via immunohistochemistry of brain tissue.
A severe form of measles rarely seen nowadays is hemorrhagic measles or black measles. It manifested as a hemorrhagic skin eruption
and was often fatal. Keratitis, appearing as multiple punctate epithelial
foci, resolved with recovery from the infection.
Myocarditis is a rare complication of measles. Miscellaneous bacterial infections have been reported, including bacteremia, cellulitis, and
toxic shock syndrome. Measles during pregnancy is associated with
high rates of maternal morbidity, fetal wastage, and stillbirths, with
congenital malformations in 3% of liveborn infants.

Subacute Sclerosing Panencephalitis

Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a chronic complication of measles with a delayed onset and an outcome that is nearly
always fatal. It appears to result from a persistent infection with an
altered measles virus that is harbored intracellularly in the central
nervous system for several years. After 7-­10 years the virus apparently regains virulence and attacks the cells in the central nervous
system that offered the virus protection. This “slow virus infection”
results in inflammation and cell death, leading to an inexorable neurodegenerative process.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1962 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
SSPE is a rare disease and generally follows the prevalence of measles
in a population. The incidence in the United States in 1960 was 0.61
cases per million persons younger than age 20 years. By 1980 the rate
had fallen to 0.06 cases per million. Between 1956 and 1982 a total of
634 cases of SSPE had been reported to the national SSPE registry. After
1982 ∼5 cases/year were reported annually in the United States, and
only 2-­3 cases/year were reported in the early 1990s. However, between
1995 and 2000, reported cases in the United States increased and 13
cases were reported in 2000. Of the 13 cases, 9 occurred in foreign-­
born individuals. This “resurgence” may be the result of an increased
incidence of measles between 1989 and 1991. Although the age of onset
ranges from <1 year to <30 years, the illness is primarily one of children and adolescents. Measles at an early age favors the development
of SSPE: 50% of patients with SSPE have had primary measles before
2 years of age, and 75% have had measles before 4 years of age. Males
are affected twice as often as females, and there appear to be more cases
reported from rural than urban populations. Recent observations from
the registry indicate a higher prevalence among children of Hispanic
origin.
The pathogenesis of SSPE remains enigmatic. Factors that seem to be
involved include defective measles virus and interaction with a defective or immature immune system. The virus isolated from brain tissue
of patients with SSPE is missing one of the six structural proteins, the
matrix or M protein. This protein is responsible for assembly, orientation, and alignment of the virus in preparation for budding during
viral replication. Immature virus may be able to reside, and possibly
propagate, within neuronal cells for long periods. The fact that most
patients with SSPE were exposed at a young age suggests that immune
immaturity is involved in pathogenesis.
Clinical manifestations of SSPE begin insidiously 7-­13 years after
primary measles infection. Subtle changes in behavior or school
performance appear, including irritability, reduced attention span,
and temper outbursts. This initial phase (stage I) may at times be
missed because of brevity or mildness of the symptoms. Fever, headache, and other signs of encephalitis are absent. The hallmark of the
second stage is massive myoclonus, which coincides with extension
of the inflammatory process site to deeper structures in the brain,
including the basal ganglia. Involuntary movements and repetitive
myoclonic jerks begin in single muscle groups but give way to massive spasms and jerks involving both axial and appendicular muscles. Consciousness is maintained. In the third stage, involuntary
movements disappear and are replaced by choreoathetosis, immobility, dystonia, and lead pipe rigidity that result from destruction
of deeper centers in the basal ganglia. The sensorium deteriorates
into dementia, stupor, and then coma. The fourth stage is characterized by loss of critical centers that support breathing, heart rate,
and blood pressure. Death soon ensues. Progression through the
clinical stages may follow courses characterized as acute, subacute,
or chronic progressive.
The diagnosis of SSPE can be established through documentation of a compatible clinical course and at least one of the following
supporting findings: (1) measles antibody detected in cerebrospinal fluid, (2) characteristic electroencephalographic findings,
and (3) typical histologic findings in and/or isolation of virus or
viral antigen from brain tissue obtained by biopsy or postmortem
examination.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis reveals normal cells but elevated IgG and
IgM antibody titers in dilutions >1:8. Electroencephalographic patterns
are normal in stage I, but in the myoclonic phase, suppression-­burst
episodes are seen that are characteristic of, but not pathognomonic for,
SSPE. Brain biopsy is no longer routinely indicated for diagnosis of SSPE.
Management of SSPE is primarily supportive and similar to care
provided to patients with other neurodegenerative diseases. Clinical
trials using isoprinosine with or without interferon suggest significant
benefit (30–34% remission rate) compared with patients without treatment (5–10% with spontaneous remissions).
It is recognized that carbamazepine is of significant benefit in the
control of myoclonic jerks in the early stages of the illness.

Virtually all patients eventually succumb to SSPE. Most die within
1-­3 years of onset from infection or loss of autonomic control mechanisms. Prevention of SSPE depends on prevention of primary measles
infection through vaccination. SSPE has been described in patients
who have no history of measles infection and exposure only to the vaccine virus. However, wild-­type virus, not vaccine virus, has been found
in brain tissue of at least some of these patients, suggesting that they
had subclinical measles previously.

TREATMENT

Management of measles is supportive because there is no specific
antiviral therapy approved for treatment of measles. Maintenance of
hydration, oxygenation, and comfort are goals of therapy. Antipyretics for comfort and fever control are useful. For patients with respiratory tract involvement, airway humidification and supplemental
oxygen may be of benefit. Respiratory failure from croup or pneumonia may require ventilatory support. Oral rehydration is effective in
most cases, but severe dehydration may require intravenous therapy.
Prophylactic antimicrobial therapy to prevent bacterial infection is
not indicated.
Measles infection in immunocompromised patients is highly lethal.
Ribavirin is active in vitro against measles virus. Anecdotal reports of
ribavirin therapy with or without intravenous gamma globulin suggest some benefit in individual patients. Although no controlled trials
have been performed, many experts favor use of ribavirin for treatment of measles pneumonia in patients <12 months, patients ≥12
months with pneumonia requiring ventilatory support, and patients
with severe immunosuppression. Ribavirin dosing is 15-­20 mg/kg/
day orally in two divided doses. The optimal duration of therapy is
not known; a duration of 5-­7 days may be reasonable, guided by the
patient’s clinical status (respiratory symptoms and chest radiograph
findings). Several investigational treatments have been used in individuals with SSPE with the goal of stabilization and delay of progression, including Isoprinosine (inosine pranobex) and interferon-­α and
interferon-­β.

Vitamin A

Vitamin A deficiency in children in resource poor countries has long
been known to be associated with increased mortality from a variety
of infectious diseases, including measles. In the United States, studies
in the early 1990s documented that 22–72% of children with measles
had low retinol levels. In addition, one study demonstrated an inverse
correlation between the level of retinol and severity of illness. Several
randomized controlled trials of vitamin A therapy in the developing world have demonstrated reduced morbidity and mortality from
measles. Use of vitamin A for treatment of measles in developed countries has not been evaluated in a large clinical trial, but a small study
showed no effect on morbidity. Given the potential for benefit, the
WHO and the CDC recommend that vitamin A be administered to
all children with acute measles, even in countries where measles is not
usually severe. Vitamin A should be administered once daily for 2 days
at doses of 200,000 IU for children 12 months of age or older; 100,000
IU for infants 6-­11 months of age; and 50,000 IU for infants younger
than 6 months of age. In children with signs and symptoms of vitamin
A deficiency, a third age-­appropriate dose is recommended 2-­4 weeks
after the second dose.

PROGNOSIS

In the early 20th century, deaths from measles in the United States varied between 2,000 and 10,000 per year, or about 10 deaths per 1,000
cases of measles. With improvements in healthcare and antimicrobial therapy, better nutrition, and decreased crowding, the death-­to-­
case ratio fell to 1 per 1,000 cases. Between 1982 and 2002, the CDC
estimated that there were 259 deaths caused by measles in the United
States, with a death-­to-­case ratio of 2.5-­2.8 per 1,000 cases of measles.
Pneumonia and encephalitis were complications in most of the fatal
cases, and immunodeficiency conditions were identified in 14–16%
of deaths. In 2011, of the 222 cases reported in the United States, 70

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 293 u Measles
(32%) were hospitalized, including 17 (24%) with diarrhea, 15 (21%)
with dehydration, and 12 (17%) with pneumonia. No cases of encephalitis or deaths were reported. In 2019, 10% of cases were hospitalized,
5% had pneumonia, and one (0.1%) had encephalitis, but no deaths
were reported.

PREVENTION

Patients shed measles virus from 7 days after exposure to 4-­6 days
after the onset of rash. Exposure of susceptible individuals to those
with measles should be avoided during this period. In hospitals, standard and airborne precautions should be observed for this period.
Immunocompromised individuals with measles will shed virus
for the duration of the illness, so isolation should be maintained
throughout the disease.

Vaccine

Vaccination against measles is the most effective and safe prevention
strategy. Measles vaccine in the United States is available as a combined vaccine with measles-­mumps-­rubella vaccine (Table 293.2).
After the measles resurgence of 1989–1991, a second dose of measles
vaccine was added to the schedule. The current recommendations
include a first dose at 12-­15 months of age and a second dose at 4-­6
years of age. However, the second dose can be given any time after

1963

30 days following the first dose, and the current schedule is a convenience schedule. Seroconversion is slightly lower in children who
receive the first dose before or at 12 months of age (87% at 9 months,
95% at 12 months, and 98% at 15 months) because of persisting
maternal antibody; however, this is an evolving situation, with children currently as young as 6 months unprotected from maternal antibodies and susceptible to measles infection. For children who have
not received two doses by 11-­12 years of age, a second dose should be
provided. Infants who receive a dose before 12 months of age should
be given two additional doses, one at 12-­15 months and another at
4-­6 years of age. Children who are traveling should be offered either
primary measles immunization even as young as 6 months or a second dose even if <4 years.
Adverse events from the measles-­mumps-­rubella vaccine include
fever (usually 6-­12 days after vaccination), rash in approximately 5%
of vaccinated persons, and, rarely, transient thrombocytopenia. Children prone to febrile seizures may experience an event following vaccination, so the risks and benefits of vaccination should be discussed
with parents. Encephalopathy and autism have not been shown to be
causally associated with the measles-­mumps-­rubella vaccine or vaccine constituents.
A review of the effect of measles vaccination on the epidemiology of
SSPE has demonstrated that measles vaccination protects against SSPE

TABLE 293.2  Recommendations for Measles Immunization
CATEGORY

RECOMMENDATIONS

CATEGORY

RECOMMENDATIONS

Unimmunized, no history of
measles (12-­15 mo of age)

MMR or MMRV vaccine is
recommended at 12-­15 mo
of age; a second dose is
recommended at least 28
days after the first dose (or 90
days for MMRV) and usually is
administered at 4 through 6 yr
of age

History of receipt of inactivated
measles vaccine or unknown
type of vaccine, 1963–1967

Dose not considered valid;
immunize (2 doses)

Further attenuated or unknown
vaccine administered with
immunoglobulin

Dose not considered valid;
immunize (2 doses)

Allergy to eggs

Immunize; no reactions likely

Immunize with MMR vaccine,
but this dose is not considered
valid, and 2 valid doses
administered on or after the
first birthday are required.
The first valid dose should be
administered at 12-­15 mo of
age; the second valid dose
is recommended at least
28 days later and usually is
administered at 4 through
6 yr of age. MMRV should not
be administered to children
<12 mo of age.

Neomycin allergy,
nonanaphylactic

Immunize; no reactions likely

Severe hypersensitivity
(anaphylaxis) to neomycin or
gelatin

Avoid immunization

Tuberculosis

Immunize; if patient has
untreated tuberculosis disease,
start antituberculosis therapy
before immunizing

Measles exposure

Immunize or give
immunoglobulin, depending
on circumstances

Students in kindergarten,
elementary, middle, and high
school who have received 1
dose of measles vaccine at
12 mo of age or older

Administer the second dose

HIV infected

Students in college and other
postsecondary institutions
who have received 1 dose of
measles vaccine at 12 mo of
age or older

Administer the second dose

Immunize (2 doses) unless
severely immunocompromised;
administration of
immunoglobulin if exposed to
measles is based on degree
of immunosuppression and
measles vaccine history

Personal or family history of
seizures

Immunize; advise parents of
slightly increased risk of
seizures

History of immunization before
the first birthday

Dose not considered valid;
immunize (2 doses)

Immunoglobulin or blood
recipient

Immunize at the appropriate
interval

Children 6-­11 mo of age in
epidemic situations or before
international travel

MMR, Measles-­mumps-­rubella vaccine; MMRV, measles-­mumps-­rubella-­varicella vaccine.
From American Academy of Pediatrics. Measles. In Kimberlin DW, Brady MT, Jackson MA, Long SS, eds. Red Book 2018 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 31st ed.
Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2018: Table 3.39, p. 543.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1964 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
TABLE 293.3  Suggested Intervals Between Immunoglobulin Administration and Measles Immunization*
DOSE
ROUTE

UNITS (U) OR
MILLILITERS (ML)

MG IgG/KG

INTERVAL
(MO)†

IM

250 U

10

3

Contact prophylaxis

IM

0.02 mL/kg

3.3

3

International travel

IM

0.06 mL/kg

10

3

Hepatitis B prophylaxis (as hepatitis B Ig)

IM

0.06 mL/kg

10

3

Rabies prophylaxis (as rabies Ig)

IM

20 IU/kg

22

4

Varicella prophylaxis (as VariZIG)

IM

125 U/10 kg
(maximum 625 U)

20-­40

5

Standard

IM

0.50 mL/kg

80

6

Immunocompromised host

IV

INDICATION FOR IMMUNOGLOBULIN
Tetanus (as tetanus Ig)
Hepatitis A prophylaxis (as Ig):

Measles prophylaxis (as Ig):

400 mg/kg

8

Respiratory syncytial virus prophylaxis (palivizumab
monoclonal antibody)‡

IM

—

15 mg/kg
(monoclonal)

None

Cytomegalovirus immune globulin

IV

3 mL/kg

150

6

Washed RBCs

IV

10 mL/kg

Negligible

0

RBCs, adenine-­saline added

IV

10 mL/kg

10

3

Packed RBCs

IV

10 mL/kg

20-­60

6

Whole blood

IV

10 mL/kg

80-­100

6

Plasma or platelet products

IV

10 mL/kg

160

7

Replacement (or therapy) of immune deficiencies (as IVIG)

IV

—

300-­400

8

ITP (as IVIG)

IV

—

400

8

ITP

IV

—

1,000

10

ITP or Kawasaki disease

IV

—

1,600-­2,000

11

Blood transfusion:

*Immunization in the form of measles-­mumps-­rubella (MMR), measles-­mumps-­rubella-­varicella (MMRV), or monovalent measles vaccine.
†These intervals should provide sufficient time for decreases in passive antibodies in all children to allow for an adequate response to measles vaccine. Physicians should not assume
that children are fully protected against measles during these intervals. Additional doses of Ig or measles vaccine may be indicated after exposure to measles.
‡Monoclonal antibodies, such as palivizumab, do not interfere with the immune response to vaccines.
Ig, Immunoglobulin; IgG, immunoglobulin G; ITP, immune (formerly termed “idiopathic”) thrombocytopenic purpura; IVIG, intravenous Ig; RBCs, red blood cells.
From American Academy of Pediatrics. Red Book: 2015 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2015: Table
1.10, p. 39.

and does not accelerate the course of SSPE or trigger the disease in
those already infected with wild measles virus.
Passively administered immune globulin may inhibit the immune
response to live measles vaccine, and administration should be
delayed for variable amounts of time based on the dose of Ig (Table
293.3).
Live vaccines should not be administered to pregnant women or to
immunodeficient or immunosuppressed patients. However, patients
with HIV who are not severely immunocompromised should be immunized. Because measles virus may suppress the cutaneous response to
tuberculosis antigen, skin testing for tuberculosis should be performed
before or at the same time as administration of the vaccine. Individuals
infected with M. tuberculosis should be receiving appropriate treatment
at the time of administration of measles vaccine.

Postexposure Prophylaxis

Susceptible individuals exposed to measles may be protected from
infection either by vaccine administration or with Ig. The vaccine is
effective in prevention or modification of measles if given within 72
hours of exposure. Ig may be given up to 6 days after exposure to prevent or modify infection. Immunocompetent children should receive
0.5 mL/kg (maximum dose in both cases is 15 mL/kg) intramuscularly.
For severely immunocompromised children and pregnant woman
without evidence of measles immunity, immunoglobulin intravenously
(IGIV) is the recommended Ig at 400 mg/kg. Ig is indicated for susceptible household contacts of patients with measles, especially infants <6
months of age, pregnant women, and immunocompromised persons.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 294 u Rubella

Chapter 294

Rubella
Hayley A. Gans
Rubella (German measles or 3-­day measles) is a mild, often exanthematous disease of childhood that is typically more severe and associated with more complications in adults. Its major clinical significance
is transplacental infection and fetal damage as part of the congenital
rubella syndrome (CRS).

ETIOLOGY

Rubella virus is a member of the family Togaviridae and is the only species of the genus Rubivirus. It is a positive-­sense single-­stranded RNA
virus with a lipid envelope and three structural proteins, including a
nucleocapsid protein (C) that is associated with the nucleus and two
glycoproteins, E1 and E2, that are associated with the envelope, carry
the main epitopes, and therefore are the major antigenic sites of the
virus. The virus is sensitive to heat, ultraviolet light, and extremes of
pH but is relatively stable at cold temperatures. Humans are the only
known reservoir.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Rubella is found worldwide and circulates predominantly in late
winter and early spring. In the United States, in the prevaccine era,
rubella appeared to occur in major epidemics every 6-­9 years, with
smaller peaks interspersed every 3-­4 years, and was most common in preschool-­age and school-­age children. During the rubella
epidemic of 1964–1965 there were an estimated 12.5 million cases
of rubella associated with 2,000 cases of encephalitis, more than
13,000 abortions or perinatal deaths, and 20,000 cases of CRS. After
introduction of the rubella vaccine in 1969 in the United States,
the incidence of rubella fell 78% and CRS cases fell 69% by 1976
(Fig. 294.1). Further decline in rubella and CRS cases occurred
when certain at-­risk populations were added to those for whom
rubella immunization is indicated, including adolescents and college students. After years of decline, a resurgence of rubella and
CRS cases occurred during 1989–1991 in association with the epidemic of measles during that period (see Fig. 294.1). Subsequently,
a two-­dose recommendation for rubella vaccine was implemented
and resulted in a decrease in incidence of rubella from 0.45 per

Number of rubella and congenital rubella
syndrome (CRS) cases—United States,1966–2011
70,000
No. rubella cases

Rubella
CRS

No. CRS cases*

100
90
80
50,000
70
60
40,000
50
30,000
40
30
20,000
20
10,000
10
0
0
1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001 2006 2011
Year
60,000

*By year of birth.

Fig. 294.1 Number of rubella and congenital rubella syndrome cas-

es—United States, 1966–2011. Rubella and CRS data provided were
reported voluntarily to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention from
state health departments. (From McLean HQ, Fiebelkorn AP, Temte JL,
et al. Prevention of measles, rubella, congenital rubella syndrome, and
mumps, 2013. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2013;62[RR-­04]:1–34.)

1965

100,000 population in 1990 to 0.1 per 100,000 population in 1999
and a corresponding decrease of CRS, with an average of six infants
with CRS reported annually from 1992 to 2004. Mothers of these
infants tended to be young, Hispanic, or foreign born. The number
of reported cases of rubella continued to decline through the 1990s
and the first decade of this century.
The endemic spread of rubella was declared eliminated in the United
States in 2004 and eliminated in the Americas in 2015. However, cases
of rubella continue to be imported into the United States from countries where it remains endemic. Accelerated global vaccine efforts have
resulted in declines of rubella cases worldwide from 94,277 in 2012 to
10,194 in 2020. Rubella elimination has been verified in 93 (48%) of
194 countries, with 70% of infants globally receiving a rubella vaccine
in 2020. From 2004 to 2016 there were 101 cases of rubella and 11 cases
of CRS reported in the United States, all of which were imported cases
of unknown source. Three of the CRS cases were acquired in Africa.
This information highlights the need for continued maintenance of
high levels of immunity in the United States.

PATHOLOGY

Little information is available on the pathologic findings in rubella
occurring postnatally. The few reported studies of biopsy or autopsy
material from cases of rubella revealed only nonspecific findings of
lymphoreticular inflammation and mononuclear perivascular and
meningeal infiltration. The pathologic findings for CRS are often severe
and may involve nearly every organ system (Table 294.1).

PATHOGENESIS

The viral mechanisms for cell injury and death in postnatal or congenital rubella are not well delineated. The main mechanisms of transmission is respiratory for postnatal infection and transplacental in CRS.
The incubation period following respiratory exposure averages 14 days,
with a range from 12 to 23 days. After infection, the virus replicates in
the respiratory epithelium and then spreads to regional lymph nodes
(Fig. 294.2). Viremia ensues and is most intense from 10 to 17 days
after infection. Viral shedding from the nasopharynx begins approximately 10 days after infection and may be detected up to 2 weeks after
onset of the rash. The period of highest communicability is from 5 days
before to 6 days after the appearance of the rash.
Congenital infection occurs during maternal viremia. After infecting the placenta, the virus spreads through the vascular system of the
developing fetus and may infect any fetal organ. The most important
risk factor for severe congenital defects is the stage of gestation at the
time of infection. Maternal infection during the first 8 weeks of gestation results in the most severe and widespread defects. The risk for
congenital defects has been estimated at 90% for maternal infection
before 11 weeks of gestation, 33% at 11-­12 weeks, 11% at 13-­14 weeks,
and 24% at 15-­16 weeks. Defects occurring after 16 weeks of gestation
are uncommon, even if fetal infection occurs.
Causes of cellular and tissue damage in the infected fetus may
include tissue necrosis due to vascular insufficiency, reduced cellular
multiplication time, chromosomal breaks, and production of a protein
inhibitor causing mitotic arrests in certain cell types. The most distinctive feature of congenital rubella is chronicity. Once the fetus is infected
early in gestation, the virus persists in fetal tissue until well beyond
delivery. Persistence suggests the possibility of ongoing tissue damage
and reactivation, most notably in the brain.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Postnatal infection with rubella is typically a mild disease not easily
discernible from other viral infections, especially in children. After an
incubation period of 12-­23 days, a prodrome consisting of low-­grade
fever, sore throat, red eyes with or without eye pain, headache, malaise,
anorexia, and lymphadenopathy begins. Suboccipital, postauricular,
and anterior cervical lymph nodes are most prominent. In children,
the first manifestation of rubella is usually the rash, which is variable and not distinctive, often more prominent with heat. It begins
on the face and neck as small, irregular pink macules that coalesce,
and it spreads centrifugally to involve the torso and extremities, where

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1966 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
it tends to occur as discrete macules (Fig. 294.3). About the time of
onset of the rash, examination of the oropharynx may reveal tiny, rose-­
colored lesions (Forchheimer spots) or petechial hemorrhages on the
soft palate. The rash fades from the face as it extends to the rest of the
body so that the whole body may not be involved at any one time. The
duration of the rash is generally 3 days, and it usually resolves without desquamation. Subclinical infections are common, and 25–40% of
children may not have a rash. Teenagers and adults tend to be more

symptomatic and have systemic manifestations, with up to 70% of
females demonstrating arthralgias and arthritis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Leukopenia, neutropenia, and mild thrombocytopenia have been
described during postnatal rubella.

DIAGNOSES

A specific diagnosis of rubella is important for epidemiologic reasons,
for diagnosis of infection in pregnant women, and for confirmation
of the diagnosis of congenital rubella. The most common diagnostic
test is rubella immunoglobulin (Ig) M enzyme immunosorbent assay,
which is typically present ∼4 days after the appearance of the rash. As
with any serologic test, the positive predictive value of testing decreases
in populations with low prevalence of disease and in immunized individuals. Tests should be performed in the context of a supportive history of exposure or consistent clinical findings. The relative sensitivity
and specificity of commercial kits used in most laboratories range from
96–99% and 86–97%, respectively. A caveat for testing of congenitally
infected infants early in infancy is that false-­negative results may occur
owing to competing IgG antibodies circulating in these patients. In

TABLE 294.1  Pathologic Findings in Congenital Rubella
Syndrome
SYSTEM

PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS

Cardiovascular

Patent ductus arteriosus
Pulmonary artery stenosis
Ventriculoseptal defect
Myocarditis

Central nervous system

Chronic meningitis
Parenchymal necrosis
Vasculitis with calcification

Eye

Microphthalmia
Cataract
Iridocyclitis
Ciliary body necrosis
Glaucoma
Retinopathy

Ear

Cochlear hemorrhage
Endothelial necrosis

Lung

Chronic mononuclear interstitial
pneumonitis

Liver

Hepatic giant cell transformation
Fibrosis
Lobular disarray
Bile stasis

Kidney

Interstitial nephritis

Adrenal gland

Cortical cytomegaly

Bone

Malformed osteoid
Poor mineralization of osteoid
Thinning cartilage

Spleen, lymph node

Extramedullary hematopoiesis

Thymus

Histiocytic reaction
Absence of germinal centers

Skin

Erythropoiesis in dermis

Incubation
16-18 days

Illness
1-4 days

Fig. 294.3 Rash of rubella.

Convalescence

Exposure to
rubella
Viral excretion from pharynx
Viremia
Antibody levels

Lymph node enlargement
HI
RASH
Neutralizing

Fever
Malaise,
sore throat

CF
(Complications)*

16 14 12 10

8

6 4
Days

2

0

2

4

6

1

2

3 4
Mo

5

6

1

2

3
Yr

4

Fig. 294.2 Pathophysiologic events
in postnatally acquired rubella virus
infection. *Possible complications include arthralgia and/or arthritis, thrombocytopenic purpura, and encephalitis. CF, Complement fixation titer;
HI, hemagglutination-­
inhibition titer.
(From Lamprecht CL. Rubella virus.
In: Beshe RB, ed. Textbook of Human
Virology, 2nd ed. Littleton, MA: PSG
Publishing; 1990:685.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 294 u Rubella
such patients, an IgM capture assay, reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) test, or viral culture should be performed for confirmation. Virus can be detected by PCR in nasal, throat, urine, blood,
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) specimens up to 10 days after rash onset
(with highest yield within 3 days). Viral isolation by culture or PCR of
nasopharyngeal secretions, urine in the newborn (as close to birth as
possible), or cord blood or placenta can be used to diagnose congenital
infection. PCR testing of amniotic fluid during pregnancy is also an
appropriate approach to diagnose congenital infection. If CRS is confirmed, infants should be screened for viral shedding monthly after the
age of 3 months until two consecutive negative tests are obtained. Viral
shedding may be detected for up to 1 year.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES

Rubella may manifest as distinctive features suggesting the diagnosis.
It is frequently confused with other infections because it is uncommon,
is similar to other viral exanthematous diseases, and demonstrates
variability in the presence of typical findings. In severe cases, it may
resemble measles. The absence of Koplik spots, a severe prodrome, and
a shorter course, allow for differentiation from measles. Other diseases
frequently confused with rubella include infections caused by adenoviruses, parvovirus B19 (erythema infectiosum), Epstein-­Barr virus,
enteroviruses, roseola, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae.

COMPLICATIONS

1967

TABLE 294.2  Clinical Manifestations of Congenital
Rubella Syndrome in 376 Children After
Maternal Rubella*
MANIFESTATION

RATE (%)

Deafness

67

Ocular

71

Cataracts

29

Retinopathy

39

Heart disease†

48

Patent ductus arteriosus

78

Right pulmonary artery stenosis

70

Left pulmonary artery stenosis

56

Valvular pulmonic stenosis

40

Low birthweight

60

Psychomotor delay

45

Neonatal purpura

23

Death

35

Complications following postnatal infection with rubella are infrequent and generally not life threatening.
Postinfectious thrombocytopenia occurs in approximately 1 in
3,000 cases of rubella and occurs more frequently among children and
in girls. It manifests about 2 weeks after the onset of the rash as petechiae, epistaxis, gastrointestinal bleeding, and hematuria and is usually
self-­limited.
Arthritis following rubella occurs more commonly among adults,
especially women. It begins within 1 week of onset of the exanthem and
classically involves the small joints of the hands. It is self-­limited and
resolves within weeks without sequelae. There are anecdotal reports
and some serologic evidence linking rubella with rheumatoid arthritis,
but a true causal association remains speculative.
Encephalitis is the most serious complication of postnatal rubella. It
occurs in two forms: a postinfectious syndrome following acute rubella
and a rare progressive panencephalitis manifesting as a neurodegenerative disorder years after rubella.
Postinfectious encephalitis is uncommon, occurring in 1 in 5,000
cases of rubella. It appears within 7 days after onset of the rash, consisting of headache, seizures, confusion, coma, focal neurologic signs, and
ataxia. Fever may recrudesce with the onset of neurologic symptoms.
CSF may be normal or have a mild mononuclear pleocytosis and/or
elevated protein concentration. Virus is rarely, if ever, isolated from
CSF or brain, suggesting a noninfectious pathogenesis. Most patients
recover completely, but mortality rates of 20% and long-­term neurologic sequelae have been reported.
Progressive rubella panencephalitis (PRP) is an extremely rare
complication of either acquired rubella or CRS. It has an onset and
course similar to those of the subacute sclerosing panencephalitis associated with measles (see Chapter 293). However, unlike in the postinfectious form of rubella encephalitis, rubella virus may be isolated from
brain tissue of the patient with PRP, suggesting an infectious pathogenesis, albeit a slow one. The clinical findings and course are indistinguishable from those of subacute sclerosing panencephalitis and
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (see Chapter 324). Death
occurs 2-­5 years after onset.
Other neurologic syndromes rarely reported with rubella include
Guillain-­Barré syndrome and peripheral neuritis. Myocarditis is a rare
complication.

*Other findings: hepatitis, linear streaking of bone, hazy cornea, congenital glaucoma,
delayed growth.
†Findings in 87 patients with congenital rubella syndrome and heart disease who
underwent cardiac angiography.
From Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, et al. Rubella: clinical manifestations and
management. Am J Dis Child. 1969;118:18–29.

Congenital Rubella Syndrome

TREATMENT

In 1941 an ophthalmologist first described a syndrome of cataracts
and congenital heart disease that he correctly associated with rubella

infections in the mothers during early pregnancy (Table 294.2). Shortly
after the first description, hearing loss was recognized as a common
finding often associated with microcephaly. In 1964 to 1965 a pandemic of rubella occurred, with 20,000 cases reported in the United
States, leading to more than 11,000 spontaneous or therapeutic abortions and 2,100 neonatal deaths. From this experience emerged the
expanded definition of CRS that includes numerous other transient or
permanent abnormalities.
Nerve deafness is the single most common finding among infants
with CRS. Most infants have some degree of intrauterine growth
restriction. Retinal findings described as salt-­and-­pepper retinopathy
are the most common ocular abnormality but have little early effect on
vision. Unilateral or bilateral cataracts are the most serious eye finding,
occurring in about a third of infants (Fig. 294.4). Cardiac abnormalities
occur in half of the children infected during the first 8 weeks of gestation. Patent ductus arteriosus is the most frequently reported cardiac
defect, followed by lesions of the pulmonary arteries and valvular disease. Interstitial pneumonitis leading to death in some cases has been
reported. Neurologic abnormalities are common and may progress
following birth. Meningoencephalitis is present in 10–20% of infants
with CRS and may persist for up to 12 months. Longitudinal follow­up through 9-­12 years of infants without initial retardation revealed
progressive development of additional sensory, motor, and behavioral
abnormalities, including hearing loss and autism. PRP has also been
recognized rarely after CRS. Subsequent postnatal growth retardation
and ultimate short stature have been reported in a minority of cases.
Rare reports of immunologic deficiency syndromes have also been
described.
A variety of late-­onset manifestations of CRS have been recognized.
In addition to PRP, they include diabetes mellitus (20%), thyroid dysfunction (5%), and glaucoma and visual abnormalities associated with
the retinopathy, which had previously been considered benign.
There is no specific treatment available for either acquired rubella or
CRS.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1968 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Fig. 294.4 Bilateral cataracts in infant with congenital rubella
syndrome.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Postnatal rubella is generally a mild illness that requires no care
beyond antipyretics and analgesics. Intravenous immunoglobulin or corticosteroids can be considered for severe, nonremitting
thrombocytopenia.
Management of children with CRS is more complex and requires
pediatric, cardiac, audiologic, ophthalmologic, and neurologic evaluation and follow-­up because many manifestations may not be readily
apparent initially or may worsen with time. Hearing screening is of
special importance because early intervention may improve outcomes
in children with hearing problems caused by CRS.

PROGNOSIS

Postnatal infection with rubella has an excellent prognosis. Long-­term
outcomes of CRS are less favorable and somewhat variable. In an Australian cohort evaluated 50 years after infection, many had chronic
conditions but most were married and had made good social adjustments. A cohort from New York from the mid-­1960s epidemic had
less-­favorable outcomes, with 30% leading normal lives, 30% in dependent situations but functional, and 30% requiring institutionalization
and continuous care.
Reinfection with wild virus occurs postnatally in both individuals who were previously infected with wild-­virus rubella and vaccinated individuals. Reinfection is defined serologically as a significant
increase in IgG antibody level and/or an IgM response in an individual who has a documented preexisting rubella-­specific IgG above an
accepted cutoff. Reinfection may result in an anamnestic IgG response,
an IgM and IgG response, or clinical rubella. There are 29 reports in
the literature of CRS following maternal reinfection. Reinfection with
serious adverse outcomes to adults or children is rare and of unknown
significance.

PREVENTION

Patients with postnatal infection should be isolated from susceptible
individuals for 7 days after onset of the rash. Standard plus droplet
precautions are recommended for hospitalized patients. Children with
CRS may excrete the virus in respiratory secretions up to 1 year of age,
so contact precautions should be maintained for them until 1 year of
age, unless repeated cultures of urine and pharyngeal secretions are
negative. Similar precautions apply to patients with CRS with regard to
attendance in school and out-­of-­home childcare.
Exposure of susceptible pregnant women poses a potential risk
to the fetus. For pregnant women exposed to rubella, a blood specimen should be obtained as soon as possible for rubella IgG-­specific

antibody testing; a frozen aliquot also should be saved for later testing. If the rubella antibody test result is positive, the mother is likely
immune. If the rubella antibody test is negative, a second specimen
should be obtained 2-­3 weeks later and tested concurrently with
the saved specimen. If both of these samples test negative, a third
specimen should be obtained 6 weeks after exposure and tested
concurrently with the saved specimen. If both the second and third
specimens test negative, infection has not occurred. A negative first
specimen and a positive test result in either the second or third specimen indicate that seroconversion has occurred in the mother, suggesting recent infection. Counseling should be provided about the
risks and benefits of termination of pregnancy. The routine use of
immunoglobulin for susceptible pregnant women exposed to rubella
is not recommended and is considered only if termination of pregnancy is not an option because of maternal preferences. In such circumstances, immunoglobulin 0.55 mL/kg intramuscularly may be
given with the understanding that prophylaxis may reduce the risk
for clinically apparent infection but does not guarantee prevention
of fetal infection.

VACCINATION

Rubella vaccine in the United States consists of the attenuated Wistar RA 27/3 strain that is usually administered in combination with
measles and mumps (MMR) or also with varicella (MMRV) in a
two-­dose regimen at 12-­15 months and 4-­6 years of age. It theoretically may be effective as postexposure prophylaxis if administered
within 3 days of exposure. Vaccine should not be administered to
severely immunocompromised patients. Patients with HIV infection who are not severely immunocompromised may benefit from
vaccination. Fever is not a contraindication, but if a more serious
illness is suspected, immunization should be delayed. Immunoglobulin preparations may inhibit the serologic response to the
vaccine (see Chapter 215). Vaccine should not be administered during pregnancy. If pregnancy occurs within 28 days of immunization, the patient should be counseled on the theoretical risks to the
fetus. Studies of more than 200 women who had been inadvertently
immunized with rubella vaccine during pregnancy showed that
none of their offspring developed CRS. Therefore interruption of
pregnancy is probably not warranted.
Following a single dose of rubella RA 27/3 vaccine, 95% of persons
12 months of age and older develop serologic immunity, and after two
doses 99% have detectable antibody. Rubella RA 27/3 vaccine is highly
protective, because 97% of those vaccinated are protected from clinical disease after one dose. Detectable antibodies remain for 15 years
in most individuals vaccinated after one dose, and 91–100% had antibodies after 12-­15 years after two doses. Although antibody levels may
wane, especially after one dose of vaccine, increased susceptibility to
rubella disease does not occur.
Adverse reactions to rubella vaccination are uncommon in
children. MMR administration is associated with fever in 5–15%
of vaccinees and with rash in approximately 5% of vaccinees.
Arthralgia and arthritis are more common after rubella vaccination in adults. Approximately 25% of postpubertal women experience arthralgia, and 10% of postpubertal women experience
arthritis. Peripheral neuropathies and transient thrombocytopenia may also occur.
As part of the worldwide effort to eliminate endemic rubella virus
transmission and occurrence of CRS, maintaining high population
immunity through vaccination coverage and high-­quality integrated
measles-­rubella surveillance have been emphasized as being vital to its
success.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for a Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 295 u Mumps

Chapter 295

Mumps
Hayley A. Gans
Mumps is an acute self-­limited infection that was once commonplace
but is now uncommon in countries with widespread use of vaccination.
It is characterized by fever, bilateral or unilateral parotid swelling and
tenderness, and the frequent occurrence of meningoencephalitis and
orchitis. Although infrequent in countries with extensive vaccination
programs, mumps remains endemic in the rest of the world, warranting continued vaccine protection. Nonetheless, outbreaks of mumps
have been reported in highly vaccinated populations in the United
States, particularly among students.

ETIOLOGY

Mumps virus is in the family Paramyxoviridae and the genus Rubulavirus. It is a negative-­
sense single-­
stranded nonsegmented RNA
virus encapsulated in a lipoprotein envelope possessing seven structural proteins. Surface glycoproteins called HN (hemagglutinin-­
neuraminidase) and F (fusion) mediate absorption of the virus to host
cells and penetration of the virus into cells, respectively. Both proteins
stimulate production of protective antibodies. Mumps virus exists as
a single serotype with up to 12 known genotypes, and humans are the
only natural host.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

In the prevaccine era, mumps occurred primarily in young children
between the ages of 5 and 9 years and in epidemics about every 4
years. Mumps infection occurred more often in the winter and spring
months. In 1968, just after the introduction of the mumps vaccine,
185,691 cases were reported in the United States. Following the recommendation for routine use of mumps vaccine in 1977, the incidence
of mumps fell dramatically in young children (Fig. 295.1) and shifted
instead to older children, adolescents, and young adults. Outbreaks
continued to occur even in highly vaccinated populations as a result
of primary vaccine failure with one dose of vaccine and because of
undervaccination of susceptible persons. After implementation of the
two-­dose recommendation for the measles-­mumps-­rubella (MMR)
vaccine for measles control in 1989, the number of mumps cases
declined further. During 2001–2003, fewer than 300 mumps cases were
reported each year. In 2006 the largest mumps epidemic in the past 20

years occurred in the United States. A total of 6,584 cases occurred,
85% of them in 8 midwestern states. Twenty-­nine percent of the cases
occurred in patients 18-­24 years old, most of whom were attending
college. An analysis of 4,039 patients with mumps seen in the first 7
months of the epidemic indicated that 63% had received more than two
doses of the MMR vaccine. Subsequently, several outbreaks of mumps
have been documented in highly vaccinated populations in the United
States, several in school settings including universities and in Guam.
This phenomenon is reported globally as well. The majority of cases in
vaccinated persons represent close contact thought to provide intense
exposure that may overcome vaccine immunity and perhaps genotype
mismatch between circulating mumps genotypes and those in the vaccine. Through 2020, mumps outbreaks have continued to occur, with a
peak in 2016 with 6,366 cases, which dropped to 154 in 2021.
Mumps is spread from person to person by respiratory droplets.
Virus appears in the saliva from up to 7 days before to as long as 7 days
after onset of parotid swelling. The period of maximum infectiousness
is 1-­2 days before to 5 days after onset of parotid swelling. Viral shedding before onset of symptoms and in asymptomatic infected individuals impairs efforts to contain the infection in susceptible populations.
The risk of spreading the virus increases the longer and the closer the
contact a person has with someone who has mumps. The U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Health Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
recommend an isolation period of 5 days after onset of parotitis for
patients with mumps in both community and healthcare settings.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Mumps virus targets the salivary glands, central nervous system (CNS),
pancreas, testes, and, to a lesser extent, thyroid, ovaries, heart, kidneys,
liver, and joint synovia.
After infection, initial viral replication occurs in the epithelium of
the upper respiratory tract. Infection spreads to the adjacent lymph
nodes by the lymphatic drainage, and viremia ensues, spreading the
virus to targeted tissues, including the meninges, salivary glands, pancreas, testes, and ovaries. Mumps virus causes necrosis of infected cells
and is associated with a lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate. Salivary
gland ducts are lined with necrotic epithelium, and the interstitium is
infiltrated with lymphocytes. Swelling of tissue within the testes may
result in focal ischemic infarcts. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) frequently contains a mononuclear pleocytosis, even in individuals without clinical signs of meningitis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period for mumps ranges from 12-­25 days but is usually
16-­18 days. Mumps virus infection may result in clinical presentation

Number of mumps cases—United States, 1968–2011

120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000

14
12
10
8
6
4
1
0
1985 1990 1995 2000

6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2005 2010

Year

20,000

2,000
1,000

0
1968

1978

1988
Year

1998

0

2008

B

20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17

No. cases
(in thousands)

140,000
No. cases

Mumps cases in U.S., by year
7,000

160,000

A

1969

Fig. 295.1 A, Mumps cases in the United States from 1968, right after the live mumps vaccine was introduced in 1967, to 2011. There was a

steady decline following introduction of the vaccine and recommendation for routine vaccination in 1977 (arrow). Note national increases in activity
in 1986–1987, 2006. Mumps data provided were reported voluntarily to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) from state health
departments. B, Mumps cases in the United States from 2000–2017 showing the increased activity in 2006, 2009, 2010, and 2014–2017. Mumps
data provided were reported voluntarily to CDC from state health departments. (A, From McLean HQ, Fiebelkorn AP, Temte JL, et al. Prevention of
measles, rubella, congenital rubella syndrome and mumps. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2013;62[RR-­04]:1–34; B, From Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report (MMWR): Notifiable Diseases and Mortality Tables. https://www.cdc.gov/mumps/outbreaks.html.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1970 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
ranging from asymptomatic (in the prevaccine era 15–24% of infections were asymptomatic; accurate estimates in the postvaccination era
are difficult to measure) or nonspecific symptoms to the typical illness
associated with parotitis with or without complications involving several body systems. The typical patient presents with a prodrome lasting
1-­2 days consisting of fever, headache, vomiting, malaise, and myalgias.
Parotitis follows and may be unilateral initially but becomes bilateral in
approximately 70% of cases (Fig. 295.2). The parotid gland is tender,
and parotitis may be preceded or accompanied by ear pain on the ipsilateral side. Ingestion of sour or acidic foods or liquids may enhance
pain in the parotid area. As swelling progresses, the angle of the jaw
is obscured, and the ear lobe may be lifted upward and outward (see
Figs. 295.2 and 295.3). The opening of the Stensen duct may be red
and edematous. The parotid swelling peaks in approximately 3 days
and then gradually subsides over 7 days. Fever and the other systemic
symptoms resolve in 3-­5 days. A morbilliform rash is rarely seen. Submandibular salivary glands may also be involved or may be enlarged
without parotid swelling. Edema over the sternum as a result of lymphatic obstruction may also occur. Symptoms in immunized individuals are the same but tend to be less severe, and parotitis may be absent.

DIAGNOSIS

When mumps was highly prevalent, the diagnosis could be made on
the basis of a history of exposure to mumps infection, an appropriate
incubation period, and development of typical clinical findings. Confirmation of the presence of parotitis could be made with demonstration
of an elevated serum amylase value. Leukopenia with a relative lymphocytosis was a common finding. Currently, in highly immunized populations patients with parotitis lasting longer than 2 days and of unknown
cause, a specific diagnosis of mumps should be confirmed or ruled out
by virologic or serologic examination. This step may be accomplished by
isolation of the virus in cell culture, detection of viral antigen by direct
immunofluorescence, or identification of nucleic acid by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Virus can be isolated from
upper respiratory tract secretions (buccal and oropharyngeal mucosa),
CSF, or urine during the acute illness; however, PCR from the oropharyngeal secretions becomes negative quickly, especially in immunized
individuals, and thus should be run within 3 days of parotid swelling.
Serologic testing is usually a more convenient and available mode of
diagnosis. A significant increase in serum mumps immunoglobulin G
(IgG) antibody between acute and convalescent serum specimens as
detected by complement fixation, neutralization hemagglutination, or
enzyme immunoassay tests establishes the diagnosis. Mumps IgG antibodies may cross react with antibodies to parainfluenza virus in serologic testing. More commonly, an enzyme immunoassay for mumps
IgM antibody is used to identify recent infection. All serologic tests are

difficult to interpret in immunized individuals, and negative test results
do not rule out mumps infection. Skin testing for mumps is neither
sensitive nor specific and should not be used.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Parotid swelling may be caused by many other infectious and noninfectious conditions, especially in sporadic cases. Viruses that cause parotitis include parainfluenza 1 and parainfluenza 3 viruses, influenza A
virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, enteroviruses, lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus, and HIV. Purulent parotitis, usually caused by
Staphylococcus aureus, is unilateral, is extremely tender, is associated
with an elevated white blood cell count, and may involve purulent drainage from the Stensen duct. Submandibular or anterior cervical adenitis
from a variety of pathogens may also be confused with parotitis. Other
noninfectious causes of parotid swelling include obstruction of the
Stensen duct, collagen vascular diseases such as Sjögren syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, immunologic diseases, tumor, and drugs.

COMPLICATIONS

The most common complications of mumps are meningitis, with or
without encephalitis, and gonadal (orchitis, oophoritis) involvement.
Uncommon complications include conjunctivitis, optic neuritis,
pneumonia, nephritis, pancreatitis, mastitis, and thrombocytopenia.
Complications can occur in the absence of parotitis, especially in
immunized individuals, and overall complication rates in immunized
individuals are lower than in unimmunized and are shifted toward the
adult populations.
Maternal infection with mumps during the first trimester of pregnancy results in increased fetal wastage. No fetal malformations have
been associated with intrauterine mumps infection. However, perinatal mumps disease has been reported in infants born to mothers who
acquired mumps late in gestation.

Meningitis and Meningoencephalitis

Mumps virus is neurotropic and is thought to enter the CNS via the
choroid plexus and infect the choroidal epithelium and ependymal
cells, both of which can be found in CSF along with mononuclear
leukocytes. In the prevaccine era mumps represented one of the most
common causes of aseptic meningitis and hearing loss among children. Symptomatic CNS involvement occurs in 10–30% of infected
individuals, but CSF pleocytosis has been found in 40–60% of patients
with mumps parotitis. The meningoencephalitis may occur before,
along with, or following the parotitis. It most commonly manifests 5
days after the parotitis. Clinical findings vary with age. Infants and
young children have fever, malaise, and lethargy, whereas older children, adolescents, and adults complain of headache and demonstrate

Parotid
gland
Ear-gland
axis
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle

Fig. 295.2 Schematic of a parotid gland infected with mumps (right)

compared with a normal gland (left). An imaginary line bisecting the
long axis of the ear divides the parotid gland into two equal parts.
These anatomic relationships are not altered in the enlarged gland. An
enlarged cervical lymph node is usually posterior to the imaginary line.
(From Mumps [epidemic parotitis]. In Krugman S, Ward R, Katz SL, eds.
Infectious Diseases in Children, 6th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1977:182.)

Fig. 295.3 A child with mumps showing parotid swelling. (From the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Public Health Image Library [PHIL], Image 4491. https://phil.cdc.gov/Details.aspx?pid=4491.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 295 u Mumps
meningeal signs. In a series of children with mumps and meningeal
involvement, findings were fever in 94%, vomiting in 84%, headache
in 47%, parotitis in 47%, neck stiffness in 71%, lethargy in 69%, and
seizures in 18%. In typical cases, symptoms resolve in 7-­10 days. CSF
in mumps meningitis has a white blood cell pleocytosis of 200-­600
μL with a predominance of lymphocytes. The CSF glucose content is
normal in most patients, but a moderate hypoglycorrhachia (glucose
content 20-­40 mg/dL) may be seen in 10–20% of patients. The CSF
protein content is normal or mildly elevated.
Less-­
common CNS complications of mumps include transverse
myelitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), aqueductal
stenosis, and facial palsy. Sensorineural hearing loss is rare and has
been estimated to occur in 0.5-­5.0 in 100,000 cases of mumps. The
hearing loss can be transient. There is some evidence that hearing loss
is more likely in patients with meningoencephalitis.

Orchitis and Oophoritis

In adolescent and adult males, orchitis is second only to parotitis as
a common finding in mumps. Involvement in prepubescent boys is
extremely rare, but after puberty, orchitis occurs in 30–40% of males. It
begins within days following onset of parotitis in most cases and is associated with moderate to high fever, chills, and exquisite pain and swelling
of the testes. In 30% or less of cases, the orchitis is bilateral. Atrophy of
the testes may occur, but sterility is rare even with bilateral involvement.
Oophoritis is uncommon in postpubertal females but may cause
severe pain and may be confused with appendicitis when located on
the right side.

Pancreatitis

Pancreatitis may occur in mumps with or without parotid involvement. Severe disease is rare, but fever, epigastric pain, and vomiting are
suggestive. Epidemiologic studies have suggested that mumps may be
associated with the subsequent development of diabetes mellitus, but a
causal link has not been established.

Cardiac Involvement

Myocarditis has been reported in mumps, and molecular studies have
identified mumps virus in heart tissue taken from patients with endocardial fibroelastosis.

Arthritis

Arthralgia, monoarthritis, and migratory polyarthritis have been
reported in mumps. Arthritis is seen with or without parotitis and usually occurs within 3 weeks of onset of parotid swelling. It is generally
mild and self-­limited.

Thyroiditis

Thyroiditis is rare following mumps. It has not been reported without parotitis and may occur weeks after the acute infection. Most cases
resolve, but some become relapsing and result in hypothyroidism.

TREATMENT

No specific antiviral therapy is available for mumps. Management should
be aimed at reducing the pain associated with meningitis or orchitis and
maintaining adequate hydration. Antipyretics may be given for fever.

PROGNOSIS

The outcome of mumps is nearly always excellent, even when the disease is complicated by encephalitis, although fatal cases from CNS
involvement or myocarditis have been reported. No mumps deaths
have occurred in the recent outbreaks in the United States.

PREVENTION

Immunization with the live mumps vaccine is the primary mode of
prevention used in the United States. It is given as part of the MMR
two-­dose vaccine schedule, at 12-­15 months of age for the first dose
and 4-­6 years of age for the second dose. If not given at 4-­6 years, the
second dose should be given before children enter puberty. In those
traveling, two doses are recommended in individuals older than 12
months administered at least 28 days apart. Antibody develops in 94%

1971

(range: 89–97%) after one dose. Antibody levels achieved after vaccination are lower than after natural infection.
The median vaccine effectiveness of mumps vaccine after one dose
of vaccine is 78% (range: 49–92%) and after two doses is 88% (range:
66–95%). Duration of effectiveness is ≥10 years after one dose and ≥15
years after two doses.
During outbreaks, a third MMR dose administered to the at-­risk
population was associated with improved outbreak control with significantly fewer cases in those receiving the third dose compared with
those not receiving it. Despite these results, modeling supports the current two-­dose schedule without a routine third booster dose because
the current regimen significantly controls size of outbreaks, severity
of disease, and number of hospitalizations, whereas the third dose
appears to be a possible strategy during an outbreak.
As a live-­virus vaccine, MMR should not be administered to pregnant women or to severely immunodeficient or immunosuppressed
individuals. HIV-­infected patients who are not severely immunocompromised may receive the vaccine, because the risk for severe infection with mumps outweighs the risk for serious reaction to the vaccine.
Individuals with anaphylactoid reactions to egg or neomycin may be
at risk for immediate-­type hypersensitivity reactions to the vaccine.
Persons with other types of reactions to egg or reactions to other components of the vaccine are not restricted from receiving the vaccine.
In 2006, in response to the multistate outbreak in the United States,
evidence of immunity to mumps through vaccination was redefined.
Acceptable presumptive evidence of immunity to mumps now consists
of one of the following: (1) documentation of adequate vaccination at
age 12 months or older, (2) laboratory evidence of immunity, (3) birth
before 1957, and (4) documentation of physician-­diagnosed mumps.
Evidence of immunity through documentation of adequate vaccination is defined as one dose of a live mumps virus vaccine for preschool-­
age children and adults not at high risk and two doses for school-­age
children (i.e., grades K-­12) and for adults at high risk (e.g., healthcare
workers, international travelers, and students at post–high school educational institutions).
All persons who work in healthcare facilities should be immune to
mumps. Adequate mumps vaccination for healthcare workers born during or after 1957 consists of two doses of a live mumps virus vaccine.
Healthcare workers with no history of mumps vaccination and no other
evidence of immunity should receive two doses, with >28 days between
doses. Healthcare workers who have received only one dose previously
should receive a second dose. Because birth before 1957 is only presumptive evidence of immunity, healthcare facilities should consider
recommending one dose of a live mumps virus vaccine for unvaccinated workers born before 1957 who do not have a history of physician-­
diagnosed mumps or laboratory evidence of mumps immunity. During
an outbreak, healthcare facilities should strongly consider recommending two doses of a live mumps virus vaccine to unvaccinated workers
born before 1957 who do not have evidence of mumps immunity.
Adverse reactions to mumps virus vaccine are rare. Parotitis and
orchitis have been reported rarely. There is inadequate information to
make a causal relationship to other reactions, such as febrile seizures,
deafness, rash, purpura, encephalitis, and meningitis with the strain
of mumps vaccine virus used for immunization in the United States.
Higher rates of aseptic meningitis following vaccination for mumps are
associated with vaccine strains used elsewhere in the world, including the Leningrad 3 and Urabe Am 9 strains. Transient suppression
of reactivity to tuberculin skin testing has been reported after mumps
vaccination.
In 2005 the quadrivalent measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella
(MMRV) vaccine was made available. However, in 2010, studies
showed a greater risk of febrile seizures in children 12-­23 months of
age 5-­12 days after administration of the vaccine. No increased risk
of seizures was seen in children receiving the first dose of the MMRV
at older than 48 months of age. As a result, the American Academy of
Pediatrics currently recommends either the MMR vaccine and separate
varicella vaccine or the MMRV vaccine in children 12-­47 months of
age. After 48 months of age, the MMRV is generally preferred.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1972 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 296

Polioviruses
Eric A.F. Simões
ETIOLOGY

The polioviruses are nonenveloped, positive-­stranded RNA viruses
belonging to the Picornaviridae family, in the genus Enterovirus, species enterovirus C and consist of three antigenically distinct serotypes
(types 1, 2, and 3). Polioviruses spread from the intestinal tract to the
central nervous system (CNS), where they cause aseptic meningitis and
poliomyelitis, or polio. The polioviruses are extremely hardy and can
retain infectivity for several days at room temperature.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The most devastating result of poliovirus infection is paralysis,
although 90–95% of infections are inapparent. Despite the absence
of symptoms, clinically inapparent infections induce protective
immunity. Clinically apparent but nonparalytic illness occurs in
approximately 5% of all infections, with paralytic polio occurring in
approximately 1 in 1,000 infections among infants to approximately
1 in 100 infections among adolescents. In industrialized countries
before universal vaccination, epidemics of paralytic poliomyelitis
occurred primarily in adolescents. Conversely, in developing countries with poor sanitation, infection early in life results in infantile
paralysis. Improved sanitation explains the virtual eradication of
polio from the United States in the early 1960s, when only approximately 65% of the population was immunized with the Salk vaccine,
which contributed to the disappearance of circulating wild-­
type
poliovirus in the United States and Europe.

TRANSMISSION

Humans are the only known reservoir for the polioviruses, which are
spread by the fecal-­oral route. Poliovirus has been isolated from feces
for longer than 2 weeks before paralysis to several weeks after the onset
of symptoms.

PATHOGENESIS

Polioviruses infect cells by adsorbing to the genetically determined
poliovirus receptor (CD155). The virus penetrates the cell, is
uncoated, and releases viral RNA. The RNA is translated to produce
proteins responsible for replication of the RNA, shutoff of host cell
protein synthesis, and synthesis of structural elements that compose
the capsid. Mature virus particles are produced in 6-­8 hours and are
released into the environment by disruption of the cell.
In the contact host, wild-­type and vaccine strains of polioviruses
gain host entry via the gastrointestinal tract. Recent studies in nonhuman primates demonstrate that the primary sites of replication are
in the CD155+ epithelial cells lining the mucosa of the tonsil follicle
and small intestine, as well as in the macrophages/dendritic cells in the
tonsil follicle and Peyer patches. Regional lymph nodes are infected,
and primary viremia occurs after 2-­3 days. The virus seeds multiple
sites, including the reticuloendothelial system, brown fat deposits, and
skeletal muscle. Wild-­type poliovirus probably accesses the CNS along
peripheral nerves. Vaccine strains of polioviruses do not replicate in
the CNS, a feature that accounts for the safety of the live-­attenuated
vaccine. Occasional revertants (by nucleotide substitution) of these
vaccine strains develop a neurovirulent phenotype and cause vaccine-­
associated paralytic poliomyelitis (VAPP). Reversion occurs in the
small intestine and probably accesses the CNS via the peripheral
nerves. Poliovirus has almost never been cultured from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with paralytic disease, and patients with
aseptic meningitis caused by poliovirus never have paralytic disease.
With the first appearance of non-­CNS symptoms, a secondary viremia

probably occurs as a result of enormous viral replication in the reticuloendothelial system.
The exact mechanism of entry into the CNS is not known. However, once entry is gained, the virus may traverse neural pathways, and
multiple sites within the CNS are often affected. The effect on motor
and autonomic neurons is most striking and correlates with the clinical manifestations. Perineuronal inflammation, a mixed inflammatory
reaction with both polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes, is
associated with extensive neuronal destruction. Petechial hemorrhages
and considerable inflammatory edema also occur in areas of poliovirus infection. The poliovirus primarily infects motor neuron cells in
the spinal cord (the anterior horn cells) and the medulla oblongata
(the cranial nerve nuclei). Because of the overlap in muscle innervation by two to three adjacent segments of the spinal cord, clinical signs
of weakness in the limbs develop when more than 50% of motor neurons are destroyed. In the medulla, less-­extensive lesions cause paralysis, and involvement of the reticular formation that contains the vital
centers controlling respiration and circulation may have a catastrophic
outcome. Involvement of the intermediate and dorsal areas of the horn
and the dorsal root ganglia in the spinal cord results in hyperesthesia and myalgias that are typical of acute poliomyelitis. Other neurons
affected are the nuclei in the roof and vermis of the cerebellum, the
substantia nigra, and, occasionally, the red nucleus in the pons; there
may be variable involvement of thalamic, hypothalamic, and pallidal
nuclei and the motor cortex.
Apart from the histopathology of the CNS, inflammatory changes
occur generally in the reticuloendothelial system. Inflammatory edema
and sparse lymphocytic infiltration are prominently associated with
hyperplastic lymphocytic follicles.
Infants acquire immunity transplacentally from their mothers.
Transplacental immunity disappears at a variable rate during the first
4-­6 months of life. Active immunity after natural infection is probably
lifelong but protects against the infecting serotype only; infections
with other serotypes are possible. Poliovirus-­neutralizing antibodies
develop within several days after exposure as a result of replication of
the virus in the tonsils and in the intestinal tract and deep lymphatic
tissues. This early production of circulating immunoglobulin (Ig) G
antibodies protects against CNS invasion. Local (mucosal) immunity,
conferred mainly by secretory IgA, is an important defense against
subsequent reinfection of the gastrointestinal tract.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period of poliovirus from contact to initial clinical
symptoms is usually considered to be 8-­12 days, with a range of 5-­35
days. Poliovirus infections with wild-­type virus may follow one of several courses: inapparent infection, which occurs in 90–95% of cases
and causes no disease and no sequelae; abortive poliomyelitis; nonparalytic poliomyelitis; or paralytic poliomyelitis. Paralysis, if it occurs,
appears 3-­8 days after the initial symptoms. The clinical manifestations
of paralytic polio caused by wild or vaccine strains are comparable,
although the incidence of abortive and nonparalytic paralysis with
vaccine-­associated poliomyelitis is unknown.

Abortive Poliomyelitis

In approximately 5% of patients, a nonspecific influenza-­like syndrome
occurs 1-­2 weeks after infection, which is termed abortive poliomyelitis. Fever, malaise, anorexia, and headache are prominent features, and
there may be sore throat and abdominal or muscular pain. Vomiting
occurs irregularly. The illness is short lived, lasting up to 2-­3 days. The
physical examination may be normal or may reveal nonspecific pharyngitis, abdominal or muscular tenderness, and weakness. Recovery is
complete, and no neurologic signs or sequelae develop.

Nonparalytic Poliomyelitis

In approximately 1% of patients infected with wild-­type poliovirus,
signs of abortive poliomyelitis are present, as are more intense headache, nausea, and vomiting, as well as soreness and stiffness of the
posterior muscles of the neck, trunk, and limbs. Fleeting paralysis of
the bladder and constipation are frequent. Approximately two thirds

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 296 u Polioviruses
of these children have a short symptom-­free interlude between the first
phase (minor illness) and the second phase (CNS disease or major illness). Nuchal rigidity and spinal rigidity are the basis for the diagnosis
of nonparalytic poliomyelitis during the second phase.
Physical examination reveals nuchal-­spinal signs and changes in
superficial and deep reflexes. Gentle forward flexion of the occiput
and neck elicits nuchal rigidity. The examiner can demonstrate head
drop by placing the hands under the patient’s shoulders and raising the
patient’s trunk. Although normally the head follows the plane of the
trunk, in poliomyelitis it often falls backward limply, but this response
is not attributable to true paresis of the neck flexors. In struggling
infants, it may be difficult to distinguish voluntary resistance from
clinically important true nuchal rigidity. The examiner may place the
infant’s shoulders flush with the edge of the table, support the weight of
the occiput in the hand, and then flex the head anteriorly. True nuchal
rigidity persists during this maneuver. When open, the anterior fontanel may be tense or bulging.
In the early stages the reflexes are normally active and remain so
unless paralysis supervenes. Changes in reflexes, either increased
or decreased, may precede weakness by 12-­24 hours. The superficial
reflexes, the cremasteric and abdominal reflexes, and the reflexes of the
spinal and gluteal muscles are usually the first to diminish. The spinal
and gluteal reflexes may disappear before the abdominal and cremasteric reflexes. Changes in the deep tendon reflexes generally occur 8-­24
hours after the superficial reflexes are depressed and indicate impending paresis of the extremities. Tendon reflexes are absent with paralysis.
Sensory defects do not occur in poliomyelitis.

Paralytic Poliomyelitis

Paralytic poliomyelitis develops in approximately 0.1% of persons
infected with poliovirus, causing 3 clinically recognizable syndromes
that represent a continuum of infection differentiated only by the portions of the CNS most severely affected. These are (1) spinal paralytic
poliomyelitis, (2) bulbar poliomyelitis, and (3) polioencephalitis.
Spinal paralytic poliomyelitis may occur as the second phase of a
biphasic illness, the first phase of which corresponds to abortive poliomyelitis. The patient then appears to recover and feels better for 2-­5
days, after which severe headache and fever occur with exacerbation
of the previous systemic symptoms. Severe muscle pain is present, and
sensory and motor phenomena (e.g., paresthesia, hyperesthesia, fasciculations, and spasms) may develop. On physical examination the
distribution of paralysis is characteristically spotty. Single muscles,
multiple muscles, or groups of muscles may be involved in any pattern. Within 1-­2 days, asymmetric flaccid paralysis or paresis occurs.
Involvement of one leg is most common, followed by involvement of
one arm. The proximal areas of the extremities tend to be involved to
a greater extent than the distal areas. To detect mild muscular weakness, it is often necessary to apply gentle resistance in opposition to
the muscle group being tested. Examination at this point may reveal
nuchal stiffness or rigidity, muscle tenderness, initially hyperactive
deep tendon reflexes (for a short period) followed by absence or diminution of reflexes, and paresis or flaccid paralysis. In the spinal form,
there is weakness of some of the muscles of the neck, abdomen, trunk,
diaphragm, thorax, or extremities. Sensation is intact; sensory disturbances, if present, suggest a disease other than poliomyelitis.
The paralytic phase of poliomyelitis is extremely variable; some
patients progress during observation from paresis to paralysis, whereas
others recover, either slowly or rapidly. The extent of paresis or paralysis is directly related to the extent of neuronal involvement; paralysis
occurs if >50% of the neurons supplying the muscles are destroyed.
The extent of involvement is usually obvious within 2-­3 days; only
rarely does progression occur beyond this interval. Bowel and bladder dysfunction ranging from transient incontinence to paralysis with
constipation and urinary retention often accompany paralysis of the
lower limbs.
The onset and course of paralysis are variable in developing countries. The biphasic course is rare; typically the disease manifests in
a single phase in which prodromal symptoms and paralysis occur
in a continuous fashion. In developing countries, where a history of

1973

intramuscular injections precedes paralytic poliomyelitis in approximately 50–60% of patients, patients may present initially with fever and
paralysis (provocation paralysis). The degree and duration of muscle
pain are also variable, ranging from a few days usually to a week. Occasionally, spasm and increased muscle tone with a transient increase in
deep tendon reflexes occur in some patients, whereas in most patients,
flaccid paralysis occurs abruptly. Once the temperature returns to normal, progression of paralytic manifestations stops. Little recovery from
paralysis is noted in the first days or weeks, but, if it is to occur, it is usually evident within 6 months. The return of strength and reflexes is slow
and may continue to improve for as long as 18 months after the acute
disease. Lack of improvement from paralysis within the first several
weeks or months after onset is usually evidence of permanent paralysis.
Atrophy of the limb, failure of growth, and deformity are common and
are especially evident in the growing child.
Bulbar poliomyelitis may occur as a clinical entity without apparent involvement of the spinal cord. Infection is a continuum, and
designation of the disease as bulbar implies only dominance of the
clinical manifestations by dysfunctions of the cranial nerves and
medullary centers. The clinical findings seen with bulbar poliomyelitis with respiratory difficulty (other than paralysis of extraocular,
facial, and masticatory muscles) include (1) nasal twang to the voice
or cry caused by palatal and pharyngeal weakness (hard-­consonant
words such as cookie and candy bring this feature out best); (2)
inability to swallow smoothly, resulting in accumulation of saliva in
the pharynx, indicating partial immobility (holding the larynx lightly
and asking the patient to swallow will confirm such immobility); (3)
accumulated pharyngeal secretions, which may cause irregular respirations that appear interrupted and abnormal even to the point of
falsely simulating intercostal or diaphragmatic weakness; (4) absence
of effective coughing, shown by constant fatiguing efforts to clear
the throat; (5) nasal regurgitation of saliva and fluids as a result of
palatal paralysis, with inability to separate the oropharynx from the
nasopharynx during swallowing; (6) deviation of the palate, uvula, or
tongue; (7) involvement of vital centers in the medulla, which manifest as irregularities in rate, depth, and rhythm of respiration and as
cardiovascular alterations, including blood pressure changes (especially increased blood pressure), alternate flushing and mottling of
the skin, and cardiac arrhythmias; and as rapid changes in body temperature; (8) paralysis of one or both vocal cords, causing hoarseness,
aphonia, and, ultimately, asphyxia unless the problem is recognized
on laryngoscopy and managed by immediate tracheostomy; and
(9) the rope sign, an acute angulation between the chin and larynx
caused by weakness of the hyoid muscles (the hyoid bone is pulled
posteriorly, narrowing the hypopharyngeal inlet).
Uncommonly, bulbar disease may culminate in an ascending paralysis (Landry type), in which there is progression cephalad from initial
involvement of the lower extremities. Hypertension and other autonomic disturbances are common in bulbar involvement and may persist for a week or more or may be transient. Occasionally, hypertension
is followed by hypotension and shock and is associated with irregular
or failed respiratory effort, delirium, or coma. This kind of bulbar disease may be rapidly fatal.
The course of bulbar disease is variable; some patients die as a result
of extensive, severe involvement of the various centers in the medulla;
others recover partially but require ongoing respiratory support, and
others recover completely. Cranial nerve involvement is seldom permanent. Atrophy of muscles may be evident, patients immobilized for
long periods may experience pneumonia, and renal stones may form
as a result of hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria secondary to bone
resorption.
Polioencephalitis is a rare form of the disease in which higher
centers of the brain are severely involved. Seizures, coma, and spastic paralysis with increased reflexes may be observed. Irritability, disorientation, drowsiness, and coarse tremors are often present with
peripheral or cranial nerve paralysis that coexists or ensues. Hypoxia
and hypercapnia caused by inadequate ventilation due to respiratory
insufficiency may produce disorientation without true encephalitis.
The manifestations are common to encephalitis of any cause and can be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1974 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
attributed to polioviruses only with specific viral diagnosis or if accompanied by flaccid paralysis.
Paralytic poliomyelitis with ventilatory insufficiency results from
several components acting together to produce ventilatory insufficiency resulting in hypoxia and hypercapnia. It may have profound
effects on many other systems. Because respiratory insufficiency may
develop rapidly, close continued clinical evaluation is essential. Despite
weakness of the respiratory muscles, the patient may respond with so
much respiratory effort associated with anxiety and fear that overventilation may occur at the outset, resulting in respiratory alkalosis. Such
effort is fatiguing and contributes to respiratory failure.
There are certain characteristic patterns of disease. Pure spinal poliomyelitis with respiratory insufficiency involves tightness, weakness, or
paralysis of the respiratory muscles (chiefly the diaphragm and intercostals) without discernible clinical involvement of the cranial nerves
or vital centers that control respiration, circulation, and body temperature. The cervical and thoracic spinal cord segments are chiefly affected.
Pure bulbar poliomyelitis involves paralysis of the motor cranial nerve
nuclei with or without involvement of the vital centers. Involvement of
the 9th, 10th, and 12th cranial nerves results in paralysis of the pharynx, tongue, and larynx with consequent airway obstruction. Bulbospinal poliomyelitis with respiratory insufficiency affects the respiratory
muscles and results in coexisting bulbar paralysis.
The clinical findings associated with involvement of the respiratory
muscles include (1) anxious expression; (2) inability to speak without frequent pauses, resulting in short, jerky, breathless sentences; (3)
increased respiratory rate; (4) movement of the alae nasi and of the
accessory muscles of respiration; (5) inability to cough or sniff with full
depth; (6) paradoxical abdominal movements caused by diaphragmatic
immobility caused by spasm or weakness of one or both leaves; and (7)
relative immobility of the intercostal spaces, which may be segmental,
unilateral, or bilateral. When the arms are weak, and especially when
deltoid paralysis occurs, there may be impending respiratory paralysis because the phrenic nerve nuclei are in adjacent areas of the spinal
cord. Observation of the patient’s capacity for thoracic breathing while
the abdominal muscles are splinted manually indicates minor degrees
of paresis. Light manual splinting of the thoracic cage helps to assess
the effectiveness of diaphragmatic movement.

DIAGNOSIS

Poliomyelitis should be considered in any unimmunized or incompletely immunized child with paralytic disease. Although this guideline
is most applicable in poliomyelitis endemic countries (Afghanistan,
and Pakistan in 2023), the spread of polio in 2013 from endemic countries to many nonendemic countries (Niger, Chad, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, and Syria) and the isolation of wild poliovirus type
1 in Israel in 2014 and circulating type 1 vaccine-­associated paralytic
polio in Ukraine in 2015 suggest that the diagnosis of polio should be
entertained in all countries. VAPP should be considered in any child
with paralytic disease occurring 7-­14 days after receiving the orally
administered polio vaccine (OPV). VAPP can occur at later times after
administration and should be considered in any child with paralytic
disease in countries or regions where wild-­type poliovirus has been
eradicated and the OPV has been administered to the child or a contact. The combination of fever, headache, neck and back pain, asymmetric flaccid paralysis without sensory loss, and pleocytosis does not
regularly occur in any other illness.
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that the
laboratory diagnosis of poliomyelitis be confirmed by isolation and
identification of poliovirus in the stool, with specific identification of
wild-­type and vaccine-­type strains. In suspected cases of acute flaccid
paralysis, two stool specimens should be collected 24-­48 hours apart as
soon as possible after the diagnosis of poliomyelitis is suspected. Poliovirus concentrations are high in the stool in the first week after the
onset of paralysis, which is the optimal time for collection of stool specimens. Polioviruses may be isolated from 80–90% of specimens from
acutely ill patients, whereas <20% of specimens from such patients
may yield virus at 3-­4 weeks after onset of paralysis. Because most children with spinal or bulbospinal poliomyelitis have constipation, rectal

straws may be used to obtain specimens; ideally a minimum of 8-­10 g
of stool should be collected. In laboratories that can isolate poliovirus,
isolates should be sent to either the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) or to one of the WHO-­certified poliomyelitis
laboratories where DNA sequence analysis can be performed to distinguish between wild poliovirus and neurovirulent, revertant OPV
strains. With the current WHO plan for global eradication of poliomyelitis, most regions of the world (the Americas, Europe, and Australia)
have been certified wild-­poliovirus free; in these areas, poliomyelitis is
most often caused by vaccine strains. Hence it is critical to differentiate
between wild-­type and revertant vaccine-­type strains.
The CSF is often normal during the minor illness and typically contains a pleocytosis with 20-­300 cells/μL with CNS involvement. The
cells in the CSF may be polymorphonuclear early during the course
of the disease but shift to mononuclear cells soon afterward. By the
second week of major illness, the CSF cell count falls to near-­normal
values. In contrast, the CSF protein content is normal or only slightly
elevated at the outset of CNS disease but usually rises to 50-­100 mg/
dL by the second week of illness. In polioencephalitis, the CSF may
remain normal or show minor changes. Serologic testing demonstrates
seroconversion or a fourfold or greater increase in antibody titers from
the acute phase of illness to 3-­6 weeks later.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Poliomyelitis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any
case of paralysis and is only one of many causes of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in children and adults. There are numerous other causes of
acute flaccid paralysis (Table 296.1). As evidence of this point, in 2022
of the 57,983 cases of AFP reported to WHO, there were 30 cases of
WPV1, 173 of cVDPV1, and 648 cases of cVDPV2. In most conditions,
the clinical features are sufficient to differentiate between these various
causes, but in some cases nerve conduction studies and electromyograms, in addition to muscle biopsies, may be required.
The possibility of polio should be considered in any case of acute
flaccid paralysis, even in countries where polio has been eradicated.
The diagnoses most often confused with polio are VAPP, West Nile
virus infection, and infections caused by other enteroviruses (including
EV-­A71 and EV-­D68), as well as Guillain-­Barré syndrome, transverse
myelitis, and traumatic paralysis. In Guillain-­Barré syndrome, which
is the most difficult to distinguish from poliomyelitis, the paralysis is
characteristically symmetric, and sensory changes and pyramidal tract
signs are common, contrasting with poliomyelitis. Fever, headache,
and meningeal signs are less notable, and the CSF has few cells but an
elevated protein content. Transverse myelitis progresses rapidly over
hours to days, causing an acute symmetric paralysis of the lower limbs
with concomitant anesthesia and diminished sensory perception.
Autonomic signs of hypothermia in the affected limbs are common,
and there is bladder dysfunction. The CSF is usually normal. Traumatic neuritis occurs from a few hours to a few days after the traumatic event, is asymmetric, is acute, and affects only one limb. Muscle
tone and deep tendon reflexes are reduced or absent in the affected
limb with pain in the gluteus. The CSF is normal.
Conditions causing pseudoparalysis do not present with nuchal-­
spinal rigidity or pleocytosis. These causes include unrecognized
trauma, transient (toxic) synovitis, acute osteomyelitis, acute rheumatic fever, scurvy, and congenital syphilis (pseudoparalysis of
Parrot).

TREATMENT

There is no specific antiviral treatment for poliomyelitis. However,
pocapavir (a capsid inhibitor) and V-­7404 (an enterovirus 3C protease inhibitor) are being developed potentially for use in combination
for treatment of poliovirus and other enteroviral infections. The management is supportive and aimed at limiting progression of disease,
preventing ensuing skeletal deformities, and preparing the child and
family for the prolonged treatment required and for permanent disability if this seems likely. Patients with the nonparalytic and mildly
paralytic forms of poliomyelitis may be treated at home. All intramuscular injections and surgical procedures are contraindicated during the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

SITE, CONDITION,
FACTOR, OR
AGENT

CLINICAL FINDINGS

ANTERIOR HORN CELLS OF SPINAL CORD
Poliomyelitis (wild
Paralysis
and vaccine-­
associated paralytic
poliomyelitis)

ONSET OF
­ ARALYSIS
P

PROGRESSION OF
PARALYSIS

SENSORY SIGNS
AND SYMPTOMS

REDUCTION OR
ABSENCE OF DEEP
TENDON REFLEXES

RESIDUAL
PARALYSIS

Incubation period
7-­14 days (range:
4-­35 days)

24-­48 hr to onset
of full paralysis;
proximal → distal,
asymmetric

No

Yes

Yes

Aseptic meningitis
(moderate
polymorphonuclear
leukocytes at 2-­3
days)

PLEOCYTOSIS

Nonpolio
enteroviruses
(including EV-­A71,
EV D68)

Hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease,
aseptic meningitis, acute
hemorrhagic conjunctivitis,
possibly idiopathic epidemic
flaccid paralysis

As in poliomyelitis

As in poliomyelitis

No

Yes

Yes

As in poliomyelitis

West Nile virus

Meningitis encephalitis

As in poliomyelitis

As in poliomyelitis

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Mo to yr

Acute, symmetric,
ascending

Yes

Yes

No

±

Incubation period
10-­21 days

Acute, symmetric,
ascending

Yes

±

±

Yes

Japanese
encephalitis virus

Incubation period
5-­15 days

Acute, proximal,
asymmetric

±

±

±

Yes

GUILLAIN-­BARRÉ SYNDROME
Acute inflammatory
Preceding infection, bilateral
polyradiculo-­
facial weakness
neuropathy

Hr to 10 days

Acute, symmetric,
ascending (days to
4 wk)

Yes

Yes

±

No

Hr to 10 days

1-­6 days

No

Yes

±

No

OTHER NEUROTROPIC VIRUSES
Rabies virus
Varicella-­zoster virus

Acute motor axonal
neuropathy

Exanthematous vesicular
eruptions

Fulminant, widespread paralysis,
bilateral facial weakness,
tongue involvement

Continued

Chapter 296 u Polioviruses

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 296.1  Differential Diagnosis of Acute Flaccid Paralysis

1975

SITE, CONDITION,
FACTOR, OR
AGENT

CLINICAL FINDINGS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ACUTE TRAUMATIC SCIATIC NEURITIS
Intramuscular gluteal Acute, asymmetric
injection

ONSET OF
­ ARALYSIS
P

PROGRESSION OF
PARALYSIS

SENSORY SIGNS
AND SYMPTOMS

REDUCTION OR
ABSENCE OF DEEP
TENDON REFLEXES

RESIDUAL
PARALYSIS

PLEOCYTOSIS

Hr to 4 days

Complete, affected
limb

Yes

Yes

±

No

Hr to days

Yes

Yes, early

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

±

Yes

Yes

Yes

±

±

Yes

Yes

±

Acute transverse
myelitis

Preceding Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, Schistosoma,
other parasitic or viral infection

Acute, symmetric
hypotonia of lower
limbs

Epidural abscess

Headache, back pain, local spinal
tenderness, meningismus

Complete

Spinal cord
compression;
trauma

Complete

Hr to days

NEUROPATHIES
Exotoxin of
Corynebacterium
diphtheriae

In severe cases, palatal paralysis,
blurred vision

Incubation period
1-­8 wk (paralysis
8-­12 wk after onset
of illness)

Toxin of Clostridium
botulinum

Abdominal pain, diplopia, loss of
accommodation, mydriasis

Incubation period
18-­36 hr

Rapid, descending,
symmetric

±

No

No

Tick bite paralysis

Ocular symptoms

Latency period 5-­10
days

Acute, symmetric,
ascending

No

Yes

No

Multifocal

No

No

Subacute, proximal
→ distal

Wk to mo

No

Yes

No

Viral myositis

Pseudoparalysis

Hr to days

No

No

No

METABOLIC DISORDERS
Hypokalemic periodic
paralysis

Proximal limb,
respiratory muscles

Sudden postprandial

No

Yes

±

No

Acute, following
systemic
inflammatory
response
syndrome/sepsis

Hr to days

±

Yes

±

No

DISEASES OF THE NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
Myasthenia gravis
Weakness, fatigability, diplopia,
ptosis, dysarthria
DISORDERS OF MUSCLE
Polymyositis
Neoplasm, autoimmune disease

INTENSIVE CARE UNIT WEAKNESS
Critical illness
Flaccid limbs and respiratory
polyneuropathy
weakness

Modified from Marx A, Glass JD, Sutter RW. Differential diagnosis of acute flaccid paralysis and its role in poliomyelitis surveillance. Epidemiol Rev. 2000;22:298–316.

No

No

1976 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Table 296.1  Differential Diagnosis of Acute Flaccid Paralysis—cont’d

Chapter 296 u Polioviruses
acute phase of the illness, especially in the first week of illness, because
they might result in progression of disease.

Abortive Poliomyelitis

Supportive treatment with analgesics, sedatives, an appetizing diet, and
bed rest until the child’s temperature is normal for several days is usually sufficient. Avoidance of exertion for the ensuing 2 weeks is desirable, and careful neurologic and musculoskeletal examinations should
be performed 2 months later to detect any minor involvement.

Nonparalytic Poliomyelitis

Treatment for the nonparalytic form is similar to that for the abortive form; in particular, relief is indicated for the discomfort of muscle
tightness and spasm of the neck, trunk, and extremities. Analgesics
are more effective when they are combined with the application of hot
packs for 15-­30 minutes every 2-­4 hours. Hot tub baths are sometimes
useful. A firm bed is desirable and can be improvised at home by placing table leaves or a sheet of plywood beneath the mattress. A footboard or splint should be used to keep the feet at a right angle to the
legs. Because muscular discomfort and spasm may continue for some
weeks, even in the nonparalytic form, hot packs and gentle physical
therapy may be necessary. Patients with nonparalytic poliomyelitis
should also be carefully examined 2 months after apparent recovery
to detect minor residual effects that might cause postural problems in
later years.

Paralytic Poliomyelitis

Most patients with the paralytic form of poliomyelitis require hospitalization with complete physical rest in a calm atmosphere for the first
2-­3 weeks. Suitable body alignment is necessary for comfort and to
avoid excessive skeletal deformity. A neutral position with the feet at
right angles to the legs, the knees slightly flexed, and the hips and spine
straight is achieved by use of boards, sandbags, and, occasionally, light
splint shells. The position should be changed every 3-­6 hours. Active and
passive movements are indicated as soon as the pain has disappeared.
Moist hot packs may relieve muscle pain and spasm. Opiates and sedatives are permissible only if no impairment of ventilation is present or
impending. Constipation is common, and fecal impaction should be
prevented. When bladder paralysis occurs, a parasympathetic stimulant
such as bethanechol may induce voiding in 15-­30 minutes; some patients
show no response to this agent, and others respond with nausea, vomiting, and palpitations. Bladder paresis rarely lasts more than a few days.
If bethanechol fails, manual compression of the bladder and the psychologic effect of running water should be tried. If catheterization must be
performed, care must be taken to prevent urinary tract infections. An
appealing diet and a relatively high fluid intake should be started at once
unless the patient is vomiting. Additional salt should be provided if the
environmental temperature is high or if the application of hot packs
induces sweating. Anorexia is common initially. Adequate dietary and
fluid intake can be maintained by placement of a central venous catheter.
An orthopedist and a physiatrist should see patients as early in the course
of the illness as possible and should assume responsibility for their care
before fixed deformities develop.
The management of pure bulbar poliomyelitis consists of maintaining the airway and avoiding all risk of inhalation of saliva, food, and
vomitus. Gravity drainage of accumulated secretions is favored by
using the head-­low (foot of bed elevated 20-­25 degrees) prone position with the face to one side. Patients with weakness of the muscles of
respiration or swallowing should be nursed in a lateral or semiprone
position. Aspirators with rigid or semirigid tips are preferred for direct
oral and pharyngeal aspiration, and soft, flexible catheters may be used
for nasopharyngeal aspiration. Fluid and electrolyte equilibrium is best
maintained by intravenous infusion because tube or oral feeding in the
first few days may incite vomiting. In addition to close observation for
respiratory insufficiency, the blood pressure should be measured at
least twice daily because hypertension is not uncommon and occasionally leads to hypertensive encephalopathy. Patients with pure bulbar
poliomyelitis may require tracheostomy because of vocal cord paralysis
or constriction of the hypopharynx; most patients who recover have

1977

little residual impairment, although some exhibit mild dysphagia and
occasional vocal fatigue with slurring of speech.
Impaired ventilation must be recognized early; mounting anxiety,
restlessness, and fatigue are early indications for preemptive intervention. Tracheostomy is indicated for some patients with pure bulbar
poliomyelitis, spinal respiratory muscle paralysis, or bulbospinal paralysis because such patients are generally unable to cough, sometimes for
many months. Mechanical respirators are often needed.

COMPLICATIONS

Paralytic poliomyelitis may be associated with numerous complications. Acute gastric dilation may occur abruptly during the acute or
convalescent stage, causing further respiratory embarrassment; immediate gastric aspiration and external application of ice bags are indicated. Melena severe enough to require transfusion may result from
single or multiple superficial intestinal erosions; perforation is rare.
Mild hypertension for days or weeks is common in the acute stage and
probably related to lesions of the vasoregulatory centers in the medulla
and especially to underventilation. In the later stages, because of immobilization, hypertension may occur along with hypercalcemia, nephrocalcinosis, and vascular lesions. Dimness of vision, headache, and a
lightheaded feeling associated with hypertension should be regarded as
premonitory of a frank convulsion. Cardiac irregularities are uncommon, but electrocardiographic abnormalities suggesting myocarditis
occur with some frequency. Acute pulmonary edema occurs occasionally, particularly in patients with arterial hypertension. Hypercalcemia
occurs because of skeletal decalcification that begins soon after immobilization and results in hypercalciuria, which in turn predisposes the
patient to urinary calculi, especially when urinary stasis and infection
are present. High fluid intake is the only effective prophylactic measure.

PROGNOSIS

The outcome of inapparent, abortive poliomyelitis and aseptic meningitis syndromes is uniformly good, with death being exceedingly rare
and with no long-­term sequelae. The outcome of paralytic disease is
determined primarily by degree and severity of CNS involvement. In
severe bulbar poliomyelitis, the mortality rate may be as high as 60%,
whereas in less-­severe bulbar involvement and/or spinal poliomyelitis,
the mortality rate varies from 5–10%, death generally occurring from
causes other than the poliovirus infection.
Maximum paralysis usually occurs 2-­3 days after the onset of the
paralytic phase of the illness, with stabilization followed by gradual
return of muscle function. The recovery phase usually lasts about
6 months, beyond which persisting paralysis is permanent. In general, paralysis is more likely to develop in male children and female
adults. Mortality and the degree of disability are greater after the age
of puberty. Pregnancy is associated with an increased risk for paralytic disease. Tonsillectomy and intramuscular injections may enhance
the risk for acquisition of bulbar and localized disease, respectively.
Increased physical activity, exercise, and fatigue during the early phase
of illness have been cited as factors leading to a higher risk for paralytic
disease. Finally, it has been clearly demonstrated that type 1 poliovirus
has the greatest propensity for natural poliomyelitis and type 3 poliovirus has a predilection for producing VAPP.

Postpolio Syndrome

After an interval of 30-­40 years, as many as 30–40% of persons who
survived paralytic poliomyelitis in childhood may experience muscle
pain and exacerbation of existing weakness or development of new
weakness or paralysis. This entity, referred to as postpolio syndrome,
has been reported only in persons who were infected in the era of
wild-­type poliovirus circulation. Risk factors for postpolio syndrome
include increasing length of time since acute poliovirus infection, presence of permanent residual impairment after recovery from acute illness, and female sex.

PREVENTION

Vaccination is the only effective method of preventing poliomyelitis.
Hygienic measures help to limit the spread of the infection among

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1978 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

cVDPV2 cases (latest onset)
1
22-Mar-23
Côte d’Ivoire
311 5-Mar-23
DR Congo
10 27-Feb-23
CAR
13 23-Feb-23
Benin
4
20-Feb-23
Indonesia
1
13-Feb-23
Israel
43 13-Feb-23
Chad
4
12-Jan-23
Somalia
22 1-Jan-23
Nigeria
Niger
13 25-Dec-22
Cameroon
3
22-Dec-22
Yemen
61 14-Dec-22
Algeria
2
13-Dec-22
Burundi
1
24-Nov-22
Sudan
1
31-Oct-22
Mali
2
26-Oct-22
Togo
1
30-Sep-22
Ghana
3
14-Sep-22
USA
1
20-Jun-22
WPV1 cases (latest onset)
Pakistan
17 20-Feb-23
Afghanistan
29-Aug-22
1
Mozambique
7
10-Aug-22
cVDPV1 cases (latest onset)
DR Congo
153 6-Mar-23
Madagascar
18 1-Mar-23
Mozambique
24 27-Feb-23
Malawi
4
1-Dec-22
Congo
1
15-Oct-22
Endemic country (WPV1)

Fig. 296.1 Global WPV1 and cVDPV cases, previous 12 months. Excludes viruses detected from environmental surveillance. Onset of paralysis:

3 May 2022 to 2 May 2023; data in WHO HQ as of 2 May 2023. (Courtesy Global Polio Eradication Initiative. https://polioeradication.org/polio-­
today/polio-­now/. Accessed Jan 26, 2022.)

young children, but immunization is necessary to control transmission among all age groups. Both the inactivated polio vaccine (IPV),
which is currently produced using better methods than those for the
original vaccine and is sometimes referred to as enhanced IPV, and
the live-­attenuated OPV have established efficacy in preventing poliovirus infection and paralytic poliomyelitis. Both vaccines induce production of antibodies against the three strains of poliovirus. IPV elicits
higher serum IgG antibody titers, but the OPV also induces significantly greater mucosal IgA immunity in the oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract, which limits replication of the wild poliovirus at these
sites. Transmission of wild poliovirus by fecal spread is limited in OPV
recipients. The immunogenicity of IPV is not affected by the presence
of maternal antibodies, and IPV has no adverse effects. Live vaccine
may undergo reversion to neurovirulence as it multiplies in the human
intestinal tract and may cause VAPP in vaccinees or in their contacts.
The overall risk for recipients varies from 1 case per 750,000 immunized infants in the United States to 1 in 143,000 immunized infants
in India. The risk for paralysis in the B-­cell–immunodeficient recipient may be as much as 6,800 times that in normal persons. HIV infection has not been found to result in long-­term excretion of virus. As of
January 2000, the IPV-­only schedule is recommended for routine polio
vaccination in the United States. All children should receive four doses
of IPV, at 2 months, 4 months, 6-­18 months, and 4-­6 years of age. Five
combination vaccines (DTaP-­HepB-­IPV-­Pediarix; DTaP-­IPV/Hib—
Pentacel; DTaP-­IPV-­Hib-­HepB—Vaxelis, and DTaP-­IPV—Kinrix and
Quadracel) and a single antigen IPV (IPOL; distributed in 10 dose
vials) are approved in the United States with different schedules and
ages for use. Given the rapid spread of cVPDV (Fig. 296.1) in many
countries of the world, the reader is advised to refer to CDC or WHO
websites to determine the necessity for accelerated vaccination of children going to identified countries. IPV can be given at a minimum of
6, 10, or 14 weeks of age with a booster at 6 months.
In 1988 the World Health Assembly resolved to eradicate poliomyelitis globally by 2000, and remarkable progress had been made toward
reaching this target. To achieve this goal, the WHO used four basic

strategies: routine immunization, National Immunization Days, acute
flaccid paralysis surveillance, and mop-­up immunization. This strategy
has resulted in a >99% decline in poliomyelitis cases; in early 2002,
there were only 10 countries in the world endemic for poliomyelitis. In
2012 there were the fewest cases of poliomyelitis ever and the virus was
endemic in only three countries (Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Nigeria).
The last case of WPV 3 infection occurred in Nigeria in November
2012, leading to certification of global WPV3 eradication. The last case
of wild poliovirus type 2 infection occurred in India in October 1999.
Polioviruses remain endemic in Pakistan and Afghanistan. The rejection of poliovirus vaccine initiatives and campaign quality in security-­
compromised areas in parts of these countries are still the main factors
interfering with efforts to eradicate polio.
In May 2013 the WHO assembly recommended the development
of a Polio Eradication and Endgame Strategic Plan. This plan included
the replacement of trivalent OPV (tOPV) with bivalent OPV (bOPV)
containing only Sabin types 1 and 3 in all countries by 2016 and the
introduction of initially one dose of IPV followed by the replacement
of bOPV with IPV in all countries of the world by 2019. As long as the
OPV is being used, there is the potential that vaccine-­derived poliovirus (VDPV) will acquire the neurovirulent phenotype and transmission characteristics of the wild-­type polioviruses. VDPV emerges from
the OPV because of continuous replication in immunodeficient persons (iVDPV) or by circulation in populations with low vaccine coverage (cVDPVs). The risk was highest with the type 2 strain. Since the
world switched from the use of tOPV to bOPV, tOPV is no longer used
globally in any routine or supplemental immunization activities.
Recommendations for international travelers to certain countries
were made by the WHO and endorsed by the CDC. Continuing spread
due to poor herd immunity and now international spread pose a significant threat to the eradication effort. The committee recommended
that for countries with WPV1, cVDPV1, or cVDPV2 with potential
risk of international spread, all residents and long-­term visitors (i.e.,
>4 weeks) of all ages receive a dose of bOPV or IPV between 4 weeks
and 12 months before travel to these countries. Such travelers should

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 297 u Nonpolio Enteroviruses
be provided with an International Certificate of Vaccination of Prophylaxis to record their polio vaccination and service proof of vaccination.
These countries have been advised to restrict at the point of departure
the international travel of any resident lacking documentation of full
vaccination, whether by air, sea, or land. For countries infected with
cVDPV2 with potential risk of international spread (see Fig. 296.1 and
WHO website), visitors should be encouraged to follow these recommendations (not mandated).
The WHO has mandated that infants in all countries still using
bOPV should receive a dose of IPV, to offer protection against polio
virus type 2. These efforts have been stymied because of the global
inability to produce IPV in a large enough volume to cover all the 128
million babies born annually in the world. This problem was a crisis
during the global synchronized introduction of bOPV, when several
countries (e.g., India) had to use two fractional doses of IPV (1/5 dose)
administered intradermally. To enhance scale-­up of IPV production in
countries such as India, Brazil, and China, IPV using Sabin strains of
poliovirus (sIPV) were developed in Japan and China. These mitigate
the stringent requirements for wild-­type poliovirus culture that are
normally required for IPV production. Other strategies include developing adjuvants for IPV (approved by the Danish Medicines Agency
in 2019) and other novel E.coli–based adjuvants that could potentially
lower the antigen quantities needed for each dose.
Given the ongoing spread of cVDPVs, alternative stable novel Sabin
vaccine strains that do not revert to neurovirulence (nOPVs) were
developed for all three strains (Bio Farma, Indonesia) and have been
shown to be immunogenic, stable, and safe.
In countries where bOPV is included in routine immunization, it
is best if it follows at least one dose of IPV or two doses of fractional
intradermal IPV.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 297

Nonpolio Enteroviruses
Kevin B. Messacar and Mark J. Abzug
The genus Enterovirus contains a large number of viruses spread via
the gastrointestinal and respiratory routes that produce a broad range
of illnesses in patients of all ages. Many of the manifestations predominantly affect infants and young children.

ETIOLOGY

Enteroviruses are nonenveloped, single-­
stranded, positive-­
sense
viruses in the Picornaviridae (small RNA virus) family, which also
includes the rhinoviruses, hepatitis A virus, and parechoviruses. The
original human enterovirus subgroups—polioviruses (see Chapter 296), coxsackieviruses, and echoviruses—were differentiated by
their replication patterns in tissue culture and animals (Table 297.1).
Enteroviruses have been reclassified on the basis of genetic similarity
into four species, human enteroviruses A-­D. Specific enterovirus types
are distinguished by antigenic and genetic sequence differences, with
enteroviruses discovered after 1970 classified by species and number
(e.g., enterovirus D68 and A71). Although more than 100 types have
been described, 10-­15 account for the majority of disease. No disease
is uniquely associated with any specific serotype, although certain
manifestations are associated with specific serotypes. The closely related
human parechoviruses can cause clinical presentations similar to those
associated with enteroviruses.

1979

Table 297.1  Classification of Human Enteroviruses
Family

Picornaviridae

Genus

Enterovirus

Subgroups*

Poliovirus serotypes 1-­3
Coxsackie A virus serotypes 1-­22, 24 (23
reclassified as echovirus 9)
Coxsackie B virus serotypes 1-­6
Echovirus serotypes 1-­9, 11-­27, 29-­33 (echoviruses
10 and 28 reclassified as nonenteroviruses;
echovirus 34 reclassified as a variant of coxsackie
A virus 24; echoviruses 22 and 23 reclassified
within the genus Parechovirus)
Numbered enterovirus serotypes (enterovirus 72
reclassified as hepatitis A virus)

*The human enteroviruses have been alternatively classified on the basis of nucleotide
and amino acid sequences into four species (human enteroviruses A-­D).

Epidemiology

Enterovirus infections are common, with a worldwide distribution.
In temperate climates, annual epidemic peaks occur in summer/fall,
although some transmission occurs year-­
round. Enteroviruses are
responsible for 33–65% of acute febrile illnesses and 55–65% of hospitalizations for suspected sepsis in infants during the summer and fall in the
United States. In tropical and semitropical areas, enteroviruses typically
circulate year-­round. In general, only a few serotypes circulate simultaneously. Infections by different serotypes can occur within the same season. Factors associated with increased incidence and/or severity include
young age, male sex, exposure to children, poor hygiene, overcrowding,
and low socioeconomic status. More than 25% of symptomatic infections occur in children younger than 1 year of age. Breastfeeding reduces
the risk for infection, likely via enterovirus-­specific antibodies.
Humans are the only known natural reservoir for human enteroviruses. Virus is primarily spread person to person, by the fecal-­oral and
respiratory routes, although types causing acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis may be spread via airborne transmission. Virus can be transmitted vertically prenatally or in the peripartum period or possibly via
breastfeeding. Enteroviruses can survive on environmental surfaces,
permitting transmission via fomites. Enteroviruses also can frequently
be isolated from water sources, sewage, and wet soil. Although contamination of drinking water, swimming pools and ponds, and hospital
water reservoirs may occasionally be responsible for transmission, such
contamination is often considered the result rather than the cause of
human infection. Transmission is common within families (≥50% risk
of spread to nonimmune household contacts), daycare centers, playgrounds, summer camps, orphanages, and hospital nurseries; severe
secondary infections may occur in nursery outbreaks. Transmission
risk is increased by diaper changing and decreased by handwashing.
Tickborne transmission has been suggested by some authors but is not
a predominant route of transmission.
Large enterovirus outbreaks have included meningitis epidemics
(echoviruses 4, 6, 9, 13, and 30 commonly); epidemics of hand-­foot-­
and-­mouth disease with severe central nervous system (CNS) and/
or cardiopulmonary disease caused by enterovirus A71 in Asia and
Australia; outbreaks of atypical, severe hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease
caused by coxsackievirus A6 in the United States and United Kingdom;
outbreaks of human enterovirus D68 respiratory illness associated
with acute flaccid myelitis in the Americas, Europe, and Asia; outbreaks of acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis caused by enterovirus D70,
coxsackievirus A24, and coxsackievirus A24 variant in tropical and
temperate regions; and community outbreaks of uveitis. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-­PCR) and genomic sequencing help identify outbreaks and demonstrate commonality of outbreak
strains, differences among epidemic strains and older prototype
strains, changes in circulating viral subgroups over time, cocirculation of multiple genetic lineages, co-­infections with different enterovirus serotypes, and associations between specific genogroups and/or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 297 u Nonpolio Enteroviruses
be provided with an International Certificate of Vaccination of Prophylaxis to record their polio vaccination and service proof of vaccination.
These countries have been advised to restrict at the point of departure
the international travel of any resident lacking documentation of full
vaccination, whether by air, sea, or land. For countries infected with
cVDPV2 with potential risk of international spread (see Fig. 296.1 and
WHO website), visitors should be encouraged to follow these recommendations (not mandated).
The WHO has mandated that infants in all countries still using
bOPV should receive a dose of IPV, to offer protection against polio
virus type 2. These efforts have been stymied because of the global
inability to produce IPV in a large enough volume to cover all the 128
million babies born annually in the world. This problem was a crisis
during the global synchronized introduction of bOPV, when several
countries (e.g., India) had to use two fractional doses of IPV (1/5 dose)
administered intradermally. To enhance scale-­up of IPV production in
countries such as India, Brazil, and China, IPV using Sabin strains of
poliovirus (sIPV) were developed in Japan and China. These mitigate
the stringent requirements for wild-­type poliovirus culture that are
normally required for IPV production. Other strategies include developing adjuvants for IPV (approved by the Danish Medicines Agency
in 2019) and other novel E.coli–based adjuvants that could potentially
lower the antigen quantities needed for each dose.
Given the ongoing spread of cVDPVs, alternative stable novel Sabin
vaccine strains that do not revert to neurovirulence (nOPVs) were
developed for all three strains (Bio Farma, Indonesia) and have been
shown to be immunogenic, stable, and safe.
In countries where bOPV is included in routine immunization, it
is best if it follows at least one dose of IPV or two doses of fractional
intradermal IPV.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 297

Nonpolio Enteroviruses
Kevin B. Messacar and Mark J. Abzug
The genus Enterovirus contains a large number of viruses spread via
the gastrointestinal and respiratory routes that produce a broad range
of illnesses in patients of all ages. Many of the manifestations predominantly affect infants and young children.

ETIOLOGY

Enteroviruses are nonenveloped, single-­
stranded, positive-­
sense
viruses in the Picornaviridae (small RNA virus) family, which also
includes the rhinoviruses, hepatitis A virus, and parechoviruses. The
original human enterovirus subgroups—polioviruses (see Chapter 296), coxsackieviruses, and echoviruses—were differentiated by
their replication patterns in tissue culture and animals (Table 297.1).
Enteroviruses have been reclassified on the basis of genetic similarity
into four species, human enteroviruses A-­D. Specific enterovirus types
are distinguished by antigenic and genetic sequence differences, with
enteroviruses discovered after 1970 classified by species and number
(e.g., enterovirus D68 and A71). Although more than 100 types have
been described, 10-­15 account for the majority of disease. No disease
is uniquely associated with any specific serotype, although certain
manifestations are associated with specific serotypes. The closely related
human parechoviruses can cause clinical presentations similar to those
associated with enteroviruses.

1979

Table 297.1  Classification of Human Enteroviruses
Family

Picornaviridae

Genus

Enterovirus

Subgroups*

Poliovirus serotypes 1-­3
Coxsackie A virus serotypes 1-­22, 24 (23
reclassified as echovirus 9)
Coxsackie B virus serotypes 1-­6
Echovirus serotypes 1-­9, 11-­27, 29-­33 (echoviruses
10 and 28 reclassified as nonenteroviruses;
echovirus 34 reclassified as a variant of coxsackie
A virus 24; echoviruses 22 and 23 reclassified
within the genus Parechovirus)
Numbered enterovirus serotypes (enterovirus 72
reclassified as hepatitis A virus)

*The human enteroviruses have been alternatively classified on the basis of nucleotide
and amino acid sequences into four species (human enteroviruses A-­D).

Epidemiology

Enterovirus infections are common, with a worldwide distribution.
In temperate climates, annual epidemic peaks occur in summer/fall,
although some transmission occurs year-­
round. Enteroviruses are
responsible for 33–65% of acute febrile illnesses and 55–65% of hospitalizations for suspected sepsis in infants during the summer and fall in the
United States. In tropical and semitropical areas, enteroviruses typically
circulate year-­round. In general, only a few serotypes circulate simultaneously. Infections by different serotypes can occur within the same season. Factors associated with increased incidence and/or severity include
young age, male sex, exposure to children, poor hygiene, overcrowding,
and low socioeconomic status. More than 25% of symptomatic infections occur in children younger than 1 year of age. Breastfeeding reduces
the risk for infection, likely via enterovirus-­specific antibodies.
Humans are the only known natural reservoir for human enteroviruses. Virus is primarily spread person to person, by the fecal-­oral and
respiratory routes, although types causing acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis may be spread via airborne transmission. Virus can be transmitted vertically prenatally or in the peripartum period or possibly via
breastfeeding. Enteroviruses can survive on environmental surfaces,
permitting transmission via fomites. Enteroviruses also can frequently
be isolated from water sources, sewage, and wet soil. Although contamination of drinking water, swimming pools and ponds, and hospital
water reservoirs may occasionally be responsible for transmission, such
contamination is often considered the result rather than the cause of
human infection. Transmission is common within families (≥50% risk
of spread to nonimmune household contacts), daycare centers, playgrounds, summer camps, orphanages, and hospital nurseries; severe
secondary infections may occur in nursery outbreaks. Transmission
risk is increased by diaper changing and decreased by handwashing.
Tickborne transmission has been suggested by some authors but is not
a predominant route of transmission.
Large enterovirus outbreaks have included meningitis epidemics
(echoviruses 4, 6, 9, 13, and 30 commonly); epidemics of hand-­foot-­
and-­mouth disease with severe central nervous system (CNS) and/
or cardiopulmonary disease caused by enterovirus A71 in Asia and
Australia; outbreaks of atypical, severe hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease
caused by coxsackievirus A6 in the United States and United Kingdom;
outbreaks of human enterovirus D68 respiratory illness associated
with acute flaccid myelitis in the Americas, Europe, and Asia; outbreaks of acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis caused by enterovirus D70,
coxsackievirus A24, and coxsackievirus A24 variant in tropical and
temperate regions; and community outbreaks of uveitis. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-­PCR) and genomic sequencing help identify outbreaks and demonstrate commonality of outbreak
strains, differences among epidemic strains and older prototype
strains, changes in circulating viral subgroups over time, cocirculation of multiple genetic lineages, co-­infections with different enterovirus serotypes, and associations between specific genogroups and/or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1980 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
genetic substitutions and epidemiologic and clinical characteristics.
Genetic analyses have demonstrated recombination and genetic drift
that lead to evolutionary changes in genomic sequence and antigenicity
and extensive genetic diversity. For example, emergence of new subgenotypes and genetic lineages of enterovirus A71 may contribute to
sequential outbreaks and increases in circulation.
The incubation period is typically 3-­6 days, except for a 1-­3 day incubation period for acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis. Symptomatic and
asymptomatic infected children typically shed cultivable virus from the
respiratory tract for <1-­3 weeks. In contrast, fecal shedding of cultivatable virus continues for as long as 7-­11 weeks for acid stabile strains
(e.g., poliovirus, enterovirus A71). Enterovirus RNA can be shed from
mucosal sites for comparable and possibly longer periods.

PATHOGENESIS

Cell surface macromolecules, including poliovirus receptor, integrin very-­late-­activation antigen (VLA)-­2, decay-­accelerating factor/
complement regulatory protein (DAF/CD55), intercellular adhesion
molecule-­1 (ICAM-­1), ICAM-­5, and coxsackievirus-­adenovirus receptor, serve as viral receptors. In addition, respiratory epithelial cell sialic
acids serve as receptors for enterovirus D68, enterovirus D70, and
coxsackievirus A24 variants, and human scavenger receptor class B2
(SCARB2), human P-­selectin glycoprotein ligand-­1, and DC-­SIGN
are receptors for enterovirus A71. After virus attaches to a cell surface
receptor, a conformational change in surface capsid proteins expels a
hydrophobic pocket factor, facilitating penetration and uncoating with
release of viral RNA in the cytoplasm. Translation of the positive-­sense
RNA produces a polyprotein that undergoes cleavage by proteases
encoded in the polyprotein. Several proteins resulting from cleavage
of the polyprotein guide synthesis of negative-­sense RNA that serves
as a template for replication of new positive-­sense RNA. The genome is
approximately 7,500 nucleotides long and includes a highly conserved
5′ noncoding region important for replication efficiency and a highly
conserved 3′ polyA region; these regions flank a continuous region
encoding viral proteins. The 5′ end is covalently linked to a small
viral protein (VPg) necessary for initiation of RNA synthesis. There is
significant variation within genomic regions encoding the structural
proteins, leading to variability in antigenicity. Replication is followed
by further cleavage of proteins and assembly into 30-­nm icosahedral
virions. Of the four structural proteins (VP1-­VP4) in the capsid, VP1 is
the most important determinant of serotype specificity. Additional regulatory proteins such as an RNA-­dependent RNA polymerase and proteases are also present in the virion. Approximately 104-­105 virions are
released from an infected cell by lysis within 5-­10 hours of infection.
Following oral or respiratory acquisition, initial replication for most
enteroviruses occurs in the pharynx and intestine, possibly within
mucosal M cells. The acid stability of most enteroviruses favors survival
in the gastrointestinal tract. Two or more enteroviruses may invade and
replicate in the gastrointestinal tract simultaneously, but interference
due to replication of one type often hinders growth of the heterologous type. Initial replication of most enteroviruses in the pharynx and
intestine is followed within days by multiplication in lymphoid tissue,
such as tonsils, Peyer patches, and regional lymph nodes. A primary,
transient viremia (minor viremia) results in spread to distant parts
of the reticuloendothelial system, including the liver, spleen, bone
marrow, and distant lymph nodes. Host immune responses may limit
replication and progression beyond the reticuloendothelial system,
resulting in subclinical infection. Clinical infection occurs if replication proceeds in the reticuloendothelial system and virus spreads via a
secondary, sustained viremia (major viremia) to target organs such as
the CNS, heart, and skin. Tropism to target organs is determined in part
by the infecting serotype. Some enteroviruses, such as enterovirus D68,
can be acid-­labile and bind sialic acid receptors on respiratory epithelial cells in the upper and lower respiratory tract and primarily produce
respiratory illness. Cytokine responses may contribute to development
of respiratory disease by these viruses. Enterovirus D68 RNA has also
been transiently detected by PCR in the blood of young children with
enterovirus D68 pneumonia when drawn soon after illness onset.

Enteroviruses can damage a wide variety of organs and systems,
including the CNS, heart, liver, lungs, pancreas, kidneys, muscle, and
skin. Damage is mediated by necrosis and the inflammatory response.
CNS infections are often associated with pleocytosis in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), composed of macrophages and activated T lymphocytes, and a mixed meningeal inflammatory response. Parenchymal
involvement may affect the cerebral white and gray matter, cerebellum,
basal ganglia, brainstem, and spinal cord with perivascular and parenchymal mixed or lymphocytic inflammation, gliosis, cellular degeneration, and neuronophagocytosis. Encephalitis during enterovirus
A71 epidemics has been characterized by severe involvement of the
brainstem, spinal cord gray matter, hypothalamus, and subthalamic
and dentate nuclei, and can be complicated by pulmonary edema, pulmonary hemorrhage, and/or interstitial pneumonitis, presumed secondary to brainstem damage; sympathetic hyperactivity; myoclonus;
ataxia; autonomic dysfunction; and CNS and systemic inflammatory
responses (including cytokine and chemokine overexpression). Immunologic cross-­reactivity with brain tissue has been postulated as one
mechanism responsible for neurologic damage and sequelae following
enterovirus A71 infection.
Enterovirus myocarditis is characterized by perivascular and interstitial mixed inflammatory infiltrates and myocyte damage, possibly mediated by viral cytolytic (e.g., cleavage of dystrophin or serum
response factor) and innate and adaptive immune-­mediated mechanisms. Chronic inflammation may persist after viral clearance.
The potential for enteroviruses to cause persistent infection is controversial. Persistent infection in dilated cardiomyopathy and in myocardial infarction has been suggested, but enterovirus RNA sequences and/
or antigens have been demonstrated in cardiac tissues in some, but not
other, series. Infections with enteroviruses such as coxsackievirus B4,
during gestation or subsequently, have been implicated as a trigger for
development of β-­cell autoantibodies and/or type 1 diabetes in genetically susceptible hosts. Persistent infection in the pancreas, intestine, or
peripheral blood mononuclear cells, with downstream immunomodulatory effects, has been suggested, but data are inconsistent. Similarly, persistent infection has been implicated in a variety of conditions, including
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Sjögren syndrome, chronic fatigue syndrome, and gastrointestinal tumors. Early enterovirus infection was
associated with reduced risk of developing lymphocytic and myeloid
leukemia in a large retrospective Taiwanese cohort study.
Severe neonatal infections can produce hepatic necrosis, hemorrhage, inflammation, endotheliitis, and venoocclusive disease; myocardial mixed inflammatory infiltrates, edema, and necrosis; meningeal
and brain inflammation, hemorrhage, gliosis, necrosis, and white matter damage; inflammation, hemorrhage, thrombosis, and necrosis in
the lungs, pancreas, and adrenal glands; and disseminated intravascular coagulation. In utero infections are characterized by placentitis and
infection of multiple fetal organs such as heart, lung, and brain.
Development of type-­specific neutralizing antibodies appears to be
the most important immune defense, mediating prevention against
and recovery from infection. Immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibodies, followed by long-­lasting IgA and IgG antibodies, and secretory IgA, mediating mucosal immunity, are produced. Although local reinfection of
the gastrointestinal tract can occur, replication is usually limited and
not associated with disease. In vitro and animal experiments suggest
that heterotypic antibody may enhance disease caused by a different
serotype. Evidence also suggests that subneutralizing concentrations of
serotype-­specific antibody may lead to antibody-­dependent enhancement of enterovirus A71 infection. Innate and cellular defenses (macrophages and cytotoxic T lymphocytes) may play important roles in
recovery from infection. Altered cellular responses to enterovirus A71,
including T lymphocyte and natural killer cell depletion, have been
associated with severe meningoencephalitis and pulmonary edema.
Hypogammaglobulinemia and agammaglobulinemia predispose to
severe, often chronic enterovirus infections. Similarly, perinatally infected
neonates lacking maternal type-­specific antibody to the infecting virus
are at risk for severe disease. Enterovirus A71 disease increases after 6
months of age, when maternal serotype-­specific antibody levels have

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 297 u Nonpolio Enteroviruses

A

B

1981

C

Fig. 297.1 A, Oval blisters of the palms in a child with hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease (coxsackievirus A16 infection). B, Oval blisters on the feet of a
child with hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease. C, Erosion of the tongue in a child with hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli
JG. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002:109.)

declined. Other risk factors for significant illness include young age,
immune suppression (posttransplantation and lymphoid malignancy),
and, according to animal models and/or epidemiologic observations,
exercise, cold exposure, malnutrition, and pregnancy. Specific human
leukocyte antigen genes, immune response gene (e.g., interleukin-­10
and interferon-­γ) polymorphisms, and low vitamin A levels have been
linked to enterovirus A71 susceptibility and severe disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Manifestations are protean, ranging from asymptomatic infection to
undifferentiated febrile or respiratory illnesses, often in association
with exanthems and/or enanthems, to, less frequently, severe diseases
such as meningoencephalitis, myocarditis, and neonatal sepsis. A
majority of individuals are asymptomatic or have very mild illness, yet
may serve as important sources for spread of infection. Symptomatic
disease is generally more common in young children.

Nonspecific Febrile Illness

Nonspecific febrile illnesses are the most common symptomatic manifestations, especially in infants and young children. These are difficult
to differentiate clinically from serious infections such as urinary tract
infection, bacteremia, and bacterial meningitis, often necessitating
hospitalization with diagnostic testing and presumptive antibiotic
therapy for suspected bacterial infection in young infants.
Illness usually begins abruptly with fever of 38.5–40°C (101.3–
104°F), malaise, and irritability. Associated symptoms may include
lethargy, anorexia, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort,
rash, sore throat, and respiratory symptoms. Older children may have
headaches and myalgias. Findings are generally nonspecific and may
include mild conjunctivitis, pharyngeal injection, and cervical lymphadenopathy. Meningitis may be present, but specific clinical features
such as meningeal findings or bulging anterior fontanelle distinguishing those with meningitis are often lacking in infants. Fever lasts a mean
of 3 days and occasionally is biphasic. Duration of illness is usually 4-­7
days but can range from 1 day to >1 week. White blood cell (WBC)
count, inflammatory biomarkers (e.g., C-­reactive protein, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate), and results of routine laboratory tests are generally normal, although transient neutropenia can be seen. Concomitant
enterovirus and bacterial infection is rare but has been observed in a
small number of infants, most commonly with urinary tract infections.
Enterovirus illnesses may be associated with a wide variety of skin
manifestations, including macular, maculopapular, urticarial, vesicular, and petechial eruptions. Rare cases of idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura have been reported. Enteroviruses have also been implicated
in cases of pityriasis rosea. In general, the frequency of cutaneous manifestations is inversely related to age. Serotypes commonly associated
with rashes are echoviruses 9, 11, 16, and 25; coxsackie A viruses 2, 4,
6, 9, and 16; coxsackie B viruses 3-­5; and enterovirus A71. Virus can
occasionally be recovered from vesicular skin lesions.

Hand-­Foot-­and-­Mouth Disease

Hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease, one of the more distinctive rash syndromes, is most frequently caused by coxsackievirus A16, sometimes in
large outbreaks, and can also be caused by enterovirus A71; coxsackie A
viruses 5, 6, 7, 9, and 10; coxsackie B viruses 2 and 5; and some echoviruses. It is usually a mild illness, with or without low-­grade fever. When
the mouth is involved, the oropharynx is inflamed and often contains
scattered, painful vesicles on the tongue, buccal mucosa, posterior pharynx, palate, gingiva, and/or lips (Fig. 297.1). These lesions may ulcerate,
leaving 4-­8 mm shallow lesions with surrounding erythema. Maculopapular, vesicular, and/or pustular lesions may occur on the hands and
fingers, feet, and buttocks and groin (see Figs. 297.1 and 297.2). Skin
lesions occur more commonly on the hands than feet and are more common on dorsal surfaces, but frequently also affect palms and soles. Hand
and foot lesions are usually tender, 3-­7–mm vesicles that resolve in about
1 week. Buttock lesions do not usually progress to vesiculation. Disseminated vesicular rashes described as eczema coxsackium may complicate
preexisting eczema. Coxsackievirus A6, in particular, is responsible for
relatively severe, atypical hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease (and herpangina) affecting adults and children that is characterized by fever, generalized rash (face, proximal extremities, and trunk, in addition to hands,
feet, and buttocks), pain, dehydration, and desquamation of palms and
soles (see Fig. 297.2). Onychomadesis (nail shedding) has been observed
following coxsackievirus A6 and other coxsackievirus infections. Hand-­
foot-­and-­mouth disease caused by enterovirus A71 can be associated
with neurologic and cardiopulmonary involvement, especially in young
children (see “Neurologic Manifestations,” later). Hand-­foot-­and-­mouth
disease caused by coxsackievirus A16 also can occasionally be associated
with complications such as encephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis, myocarditis, pericarditis, and shock.

Herpangina

Herpangina is characterized by sudden onset of fever, sore throat,
dysphagia, and painful lesions in the posterior pharynx. Temperatures range from normal to 41°C (105.8°F); fever tends to be higher in
younger patients. Headache and backache may occur in older children,
and vomiting and abdominal pain occur in 25% of cases. Characteristic
lesions, present on the anterior tonsillar pillars, soft palate, uvula, tonsils, posterior pharyngeal wall, and, occasionally, the posterior buccal
surfaces, are discrete 1-­2–mm vesicles and ulcers that enlarge over 2-­3
days to 3-­4 mm and are surrounded by erythematous rings that vary in
size up to 10 mm. The number of lesions can range from 1 to >15 but
is most commonly around 5. The remainder of the pharynx appears
normal or minimally erythematous. Most cases are mild and have
no complications. However, dehydration as a result of decreased oral
intake may occur with more severe illness; meningitis can also sometimes occur. Fever generally lasts 1-­4 days, and resolution of symptoms
occurs in 3-­7 days. A variety of enteroviruses cause herpangina, including enterovirus A71, but coxsackie A viruses are implicated most often.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1982 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
and marked by high contagiousness, with spread mainly via eye-­hand-­
fomite-­eye transmission. School-­age children, teenagers, and adults
20-­50 years of age have the highest attack rates. Sudden onset of severe
eye pain is associated with photophobia, blurred vision, lacrimation, conjunctival erythema and congestion, lid edema, preauricular
lymphadenopathy, and, in some cases, subconjunctival hemorrhages
and superficial punctate keratitis. Subconjunctival hemorrhage is the
hallmark of enterovirus D70 cases (>70%) but is more rare with coxsackievirus infections. Eye discharge is initially serous but becomes
mucopurulent with secondary bacterial infection. Systemic symptoms,
including fever and headache, occur in up to 20% of cases; manifestations suggestive of pharyngoconjunctival fever occasionally occur.
Recovery is usually complete within 1-­
2 weeks. Polyradiculoneuropathy or acute flaccid paralysis following enterovirus D70 infection
occurs occasionally. Other enteroviruses have occasionally been implicated as causes of keratoconjunctivitis.
Epidemic and sporadic uveitis in infants caused by subtypes of
enteroviruses 11 and 19 can be associated with severe complications,
including destruction of the iris, cataracts, and glaucoma. Enteroviruses have been implicated in cases of chorioretinitis, uveoretinitis,
optic neuritis, and unilateral acute idiopathic maculopathy.

Myocarditis and Pericarditis
Fig. 297.2 Atypical hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease. Vesiculobullous
rash on the right buttock and posterior thigh. (From Waldman A, Thomas L, Thacker S, et al. Vesiculobullous eruption as an atypical hand, foot,
and mouth presentation. J Pediatr. 2016;179:273. Fig. B.)

Respiratory Manifestations

Symptoms such as sore throat and coryza frequently accompany and
sometimes dominate enterovirus illnesses. Other respiratory findings
may include wheezing, exacerbation of asthma, apnea, pneumonia,
otitis media, bronchiolitis, croup, parotitis, and pharyngotonsillitis,
which may occasionally be exudative. Lower respiratory tract infection may be significant in immunocompromised patients. Clusters and
outbreaks of cases of severe respiratory disease, including pneumonia
and wheezing (both in children with a history of asthma and those
unaffected by asthma), have been increasingly recognized in association with multiple lineages of enterovirus D68.
Pleurodynia (Bornholm disease), caused most frequently by coxsackie B viruses 3, 5, 1, and 2 and echoviruses 1 and 6, is an epidemic
or sporadic illness characterized by paroxysmal thoracic pain, as a
result of myositis involving chest and abdominal wall muscles and,
possibly, pleural inflammation. In epidemics, which occur every 10-­20
years, children and adults are affected, but most cases occur in persons younger than age 30 years. Malaise, myalgias, and headache are
followed by sudden onset of fever and spasmodic, pleuritic pain in
the chest or upper abdomen aggravated by coughing, sneezing, deep
breathing, or other movement. During spasms, which last from a few
minutes to several hours, pain may be severe, and respirations are usually rapid, shallow, and grunting, suggesting pneumonia or pleural
inflammation. A pleural friction rub is noted during pain episodes in
<10% of patients. Chest radiographs are generally normal but can demonstrate pulmonary infiltrates or pleural effusions. Pain localized to
the abdomen may suggest colic, intestinal obstruction, appendicitis, or
peritonitis. Pain usually subsides within 3-­6 days but may persist for up
to weeks. Symptoms may occur in a biphasic or, rarely, recurrent pattern, with less prominent fever during recurrences. Pleurodynia may
be associated with meningitis, orchitis, myocarditis, or pericarditis.
Life-­threatening noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, hemorrhage,
and/or interstitial pneumonitis may occur in patients with enterovirus
A71 brainstem encephalitis.

Ocular Manifestations

Epidemics of acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, primarily caused by
enterovirus D70 and coxsackievirus A24/A24 variant, are explosive

Enteroviruses account for approximately 25–35% of cases of myocarditis and pericarditis of proven etiology (see Chapters 488 and 489). Coxsackie B viruses are most commonly implicated, although coxsackie
A viruses and echoviruses also may be causative. Adolescents and
young adults (especially physically active males) are disproportionately
affected. Myopericarditis may be the dominant feature, or it may be one
manifestation of disseminated disease, as in neonates. Disease ranges
from relatively mild to severe. Upper respiratory tract symptoms frequently precede fatigue, dyspnea, chest pain, congestive heart failure,
and dysrhythmias. Presentations may mimic myocardial infarction;
sudden death may also occur (including apparent sudden infant death
syndrome). A pericardial friction rub indicates pericardial involvement. Chest radiography often demonstrates cardiac enlargement,
and echocardiography may confirm ventricular dilation, reduced contractility, and/or pericardial effusion. Electrocardiography frequently
reveals ST segment, T wave, and/or rhythm abnormalities, and serum
myocardial enzyme concentrations are often elevated. The acute
mortality of enterovirus myocarditis is 0–4%. Recovery is complete
without residual disability in the majority of patients. Occasionally,
chronic cardiomyopathy, inflammatory ventricular microaneurysms,
or constrictive pericarditis may result. The role of persistent infection
in chronic dilated cardiomyopathy is controversial. Enteroviruses have
also been implicated in late adverse cardiac events following heart
transplantation and in acute cardiac events such as myocardial infarction, endocarditis, and peripartum cardiomyopathy. Cardiopulmonary
dysfunction observed in enterovirus A71 epidemics most commonly
occurs without evidence of myocarditis and may be of neurogenic origin; however, true myocarditis has also been described.

Gastrointestinal and Genitourinary Manifestations

Gastrointestinal symptoms such as emesis (especially with meningitis),
diarrhea (rarely severe), and abdominal pain are frequent but generally
not dominant. Diarrhea, hematochezia, pneumatosis intestinalis, and
necrotizing enterocolitis have occurred in premature infants during
nursery outbreaks. Enterovirus infection has been implicated in acute
and chronic gastritis, intussusception, chronic intestinal inflammation in hypogammaglobulinemic patients, sporadic hepatitis in normal children, severe hepatitis in neonates, and pancreatitis, which may
result in transient exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Coxsackie B viruses are second only to mumps as causes of orchitis, most commonly presenting in adolescents. The illness is frequently biphasic; fever and pleurodynia or meningitis are followed
approximately 2 weeks later by orchitis, often with epididymitis.
Enteroviruses have also been implicated in cases of nephritis and IgA
nephropathy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 297 u Nonpolio Enteroviruses
Neurologic Manifestations

Enteroviruses are the most common cause of viral meningitis in
mumps-­immunized populations, accounting for up to 90% or more
of cases in which a cause is identified. Meningitis is particularly common in infants, especially in those younger than 3 months of age, often
during community epidemics. Frequently implicated serotypes include
coxsackie B viruses 2-­5; echoviruses 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 16, and 30; and
enteroviruses D70 and A71. Most cases in infants and young children
are mild and lack specific meningeal signs, whereas nuchal rigidity is
apparent in more than half of children older than 1-­2 years of age. Fever
is present in 50–100% and may be accompanied by irritability, malaise,
headache, photophobia, nausea, emesis, anorexia, lethargy, hypotonia,
rash, cough, rhinorrhea, pharyngitis, diarrhea, and/or myalgia. Some
cases are biphasic, with fever and nonspecific symptoms lasting a few
days and followed by return of fever with meningeal signs several days
later. Fever usually resolves in 3-­5 days, and other symptoms in infants
and young children usually resolve within 1 week. In adults, symptoms
tend to be more severe and of longer duration. CSF findings include
pleocytosis (generally <500 but occasionally as high as 1,000-­8,000
WBCs/μL; often predominantly polymorphonuclear cells in the first
48 hours before becoming mostly mononuclear); normal or slightly
low glucose content (10% <40 mg/dL); and normal or mildly increased
protein content (generally <100 mg/dL). CSF parameters are normal
in up to half of young infants despite detection of enterovirus in CSF
and may also be normal in older children early after illness onset. Acute
complications occur in approximately 10% of young children, including simple and complex seizures, obtundation, increased intracranial
pressure, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion,
ventriculitis, transient cerebral arteriopathy, and coma. The long-­term
prognosis for most children, even in those with acute complications,
is good.
Enteroviruses are also responsible for ≥10–20% of cases of encephalitis with an identified cause. Frequently implicated serotypes include
echoviruses 3, 4, 6, 9, and 11; coxsackie B viruses 2, 4, and 5; coxsackie
A virus 9; and enterovirus A71. After initial nonspecific symptoms,
there is progression to encephalopathy characterized by confusion,
weakness, lethargy, and/or irritability. Symptoms are most commonly
generalized, although focal findings, including focal motor seizures,
hemichorea, acute cerebellar ataxia, aphasia, extrapyramidal symptoms, and/or focal imaging abnormalities, may occur. Meningeal signs
and CSF indices similar to those of enteroviral meningitis are commonly present, leading to characterization of most cases as meningoencephalitis. Severity ranges from mild alteration in mental status to
coma and decerebrate status. Long-­term sequelae, including epilepsy,
weakness, cranial nerve palsy, spasticity, psychomotor retardation, and
hearing loss, or death may follow severe disease. Persistent or recurrent
cases have been observed rarely.
Neurologic manifestations have been prominent in epidemics in
Asia and Australia of enterovirus A71, and, to a lesser extent, coxsackievirus A16 disease. Many affected children have had hand-­foot-­
and-­mouth disease, some have had herpangina, and others have had
no mucocutaneous manifestations. Neurologic syndromes in a fraction of children have included meningitis, meningoencephalomyelitis, acute flaccid paralysis, Guillain-­Barré syndrome, transverse
myelitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, cerebellar ataxia,
opsoclonus-­
myoclonus syndrome, benign intracranial hypertension, and brainstem encephalitis (rhombencephalitis involving the
midbrain, pons, and medulla). Enterovirus A71 rhombencephalitis is
characterized by altered consciousness, myoclonus, vomiting, ataxia,
nystagmus, tremor, cranial nerve abnormalities, autonomic dysfunction, and MRI demonstrating lesions in the brainstem, thalamus,
and cerebellum. Although the disease has been mild and reversible
in some children, others have had rapid progression to noncardiogenic (presumed neurogenic) pulmonary edema and hemorrhage,
cardiopulmonary failure, shock, and coma. High mortality rates have
been reported in children younger than 5 years of age, especially in
those younger than 1 year of age. Deficits such as central hypoventilation, bulbar dysfunction, neurodevelopmental delay, cerebellar
defects, attention deficit/hyperactivity–related symptoms, persistent

1983

limb weakness, and muscle atrophy have been observed among survivors, especially those who experienced cardiopulmonary failure or
acute flaccid paralysis during their acute illness. Although the most
severe cases have been associated with enterovirus A71, similar clinical pictures have been produced by other enterovirus serotypes (e.g.,
coxsackieviruses A16 and B5, echovirus 7).
Patients with antibody or combined immunodeficiencies (including human immunodeficiency virus infection, acute lymphocytic leukemia, and transplantation) and patients receiving anti-­CD20 antibody
therapy are at risk for acute or, more commonly, chronic enterovirus
meningoencephalitis. The latter is characterized by persistent CSF
abnormalities, viral detection in CSF or brain tissue for years, and
recurrent encephalitis and/or progressive neurologic deterioration,
including insidious intellectual or personality deterioration, altered
mental status, seizures, motor weakness, and increased intracranial
pressure. Although disease may wax and wane, deficits generally
become progressive and ultimately are frequently fatal or lead to long-­
term sequelae. A dermatomyositis-­like syndrome, hepatitis, arthritis,
myocarditis, or disseminated infection may also occur. Chronic enterovirus meningoencephalitis has become less common with prophylactic
high-­dose intravenous immunoglobulin replacement in agammaglobulinemic patients.
A variety of nonpoliovirus enteroviruses, including enteroviruses
D68, D70, A71, coxsackie A viruses 7 and 24, coxsackie B viruses, and
several echoviruses, have been associated with acute flaccid paralysis with motor weakness as a result of spinal cord anterior horn cell
involvement. Acute flaccid myelitis is used to designate the clinical
syndrome of acute flaccid limb weakness with longitudinal MRI abnormalities in the spinal cord gray matter. Neurologic abnormalities are
commonly preceded by a febrile respiratory or gastrointestinal prodromal illness around 1 week before onset. Limb involvement tends to be
asymmetric and varies from one to all four limbs, with severity ranging
from mild weakness to complete paralysis. Cranial nerve dysfunction,
including bulbar paralysis, and respiratory failure requiring ventilator support, similar to poliovirus poliomyelitis, have been described
in acute flaccid myelitis cases associated with enterovirus D68 and
enterovirus A71. Sensory involvement, encephalopathy, seizures, and
supratentorial imaging changes are uncommon with enterovirus D68
infection. Functional improvements may be seen over time, but muscle
atrophy with limb weakness and some degree of disability persist in
the vast majority of cases. A proportion of children with acute flaccid myelitis will have a need for long-­term tracheostomy, ventilation,
and enteral feeding tubes as a result of persistent bulbar or respiratory
paralysis, and scoliosis requiring spinal fusion, limb deformity requiring orthotics and assistive devices, and low bone density predisposing to fractures are common. Nerve transfer surgical procedures that
involve splitting and moving functioning nerves to completely denervated muscles have been used to improve functional outcomes in select
cases.
Other neurologic syndromes include cerebellar ataxia; transverse
myelitis; Guillain-­Barré syndrome (including Miller Fisher variant)
and axonal polyneuropathy; acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; peripheral neuritis; optic neuritis; sudden hearing loss, tinnitus,
and inner ear disorders such as vestibular neuritis; and other cranial
neuropathies.

Myositis and Arthritis

Although myalgia is common, direct evidence of muscle involvement,
including rhabdomyolysis, muscle swelling, focal myositis, and polymyositis, has uncommonly been reported. A dermatomyositis-­like syndrome and arthritis can be seen in enterovirus-­infected patients with
hypogammaglobulinemia. Enteroviruses are a rare cause of arthritis in
normal hosts.

Neonatal Infections

Neonatal infections are relatively common, with a disease incidence
comparable to or greater than that of symptomatic neonatal herpes
simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and group B streptococcus infections. Infection frequently is caused by coxsackie B viruses 2-­5 and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1984 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
echoviruses 6, 9, 11, and 19, although many serotypes have been implicated, including coxsackie B virus 1 and echovirus 30 in more recent
years. Enteroviruses may be acquired vertically before, during, or after
delivery, including possibly via breast milk; horizontally from family
members; or by sporadic or epidemic transmission in nurseries. In
utero infection can lead to fetal demise, nonimmune hydrops fetalis,
or neonatal illness. Additionally, maternal and intrauterine infections
have been speculatively linked to congenital anomalies; prematurity,
low birthweight, and intrauterine growth restriction; neurodevelopmental sequelae; unexplained neonatal illness and death; and increased
risk of type 1 diabetes and schizophrenia.
The majority of neonatal infections are asymptomatic, and symptomatic presentations range from benign febrile illness to severe multisystem disease. Most affected newborns are full term and previously
well. Maternal history often reveals a recent viral illness preceding or
immediately following delivery, which may include fever and abdominal pain. Neonatal symptoms may occur as early as day 1 of life, with
onset of severe disease generally within the first 2 weeks of life. Frequent findings include fever or hypothermia, irritability, lethargy,
anorexia, rash (usually maculopapular, occasionally petechial or papulovesicular), jaundice, respiratory symptoms, apnea, hepatomegaly,
abdominal distention, emesis, diarrhea, and decreased perfusion. Most
patients have benign courses, with resolution of fever in an average of
3 days and of other symptoms in about 1 week. A biphasic course may
occur occasionally. A minority have severe disease dominated by any
combination of sepsis, meningoencephalitis, myocarditis, hepatitis,
coagulopathy, and/or pneumonitis. Meningoencephalitis may be manifested by focal or complex seizures, bulging fontanelle, nuchal rigidity,
and/or reduced level of consciousness. Myocarditis, most often associated with coxsackie B virus infection, may be suggested by tachycardia,
dyspnea, cyanosis, and cardiomegaly. Hepatitis and pneumonitis are
most often associated with echovirus infection, although they may also
occur with coxsackie B viruses. Gastrointestinal manifestations may be
prominent in premature neonates. Laboratory and radiographic evaluation may reveal leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, CSF pleocytosis,
CNS white matter damage, elevations of serum transaminases and bilirubin, coagulopathy, pulmonary infiltrates, and electrocardiographic
changes.
Complications of severe neonatal disease include CNS necrosis and
generalized or focal neurologic compromise; arrhythmias, congestive
heart failure, myocardial infarction, and pericarditis; hepatic necrosis
and failure; coagulopathy with intracranial or other bleeding; adrenal
necrosis and hemorrhage; and rapidly progressive pneumonitis and
pulmonary hypertension. Myositis, arthritis, necrotizing enterocolitis, inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis-­like presentation, bone marrow failure, and sudden death are rare events. Mortality with severe disease is significant
and is most often associated with hepatitis and bleeding complications,
myocarditis, and/or pneumonitis.
Survivors of severe neonatal disease may have gradual resolution of
hepatic and cardiac dysfunction, although persistent hepatic dysfunction and residual cardiac impairment, chronic calcific myocarditis,
and ventricular aneurysm may occur. Meningoencephalitis may be
associated with speech and language impairment; cognitive deficits;
spasticity, hypotonicity, or weakness; seizure disorders; microcephaly
or hydrocephaly; and ocular abnormalities. However, many survivors
appear to have no long-­term sequelae. Risk factors for severe disease
include illness onset in the first few days of life; maternal illness just
before or after delivery; prematurity; male sex; infection by echovirus
11 or a coxsackie B virus; positive serum viral culture; absence of neutralizing antibody to the infecting virus; and evidence of severe hepatitis, myocarditis, and/or multisystem disease.

Transplant Recipients and Patients with Malignancies

Enterovirus infections in stem cell and solid organ transplant recipients may be severe and/or prolonged, causing progressive pneumonia,
severe diarrhea, pericarditis, heart failure, meningoencephalitis, and
disseminated disease. Enterovirus-­
associated hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, meningitis, encephalitis, acute flaccid myelitis, and

myocarditis have been reported in children with malignancies and
patients treated with anti-­CD20 monoclonal antibody. Infections in
these groups are associated with high fatality rates.

DIAGNOSIS

Clues to enterovirus infection include characteristic findings such as
hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease or herpangina lesions, consistent seasonality, known community outbreak, and exposure to enterovirus-­
compatible disease. Acute flaccid myelitis due to enterovirus should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of any child presenting with
acute-­onset limb weakness, particularly in the summer to fall during
enterovirus outbreaks and when following a febrile illness. In the neonate, history of maternal fever, malaise, and/or abdominal pain near
delivery during enterovirus season is suggestive.
Traditionally, enterovirus infection has been confirmed with viral culture using a combination of cell lines. Sensitivity of culture ranges from
50% to 75% and can be increased by sampling of multiple sites (e.g., CSF
plus oropharynx and rectum in children with meningitis). In neonates,
yields of 30–70% are achieved when blood, urine, CSF, and mucosal
swabs are cultured. A major limitation is the inability of most coxsackie
A viruses to grow in culture. Yield may also be limited by neutralizing
antibody in patient specimens, improper specimen handling, or insensitivity of the cell lines used. Culture is relatively slow, with 3-­8 days usually
required to detect growth. Although cultivation of an enterovirus from
any site can generally be considered evidence of recent infection, isolation from the rectum or stool can reflect more remote shedding. Similarly, recovery from a mucosal site may suggest an association with an
illness, whereas recovery from a normally sterile site (e.g., CSF, blood, or
tissue) is more conclusive evidence of causation. Serotype identification
by type-­specific antibody staining or neutralization of a viral isolate is
generally required only for investigation of an outbreak or an unusual
disease manifestation, for surveillance, or to distinguish nonpoliovirus
enteroviruses from vaccine or wild-­type polioviruses.
Direct testing for nucleic acid has replaced culture because of
increased sensitivity and more rapid turnaround. RT-­PCR detection
of highly conserved areas of the enterovirus genome can detect the
majority of enteroviruses in CSF; serum; urine; conjunctival, nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal, tracheal, rectal, and stool specimens;
dried blood spots; and tissues such as myocardium, liver, and brain.
However, the closely related parechoviruses are not detected by most
enterovirus RT-­PCR primers. Sensitivity and specificity of RT-­PCR are
high, with results available in as short as 1 hour. Real-­time, quantitative PCR assays and nested PCR assays with enhanced sensitivity have
been developed, as have enterovirus-­containing multiplex PCR assays,
nucleic acid sequence–based amplification assays, reverse transcription loop-­mediated isothermal amplification, culture-­enhanced PCR
assays, and PCR-­based microarray assays. PCR testing of CSF from
children with meningitis and from hypogammaglobulinemic patients
with chronic meningoencephalitis is frequently positive despite negative cultures. Routine PCR testing of CSF in infants and young children
with suspected meningitis during enterovirus season decreases the
number of diagnostic tests, duration of hospital stay, antibiotic use, and
overall costs. Enterovirus RNA may not be detected in CSF by the time
of clinical presentation with neurologic syndromes associated with certain enteroviruses (e.g., enterovirus A71 and D68), but shedding may
still be detectable in nonsterile sites (stool/rectal for enterovirus A71;
respiratory for enterovirus D68). PCR testing of tracheal aspirates of
children with myocarditis has good concordance with testing of myocardial specimens. In ill neonates and young infants, PCR testing of
serum and urine has higher yields than culture. Viral load in blood
of neonates is correlated with disease severity; viral nucleic acid may
persist in blood of severely ill newborns for up to 2 months.
Sequence analysis of amplified nucleic acid can be used for serotype
identification and phylogenetic analysis and to establish a transmission
link among cases. Serotype-­specific (e.g., enterovirus A71, enterovirus D68, and coxsackievirus A16) PCR assays have been developed.
For enterovirus A71, the yield of specimens other than CSF and blood
(oropharyngeal, nasopharyngeal, rectal, vesicle swabs, and CNS tissue) is greater than the yield of CSF and blood, which are infrequently

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 297 u Nonpolio Enteroviruses

1985

positive. Enterovirus D68 is more readily detected in respiratory specimens (i.e., nasal wash or nasopharyngeal swab) compared to stool/
rectal or CSF specimens. Routine collection and testing of respiratory
and stool/rectal specimens, in addition to CSF, is warranted in neurologic presentations potentially associated with these viruses. Of note,
commercially available multiplex respiratory PCR assays generally are
unable to distinguish enteroviruses (including enterovirus D68) from
rhinoviruses. Antigen detection assays that target specific serotypes
such as enterovirus A71 with monoclonal antibodies have also been
developed.
Enterovirus infections can be detected serologically by a rise in
serum or CSF of neutralizing, complement fixation, enzyme-­linked
immunosorbent assay, or other type-­specific antibody or by detection of serotype-­specific IgM antibody. However, serologic testing
requires presumptive knowledge of the infecting serotype or an assay
with sufficiently broad cross-­reactivity. Sensitivity and specificity may
be limiting, and cross-­reactivity among serotypes may occur. Except
for epidemiologic studies or cases characteristic of specific serotypes
(e.g., enterovirus A71 or enterovirus D68), serology is generally less
useful than culture or nucleic acid detection. Enterovirus antibodies
have been detected in CSF of children with acute flaccid myelitis when
viral RNA was not detectable.

as enterovirus infections, with a biennial pattern of circulation noted
in Europe. Outbreaks have been described in the nursery setting. In
young infants, parechoviruses can cause a sepsis-­like illness similar to
enterovirus illness and are a common, underrecognized cause of viral
meningoencephalitis. More frequently than with enteroviruses, infants
with parechovirus CNS infection often have no CSF pleocytosis. There
is also a higher incidence of white matter MRI abnormalities and long-­
term neurodevelopmental deficits with parechovirus encephalitis compared with enterovirus encephalitis. Rarely, parechoviruses have been
identified in cases of hepatitis or myocarditis. Infections in older children are often unrecognized or cause acute, benign febrile, respiratory,
or gastrointestinal illnesses with few specific findings.
Infants suspected of having an enterovirus infection should also
be considered as possibly having a parechovirus infection, because
the two may be indistinguishable. A distinctive rash involving the
extremities with palm and sole erythema or peripheral leukopenia
in the setting of high fever during the summer-­fall season are clinical
findings that should also prompt consideration of parechovirus infection. The diagnosis of parechovirus infection is confirmed by human
parechovirus-­specific PCR on CSF, blood, stool, and oropharyngeal or
nasopharyngeal specimens.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

In the absence of a proven antiviral agent for enterovirus infections,
supportive care is the mainstay of treatment. Newborns and young
infants with nonspecific febrile illnesses and children with meningitis
frequently require diagnostic evaluation and hospitalization for presumptive treatment of bacterial and herpes simplex virus infection.
Neonates with severe disease and infants and children with concerning
disease manifestations (e.g., myocarditis, enterovirus A71 neurologic
and cardiopulmonary disease, enterovirus D68 respiratory failure, and
acute flaccid myelitis) may require intensive cardiorespiratory support.

The differential diagnosis of enterovirus infections varies with the clinical presentation (Table 297.2).
Human parechoviruses, members of the Picornaviridae family,
produce many manifestations similar to the nonpolio enteroviruses.
They are small RNA viruses that were originally classified as echoviruses. Nineteen parechoviruses have been identified that infect
humans; serotypes 1 and 3 are the most common causes of symptomatic infection. Parechovirus epidemics occur in the same season

TREATMENT

Table 297.2  Differential Diagnosis of Nonpolio Enterovirus Infections
CLINICAL MANIFESTATION

BACTERIAL PATHOGENS

VIRAL PATHOGENS

NONINFECTIOUS

Nonspecific febrile illness

Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae type b,
Neisseria meningitidis

Influenza viruses, human
herpesviruses 6 and 7, human
parechoviruses

Rheumatologic disorders,
oncologic diseases, drug
reaction

Exanthems/enanthems

Group A Streptococcus,
Staphylococcus aureus, N.
meningitidis, T. pallidum, M.
pneumoniae

Herpes simplex virus, adenoviruses,
varicella-­zoster virus, Epstein-­Barr
virus, measles virus, rubella virus,
human herpesviruses 6 and 7,
human parechoviruses

Drug reaction, Stevens Johnson
syndrome, toxic epidermal
necrolysis, Kawasaki syndrome,
vasculitis

Respiratory illness/
conjunctivitis

S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae
(nontypeable and type b), N.
meningitidis, Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, Chlamydophila
pneumoniae

Adenoviruses, influenza viruses,
respiratory syncytial virus,
parainfluenza viruses, rhinoviruses,
human metapneumovirus,
coronaviruses

Asthma exacerbation,
rheumatologic uveitis, Kawasaki
syndrome

Myocarditis/pericarditis

S. aureus, H. influenzae type b, M.
pneumoniae

Adenoviruses, influenza virus,
parvovirus, cytomegalovirus

Drugs, Kawasaki syndrome,
rheumatic fever

Meningitis/encephalitis

S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae
type b, N. meningitidis,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
Borrelia burgdorferi, M.
pneumoniae, Bartonella
henselae, Listeria monocytogenes

Herpes simplex virus, West Nile virus,
influenza viruses, adenoviruses,
Epstein-­Barr virus, mumps virus,
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus,
arboviruses, human parechoviruses

Drugs, intravenous
immunoglobulin, Kawasaki
syndrome, autoimmune
encephalitis (e.g., anti-­NMDA
receptor), acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM),
demyelinating disorders

Acute flaccid myelitis

C. botulinum

Poliovirus, West Nile virus, Japanese
encephalitis virus, rabies virus,
adenovirus

Spinal cord infarction, antimyelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
(MOG) myelitis, neuromyelitis
optica (NMO), Guillain-­Barré
syndrome, ADEM, transverse
myelitis, lupus, tick paralysis

Neonatal infections

Group B Streptococcus,
gram-­negative enteric bacilli,
L. monocytogenes, Enterococcus

Herpes simplex virus, adenoviruses,
cytomegalovirus, rubella virus,
human parechoviruses

Neonatal lupus, Aicardi-­Goutières
syndrome

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1986 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Milrinone has been suggested as a useful agent in severe enterovirus
A71 cardiopulmonary disease. Liver and cardiac transplantation have
been performed for neonates with progressive end-­organ failure.
Immunoglobulin has been used to treat enterovirus infections based
on the importance of the humoral immune response to enterovirus
infection and the observation that absence of neutralizing antibody
is a risk factor for symptomatic infection. Immunoglobulin products
contain neutralizing antibodies to many commonly circulating serotypes, although titers vary with serotype and among products and lots.
Anecdotal and retrospective, uncontrolled use of intravenous immunoglobulin or infusion of maternal convalescent plasma to treat newborns with severe disease has been associated with varying outcomes.
The one randomized controlled trial was too small to demonstrate
significant clinical benefits, although neonates who received immunoglobulin containing high neutralizing titers to their own isolates
had shorter periods of viremia and viruria. Immunoglobulin has been
administered intravenously and intraventricularly to treat hypogammaglobulinemia in patients with chronic enterovirus meningoencephalitis and intravenously in transplant and oncology patients with
severe infections, with variable success. Intravenous immunoglobulin
and corticosteroids have been used for patients with neurologic disease
caused by enterovirus A71, enterovirus D68, and other enteroviruses.
Modulation of cytokine profiles after administration of intravenous
immunoglobulin for enterovirus A71–associated brainstem encephalitis has been demonstrated. High-­titer enterovirus A71 immunoglobulin appeared promising in animal models, and clinical trials in regions
with epidemic enterovirus A71 disease are ongoing. Anti–enterovirus
A71 and D68 monoclonal antibodies have also been generated and
evaluated in vitro and in animal models. A retrospective study suggested that treatment of presumed viral myocarditis with immunoglobulin was associated with improved outcome; however, virologic
diagnoses were not made. Evaluation of corticosteroids and cyclosporine and other immunosuppressive therapy for myocarditis has been
inconclusive. Successful treatment of enterovirus myocarditis with
interferon-­α has been reported anecdotally, and interferon-­β treatment was associated with viral clearance, improved cardiac function,
and survival in chronic cardiomyopathy associated with persistence of
enterovirus (or adenovirus) genome. Activity of interferon-­α against
enterovirus A71 has been demonstrated with in vitro and animal models, but potency varies with interferon-­α type.
Antiviral agents that act at various steps in the enterovirus life cycle—
attachment, penetration, uncoating, translation, polyprotein processing,
protease activity, replication, and assembly—are being evaluated. Candidates include pharmacologically active chemical compounds, small interfering RNAs and DNA-­like antisense agents, purine nucleoside analogs,
synthetic peptides, enzyme inhibitors of signal transduction pathways,
interferon-­inducers, and herbal compounds. Pleconaril, an inhibitor of
attachment and uncoating, was associated with benefit in some controlled
studies of enterovirus meningitis and picornavirus upper respiratory tract
infections, and uncontrolled experience suggested possible benefits in
high-­risk infections. A randomized controlled trial of pleconaril in neonates with severe hepatitis, coagulopathy, and/or myocarditis suggested
possible virologic and clinical benefits of treatment. Pocapavir, an agent
with a similar mechanism of action that is in development for treatment of
poliovirus infections, has been used in a small number of cases of severe
neonatal enterovirus sepsis. Vapendavir is another attachment inhibitor
that is in clinical trials for rhinovirus infections and has in vitro activity
against enteroviruses (including enterovirus A71) but has not entered clinical trials for enterovirus infections. Pleconaril, pocapavir, and vapendavir
are not currently available for clinical use.
Design and evaluation of candidate agents active against enterovirus
A71 and enterovirus D68 are high priorities. Challenges for therapies
of enterovirus A71 include limited cross-­genotypic activity of candidate compounds and high viral mutagenicity that favors emergence
of resistance. Lactoferrin and ribavirin have demonstrated activity
with in vitro and/or animal models. The investigational agents rupintrivir and V-­7404, which inhibit the 3C-­protease conserved among
many enteroviruses and essential for infectivity, have broad activity
in vitro, including against both enterovirus A71 and enterovirus D68.
DAS181 is an investigational, inhaled drug with sialidase activity that

has in vitro activity against recently circulating strains of enterovirus
D68. The antidepressant fluoxetine interacts with the enterovirus 2C
protein and has in vitro activity against group B and D enteroviruses; it
has been used anecdotally for chronic enterovirus encephalitis associated with agammaglobulinemia and enterovirus D68-­associated acute
flaccid myelitis. A retrospective study did not demonstrate a signal of
efficacy in the latter condition.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

The prognosis in the majority of enterovirus infections is excellent.
Morbidity and mortality are associated primarily with myocarditis,
neurologic disease, severe neonatal infections, and infections in immunocompromised hosts.

Prevention

The first line of defense is prevention of transmission through good
hygiene, such as handwashing, avoidance of sharing utensils and
drinking containers and other potential fomites, disinfection of contaminated surfaces, and avoiding community settings where exposures
are likely to occur. The paucity of enterovirus circulation and associated hand-­foot-­mouth disease and respiratory and neurologic disease
in 2020 during the COVID-­19 pandemic provides indirect evidence of
the efficacy of nonpharmaceutical interventions targeted to decrease
SARS-­CoV-­2 spread (masking, distancing, school mitigation strategies) against enteroviruses. Chlorination of drinking water and swimming pools also may be an important preventative strategy. Contact
precautions should be used for all patients with enterovirus infections
in the hospital setting; droplet precautions should also be included for
patients with respiratory syndromes and, possibly, enterovirus A71
and D68 infection. Infection control techniques such as cohorting have
proven effective in limiting nursery outbreaks. Prophylactic administration of immunoglobulin or convalescent plasma has been used in
nursery epidemics; simultaneous use of infection control interventions
makes it difficult to determine efficacy.
Pregnant women near term should avoid contact with individuals ill
with possible enterovirus infections. If a pregnant woman experiences
a suggestive illness, it is advisable not to proceed with emergency delivery unless there is concern for fetal compromise or obstetric emergencies cannot be excluded. Rather, it may be advantageous to extend
pregnancy, allowing the fetus to passively acquire protective antibodies. A strategy of prophylactically administering immunoglobulin
(or maternal convalescent plasma) to neonates born to mothers with
enterovirus infections is untested.
Maintenance antibody replacement with high-­
dose intravenous
immunoglobulin for patients with hypogammaglobulinemia has
reduced the incidence of chronic enterovirus meningoencephalitis,
although breakthrough infections occur. Inactivated vaccines to prevent enterovirus A71 infections, given to children 6-­35 months of age,
have been demonstrated to be safe and effective (>90% against enterovirus A71 hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease and >80% against enterovirus
A71 serious disease) in phase 3 clinical trials. Three inactivated enterovirus A71 vaccines have been licensed and approved for prevention of
severe hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease in China and are being studied
in other Asian countries. Other vaccine strategies for enterovirus A71,
including VP1 capsid protein–based subunit, DNA, and vector vaccines; combined peptide vaccines; live-­attenuated vaccines; virus-­like
particles; breast milk enriched with VP1 capsid protein or lactoferrin;
and interferon-­γ–expressing recombinant viral vectors, are also under
investigation. Circulation of multiple enterovirus A71 types, antigenic
drift, viral recombination, and potential immunologic cross-­reactivity
with brain tissue may pose challenges to development of enterovirus
A71 vaccines. Vaccine candidates against EV-­D68, including virus-­like
particle vaccines and inactivated whole virus vaccines, are in development, but have not progressed beyond animal studies. Most enterovirus vaccines do not provide cross-­protection against other serotypes;
however, the potential to create multivalent enterovirus vaccines targeting several common strains with severe manifestations is under
investigation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 298 u Parvoviruses

Chapter 298

Parvoviruses
William C. Koch
The parvoviruses are small, single-­stranded DNA viruses. They are
common infectious agents of a wide variety of animal species, including mammals, birds, and insects. Parvoviruses as a group include
a number of important animal pathogens. There are five different
types of parvoviruses known to infect humans: the dependoviruses,
also called adeno-­associated viruses (AAVs), parvovirus B19 (B19V),
human bocaviruses (HBoVs), parvovirus 4 (PARV4), and human bufavirus (HBuV). B19V and HBoV are the only two parvoviruses proven
to be pathogenic in humans. B19V is the most well studied and clinically important of the human parvoviruses and the cause of erythema
infectiosum or fifth disease. Human bocavirus is an emerging human
pathogen.

ETIOLOGY

The five human parvoviruses are distinct enough from each other to
represent five different genera within the Parvoviridae family. B19V is a
member of the genus Erythroparvovirus, is composed of an icosahedral
protein capsid without an envelope, and contains a single-­stranded
DNA genome of approximately 5.5 kb. It is relatively heat and solvent
resistant. It is antigenically distinct from other mammalian parvoviruses and has only one known serotype, with three distinct genotypes
described. The relatively short genome in parvoviruses does not encode
a DNA polymerase, so all parvoviruses require either host cell factors
present in late S phase or co-infection with another virus to replicate
their DNA. B19V can be propagated effectively in vitro only in CD36+
erythroid progenitor cells derived from human bone marrow, umbilical cord blood, or peripheral blood.
HBoV is a member of the genus Bocaparvovirus. HBoV was first
isolated from nasopharyngeal specimens from children with respiratory tract infection in 2005. It was identified using random polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) amplification and sequencing methods specifically designed to detect previously unknown viral sequences. Analysis
of the gene sequences showed similarities to both bovine and canine
parvoviruses, and thus the virus was named human bocavirus. Later,
three other HBoVs were identified in stool samples and designated
as HBoV types 2, 3, and 4, with the initial respiratory isolate called
HBoV1. The HBoV capsid structure and genome size are similar to
those of B19V, but the genomic organization and replication are different (though not fully characterized to date). HBoVs cannot be
propagated in conventional cell culture but have been grown in a pseudostratified human airway epithelial cell culture system.
The AAVs are members of the genus Dependoparvovirus and were
the first parvoviruses to be found in humans. They were originally
identified as contaminants in laboratory preparations of adenovirus,
resulting in the designation “adeno-­associated viruses.” They were later
isolated directly from human tissue samples, and now several AAV serotypes are known to commonly infect humans. AAVs have a unique life
cycle that can take one of two paths: (1) a lytic infection with replication
of viral DNA and production of new virus, or (2) viral integration into
the host cell DNA. In the presence of a “helper” virus, usually an adenovirus or a herpesvirus, AAV can replicate its DNA, produce capsids, and
release new virions by cell lysis. In the absence of a helper virus infection, the AAV genome becomes integrated into the host cell DNA. This
feature has drawn interest in AAVs as potential vectors for gene therapy.
Although human infection with AAVs is common, there is only one possible disease association (idiopathic hepatitis) (see Chapter 406).
PARV4 was initially identified in 2005 from the blood of an adult
patient with acute viral syndrome, who was also an intravenous drug
user co-­infected with hepatitis C. Subsequently, this virus has been found

1987

in blood donors and donated plasma pools in many different countries. It appears to be present in approximately 3% of blood donors in
the United States and 4% of plasma pools. There is currently no known
disease association or clinical symptomology associated with infection.
Likewise, BuV is a parvovirus that was first identified in 2012 in the feces
from children <5 years of age with acute diarrhea but has an unclear role
as a pathogen. PARV4 has been assigned to the genus Tetraparvovirus,
and BuV is a member of the genus Protoparvovirus. The full epidemiology and clinical relevance of these viruses await further study.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Parvovirus B19

Infections with B19V are common and occur worldwide. Clinically
apparent infections, such as the rash illness of erythema infectiosum
and transient aplastic crisis, are most prevalent in school-­age children
(70% of cases occur in patients between 5 and 15 years of age). Seasonal
peaks occur in the late winter and spring, with sporadic infections
throughout the year. Seroprevalence increases with age, with 40–60%
of adults having evidence of prior infection.
Transmission of B19V is by the respiratory route, presumably via
large-­droplet spread from nasopharyngeal viral shedding. The transmission rate is 15–30% among susceptible household contacts, and
mothers are more commonly infected than fathers. In outbreaks of erythema infectiosum in elementary schools, the secondary attack rates
range from 10–60%. Nosocomial outbreaks also occur, with secondary
attack rates of 30% among susceptible healthcare workers.
Although respiratory spread is the primary mode of transmission,
B19V is also transmissible in blood and blood products, as documented
among children with hemophilia receiving pooled-­donor clotting factor. Given the resistance of the virus to solvents, fomite transmission
could be important in childcare centers and other group settings, but
this mode of transmission has not been definitively established.

Human Bocaviruses

The majority of published studies have used molecular methods to detect
HBoV DNA in respiratory secretions, fecal samples, blood, and other
tissues. HBoV DNA (HBoV1) can be found commonly in respiratory
secretions from children hospitalized with acute lower respiratory tract
infections (LRTIs). It is more prevalent in children younger than 2 years
of age and seems to be associated with wheezing respiratory illness.
However, it can be isolated from respiratory secretions from asymptomatic children and can often be found as a co-infection with other
common respiratory pathogens of children this age, including respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, and rhinoviruses. This
has caused some confusion as to the pathogenic role of HBoV in acute
LRTI, including whether it can persist in secretions long after a subclinical infection or requires a helper virus. A limited number of seroepidemiologic studies have been performed, and these suggest that infection is
common in children younger than 5 years of age. The most recent studies
provide evidence that the virus is in fact pathogenic, especially in children younger than 2 years with wheezing and LRTI, because HBoV1 is
more likely to be the only virus isolated in these patients and more likely
to have an acute antibody response when coupled with specific antibody
testing. When quantitative PCR is used, the virus is found to be much
higher in titer in these symptomatic cases.
HBoV DNA (HBoV2, HBoV3, and HBoV4) has also been found in
fecal samples in studies from various countries, but its role as a cause of
viral gastroenteritis is still undetermined.

PATHOGENESIS
Parvovirus B19

The primary target of B19V infection is the erythroid cell line, specifically erythroid precursors near the pronormoblast stage. Viral infection produces cell lysis, leading to a progressive depletion of erythroid
precursors and a transient arrest of erythropoiesis. The virus has no
apparent effect on the myeloid cell line. The tropism for erythroid cells
is related to the erythrocyte P blood group antigen, which is the primary cell receptor for the virus and is also found on endothelial cells,
placental cells, and fetal myocardial cells. Thrombocytopenia and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1988 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
neutropenia are often observed clinically, but the pathogenesis of these
abnormalities is not completely understood.
Experimental infection of normal volunteers with B19V revealed a
biphasic illness. From 7-­11 days after inoculation, subjects had viremia
and nasopharyngeal viral shedding with fever, malaise, and rhinorrhea. Reticulocyte counts dropped to undetectable levels but resulted
in only a mild, clinically insignificant fall in serum hemoglobin. With
the appearance of specific antibodies, symptoms resolved and serum
hemoglobin returned to normal. Several subjects experienced a rash
associated with arthralgia 17-­18 days after inoculation. Some manifestations of B19 infection, such as transient aplastic crisis, appear to be
a direct result of viral infection, whereas others, including the exanthem and arthritis, appear to be postinfectious phenomena related to the
immune response. Skin biopsy of patients with erythema infectiosum
reveals edema in the epidermis and a perivascular mononuclear infiltrate compatible with an immune-­mediated process.
Individuals with chronic hemolytic anemia and increased red
blood cell (RBC) turnover are very sensitive to minor perturbations in
erythropoiesis. Infection with B19V leads to a transient arrest in RBC
production and a precipitous fall in serum hemoglobin, often requiring transfusion. The reticulocyte count drops to undetectable levels,
reflecting the lysis of infected erythroid precursors. Humoral immunity is crucial in controlling infection. Specific immunoglobulin (Ig) M
appears within 1-­2 days of infection and is followed by anti-­B19 IgG,
which leads to control of the infection, restoration of reticulocytosis,
and a rise in serum hemoglobin.
Individuals with impaired humoral immunity are at increased
risk for more serious or persistent infection with B19V, which usually
manifests as chronic RBC aplasia, although neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and marrow failure are also described. Children undergoing
chemotherapy for leukemia or other forms of cancer, transplant recipients, and patients with congenital or acquired immunodeficiency states
(including AIDS) are at risk for chronic B19V infections.
Infections in the fetus and neonate are somewhat analogous to
infections in immunocompromised persons. B19V is associated with
nonimmune fetal hydrops and stillbirth in women experiencing a
primary infection but does not appear to be teratogenic. Like most
mammalian parvoviruses, B19V can cross the placenta and cause fetal
infection during primary maternal infection. Parvovirus cytopathic
effects are seen primarily in erythroblasts of the bone marrow and
sites of extramedullary hematopoiesis in the liver and spleen. Fetal
infection can presumably occur as early as 6 weeks of gestation, when
erythroblasts are first found in the fetal liver; after the fourth month of
gestation, hematopoiesis switches to the bone marrow. In some cases,
fetal infection leads to profound fetal anemia and subsequent high-­
output cardiac failure (see Chapter 138). Fetal hydrops ensues and is
often associated with fetal death. There may also be a direct effect of
the virus on myocardial tissue that contributes to the cardiac failure.
However, most infections during pregnancy result in normal deliveries
at term. Some of the asymptomatic infants from these deliveries have
been reported to have chronic postnatal infection with B19V that is of
unknown significance.

Human Bocaviruses

Mechanisms of HBoV replication and pathogenesis are poorly characterized to date. Growth of HBoV1 in tissue culture is difficult, though
the virus has been cultured in primary respiratory epithelial cells as
noted above. The primary site of viral replication appears to be the
respiratory tract, because the virus has been detected most frequently
and in highest copy numbers here. HBoV1 has also been found occasionally in the serum, suggesting the potential for systemic spread.
HBoV1 has also been detected in stool, but copy numbers are very low.
In contrast, HBoV types 2-­4 are found predominantly in the stool, but
host cell types are not known.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Parvovirus B19

Many infections are clinically inapparent (Table 298.1). Infected
children characteristically demonstrate the rash illness of erythema

TABLE 298.1  Clinical Associations with Parvovirus B19
Infection
Asymptomatic infection
Exanthematous disorders
Erythema infectiosum (fifth disease)
Papular-­purpuric gloves-­and-­socks syndrome
Asymmetric periflexural exanthem
“Bathing trunk” exanthem
Petechial exanthems
Other disorders
Arthritis
Transient aplastic crises
Chronic anemia
Refractory anemia after solid organ or stem cell transplantation
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Fetal hydrops
Vasculitis
Neurologic disease, including arterial ischemic stroke,
encephalopathy, encephalitis
Rheumatologic disease
Liver failure
Myocarditis
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Box 16.2, p. 452.

Fig. 298.1 Erythema infectiosum. Erythema of the bilateral cheeks,
which has been likened to a “slapped-­cheek” appearance. (From Paller
AS, Macini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2006:431.)
infectiosum. Adults, especially women, frequently experience acute
polyarthropathy with or without a rash.

Erythema Infectiosum (Fifth Disease)

The most common manifestation of B19V is erythema infectiosum,
also known as fifth disease, which is a benign, self-­limited exanthematous illness of childhood.
The incubation period for erythema infectiosum is 4-­28 days (average: 16-­17 days). The prodromal phase is mild and consists of low-­
grade fever in 15–30% of cases, headache, and symptoms of mild upper
respiratory tract infection. The hallmark of erythema infectiosum is
the characteristic rash, which occurs in three stages that are not always
distinguishable. The initial stage is an erythematous facial flushing,
often described as a slapped-­cheek appearance (Fig. 298.1). The rash
spreads rapidly or concurrently to the trunk and proximal extremities
as a diffuse macular erythema in the second stage. Central clearing of
macular lesions occurs promptly, giving the rash a lacy, reticulated
appearance (Fig. 298.2). The rash tends to be more prominent on
extensor surfaces, sparing the palms and soles. Affected children are
afebrile and do not appear ill. Some have petechiae. Older children
and adults often complain of mild pruritus. The rash resolves spontaneously without desquamation but tends to wax and wane over 1-­3
weeks. It can recur with exposure to sunlight, heat, exercise, and stress.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 298 u Parvoviruses

Fig. 298.2 Erythema infectiosum. Reticulate erythema on the upper

arm of a patient with erythema infectiosum. (From Paller AS, Macini
AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2006:431.)

Lymphadenopathy and atypical papular, purpuric and vesicular rashes
are also described.

Arthropathy

Arthritis and arthralgia may occur in isolation or with other symptoms. Joint symptoms are much more common among adults and older
adolescents with B19V infection. Females are affected more frequently
than males. In one large outbreak of fifth disease, 60% of adults and
80% of adult women reported joint symptoms. Joint symptoms range
from diffuse polyarthralgia with morning stiffness to frank arthritis.
The joints most often affected are the hands, wrists, knees, and ankles,
but practically any joint may be affected. The joint symptoms are self-­
limited and, in the majority of patients, resolve within 2-­4 weeks. Some
patients may have a prolonged course of many months, suggesting
rheumatoid arthritis. Transient rheumatoid factor positivity is reported
in some of these patients but with no joint destruction.

Transient Aplastic Crisis

The transient arrest of erythropoiesis and absolute reticulocytopenia
induced by B19V infection leads to a sudden fall in serum hemoglobin
in individuals with chronic hemolytic conditions. This B19V-­induced
RBC aplasia or transient aplastic crisis occurs in patients with all types
of chronic hemolysis and/or rapid RBC turnover, including sickle cell
disease, thalassemia, hereditary spherocytosis, and pyruvate kinase
deficiency, among others. In contrast to children with erythema infectiosum only, patients with aplastic crisis are ill at presentation with
fever, malaise, and lethargy and have signs and symptoms of profound
anemia, including pallor, tachycardia, and tachypnea. Rash is rarely
present. The incubation period for transient aplastic crisis is shorter
than that for erythema infectiosum because the crisis occurs coincident with the viremia. Children with sickle cell hemoglobinopathies
may also have a concurrent vasoocclusive pain crisis, further confusing
the clinical presentation.

Immunocompromised Persons

Individuals with impaired humoral immunity are at risk for chronic
B19V infection. Chronic anemia is the most common manifestation, sometimes accompanied by neutropenia, thrombocytopenia,
or complete marrow suppression. Chronic infections occur in persons receiving cancer chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy
for transplantation and persons with congenital immunodeficiencies, AIDS, and functional defects in IgG production who are thereby
unable to generate neutralizing antibodies.

Fetal Infection

Primary maternal infection is associated with nonimmune fetal
hydrops and intrauterine fetal demise, with the risk for fetal loss when

1989

Fig. 298.3 Papular-­purpuric gloves-­and-­socks syndrome. Petechial

purpura of the palms in a patient with parvovirus B19 infection. (From
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 16.18, p. 453.)

infection occurs in pregnancy estimated at 2–5%. The mechanism of
fetal disease appears to be a viral-­induced RBC aplasia at a time when
the fetal erythroid fraction is rapidly expanding, leading to profound
anemia, high-­output cardiac failure, and fetal hydrops. Viral DNA has
been detected in infected abortuses. The second trimester seems to be
the most sensitive period, but fetal losses are reported at every stage of
gestation. If maternal B19V infection is suspected, fetal ultrasonography and measurement of the peak systolic flow velocity of the middle
cerebral artery are sensitive, noninvasive procedures to diagnose fetal
anemia and hydrops. Most infants infected in utero are born normal
at term, including some who have had ultrasonographic evidence of
hydrops. A small subset of infants infected in utero may acquire a
chronic or persistent postnatal infection with B19V that is of unknown
significance. Congenital anemia associated with intrauterine B19V
infection has been reported in a few cases, sometimes following intrauterine hydrops. This process may mimic other forms of congenital
hypoplastic anemia (e.g., Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome). Fetal infection with B19V has been associated with bone lesions but has not been
associated with other birth defects. B19V is only one of many causes of
hydrops fetalis (see Chapter 140).

Myocarditis

B19V infection has been associated with myocarditis in fetuses, infants,
children, and a limited number of adults. Diagnosis has often been based
on serologic findings suggestive of a concurrent B19V infection, but in
many cases B19V DNA has been demonstrated in cardiac tissue. B19-­
related myocarditis is plausible because fetal myocardial cells are known
to express P antigen, the cell receptor for the virus. In the few cases in
which histology is reported, a predominantly lymphocytic infiltrate is
described. Outcomes have varied from complete recovery to chronic
cardiomyopathy to fatal cardiac arrest. Although B19-­associated myocarditis seems to be a rare occurrence, there appears to be enough evidence to consider B19V as a potential cause of lymphocytic myocarditis,
especially in infants and immunocompromised persons.

Other Cutaneous Manifestations

A variety of atypical skin eruptions have been reported with B19V infection. Most of these are petechial or purpuric, often with evidence of
vasculitis on biopsy. Among these rashes, the papular-­purpuric gloves-­
and-­socks syndrome (PPGSS) is well established in the dermatologic
literature as distinctly associated with B19V infection (Figs. 298.3 and
298.4). PPGSS is characterized by fever, pruritus, and painful edema and
erythema localized to the distal extremities in a distinct gloves-­and-­socks
distribution, followed by acral petechiae and oral lesions. The syndrome
is self-­limited and resolves within a few weeks. Although PPGSS was initially described in young adults, a number of reports of the disease in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1990 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
children have since been published. In those cases linked to B19V infection, the eruption is accompanied by serologic evidence of acute infection. Generalized petechial rash has also been reported.

Human Bocaviruses

Many studies have reported an association between respiratory tract
infection and HBoV1 infection as detected by PCR of respiratory secretions, primarily nasopharyngeal secretions. Clinical manifestations in
these studies have ranged from mild upper respiratory symptoms to
pneumonia. However, the role of HBoV1 as a pathogen has been challenged by the detection of the virus in asymptomatic children and by
the frequent detection of other respiratory viruses in the same samples.
Nonetheless, studies that have included some combination of quantitative PCR, serum PCR, and serology have been more convincing about
HBoV1 as a human pathogen. The use of a quantitative PCR method
also seems to differentiate between HBoV1 infection (and wheezing)
and prolonged viral shedding, because patients with higher viral titers
were more likely to be symptomatic, to be viremic, and to have HBoV1
isolated without other viruses.
HBoV type 2 DNA has been found in the stool of 3–25% of children with gastroenteritis, but often with another enteric virus. DNA

of HBoV types 2, 3, and 4 has also been found in the stool of healthy,
asymptomatic individuals. At present, there are few data linking
HBoV2, HBoV3, or HBoV4 to gastroenteritis or any clinical illness.
Further studies are required to determine if any of the HBoVs are associated with some cases of childhood gastroenteritis.

DIAGNOSIS
Parvovirus B19 Infection

The diagnosis of erythema infectiosum is usually based on clinical presentation of the typical rash and rarely requires virologic confirmation.
Similarly, the diagnosis of a typical transient aplastic crisis in a child
with sickle cell disease is generally made on clinical grounds without
specific virologic testing.
Serologic tests for the diagnosis of B19V infection are available. B19-­
specific IgM develops within 2-­3 days after infection and persists up
to 6 months (Fig. 298.5). Anti-­B19 IgG serves as a marker of current
or past infection. Seroconversion of anti-­B19 IgG antibodies in paired
sera can also be used to confirm recent infection.
Serologic diagnosis is unreliable in immunocompromised persons;
diagnosis in these patients requires methods to detect viral DNA.
Because the virus cannot be isolated by standard cell culture, methods to
detect viral particles or viral DNA, such as PCR are necessary to establish
the diagnosis. Viral DNA may be detectable for ∼1 month after infection in immunocompetent patients but longer in immune compromised
patients. Some reports suggest that prolonged detection of viral DNA
(months) may represent DNA but not the complete virus. Prenatal diagnosis of B19V-­induced fetal hydrops can be accomplished by detection
of viral DNA in fetal blood or amniotic fluid by these methods.

Human Bocavirus Infections

Fig. 298.4 Papular-­purpuric gloves-­and-­socks syndrome. Erythema

and petechiae of the plantar feet were accompanied by pruritus and
sore throat in this young girl with parvovirus B19 infection. (From Paller
AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 16.19, p. 454.)

HBoV1 infections cannot be differentiated from other viral respiratory
infections on clinical grounds. HBoV DNA can be readily detected by
PCR methods and is now included in several commercially available
multiplex respiratory virus PCR assays. Quantitative PCR is useful to
differentiate acute infection from persistent viral shedding, because
higher viral copy numbers (>104 HBoV1 genomes/mL) correlate with
acute illness, but this test is not widely available. Likewise, serologic
methods to detect specific IgM and IgG antibodies have been developed, but these too are not routinely available and there are problems
with cross-­reactivity among antibodies to the various HBoV types.
The most reliable method to diagnose HBoV1 infection would include
detection of viral DNA in serum by PCR and in respiratory tract samples by quantitative PCR, with concurrent detection of IgM or a diagnostic IgG response in paired samples.

Nonspecific
febrile illness

Erythema
infectiosum
Aplastic crisis

Virus
excretion

IgM
antibody

Viremia
Reticulocytes

0

7

14
Days

21

28

Fig. 298.5 Selected virologic, immunologic, hematologic, and clinical events in parvovirus B19 virus infection. (From Schulte DJ. Human parvovirus B19. In Kaplan SL, Harrison GJ, Steinbach WJ, Cherry JD, Hotez PJ, eds. Feigin and Cherry’s Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2019. Fig 152.1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 299 u Herpes Simplex Virus
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Parvovirus B19

The rash of erythema infectiosum must be differentiated from roseola,
rubella, measles, enteroviral infections, and drug reactions. Rash and
arthritis in older children should prompt consideration of juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, serum sickness, and
other connective tissue disorders.

Human Bocavirus

Respiratory illness and wheezing caused by HBoV1 cannot be differentiated clinically from other common viral respiratory infections,
especially respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, rhinoviruses, enterovirus D68, and parainfluenza viruses. HBoV1 infection
in young children seems to most closely resemble that of respiratory
syncytial virus and human metapneumovirus, because the clinical
symptoms and age ranges will overlap.

TREATMENT
Parvovirus B19

There is no specific antiviral therapy approved for B19V infection.
The acyclic nucleoside phosphonates cidofovir and brincidofovir
have been shown to inhibit B19V replication in vitro, but no clinical studies have been performed and thus antiviral therapy cannot
be recommended. Commercial lots of intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) have been used with some success to treat B19V-­related episodes of anemia and bone marrow failure in immunocompromised
children. Specific antibody may facilitate clearance of the virus but
is not always necessary, because cessation of cytotoxic chemotherapy with subsequent restoration of immune function often suffices.
In patients whose immune function is not likely to recover, such as
patients with AIDS, administration of IVIG may give only a temporary remission, and periodic reinfusions may be required. In patients
with AIDS, clearance of B19V infection has been reported after initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) without the
use of IVIG.
No controlled studies have been published regarding dosing of
IVIG for B19V-­induced RBC aplasia. Multiple case reports and
limited clinical series have reported successful treatment of severe
anemia secondary to chronic B19V infection using several different IVIG dosing regimens. Initial reports recommended a starting
dose of 400 mg/kg/day for up to 5 days. Other reports have used
higher doses ranging from 1-2 g/kg split into one to three infusions. The dose and duration of IVIG may be adjusted based on
the response to therapy. The optimal schedule of IVIG treatment
is not known.
B19V-­infected fetuses with anemia and hydrops have been managed
successfully with intrauterine RBC transfusions, but this procedure has
significant attendant risks. Once fetal hydrops is diagnosed, regardless
of the suspected cause, the mother should be referred to a fetal therapy
center for further evaluation because of the high risk for serious complications (see Chapter 140).

Human Bocavirus

There is no specific antiviral therapy available. Appropriate supportive treatment for viral LRTI and pneumonia is recommended, as
directed by clinical severity. For children with wheezing illness specifically caused by HBoV1 infection, there are no data examining their
response to bronchodilator therapy.

COMPLICATIONS
Parvovirus B19

Erythema infectiosum is often accompanied by arthralgias or arthritis
in adolescents and adults that may persist after resolution of the rash
(see Table 298.1). B19V may rarely cause thrombocytopenic purpura.
Neurologic conditions, including aseptic meningitis, encephalitis, and
peripheral neuropathy, have been reported in both immunocompromised and healthy individuals in association with B19V infection. The
incidence of stroke may be increased in children with sickle cell disease

1991

following B19V-­induced transient aplastic crisis. B19V is also a cause
of infection-­associated hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, usually
in immunocompromised persons.

Human Bocavirus

There are no studies reporting on complications of HBoV1 infection. Complications of wheezing and viral pneumonia would be possible, including hypoxemia and secondary bacterial infection, among
others.

PREVENTION
Parvovirus B19

Children with erythema infectiosum are not likely to be infectious
at presentation because the rash and arthropathy represent immune-­
mediated, postinfectious phenomena. Isolation and exclusion from
school or childcare are unnecessary and ineffective after diagnosis.
Children with B19V-­induced RBC aplasia, including the transient
aplastic crisis, are infectious upon presentation and demonstrate a
more intense viremia. Most of these children require transfusions and
supportive care until their hematologic status stabilizes. They should
be isolated in the hospital to prevent spread to susceptible patients and
staff. Isolation should continue for at least 1 week and until fever has
resolved. Pregnant caregivers should not be assigned to these patients.
Exclusion of pregnant women from workplaces where children with
erythema infectiosum may be present (e.g., primary and secondary
schools) is not recommended as a general policy because it is unlikely
to reduce their risk. There are no data to support the use of IVIG for
postexposure prophylaxis in pregnant caregivers or immunocompromised children. No vaccine is currently available, though this is a topic
of ongoing research.

Human Bocavirus

There are no studies that have addressed the prevention of transmission of this infection. In the hospital setting, standard precautions
should be observed to limit spread of the virus. Because HBoV1 causes
respiratory infection and can be detected in respiratory secretions
sometimes in very high titer, measures to limit contact with respiratory
secretions should be considered, including contact and droplet isolation for severely symptomatic young children. No vaccine is available,
and no other preventive measures have been reported.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 299

Herpes Simplex Virus
Lawrence R. Stanberry and Philip Zachariah
The two closely related herpes simplex viruses (HSVs), HSV type 1
(HSV-­1) and HSV type 2 (HSV-­2), cause a variety of illnesses, depending on the anatomic site where the infection is initiated, the immune
state of the host, and whether the symptoms reflect primary or recurrent infection. Common infections involve the skin, eye, oral cavity,
and genital tract. Infections tend to be mild and self-­limiting, except in
the immunocompromised patient and newborn infants, in whom they
may be severe and life-­threatening.
Primary infection occurs in individuals who have not been infected
previously with either HSV-­1 or HSV-­2. Because these individuals are
HSV seronegative and have no preexisting immunity to HSV, primary
infections can be severe. Nonprimary first infection occurs in individuals previously infected with one type of HSV (e.g., HSV-­1) who

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1992 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
have become infected for the first time with the other type of HSV
(HSV-­2). Because immunity to one HSV type provides some cross-­
protection against disease caused by the other HSV type, nonprimary
first infections tend to be less severe than true primary infections. During primary and nonprimary initial infections, HSV establishes latent
infection in regional sensory ganglion neurons. Virus is maintained in
this latent state for the life of the host but periodically can reactivate
and cause recurrent infection. Symptomatic recurrent infections tend
to be less severe and of shorter duration than first infections. Asymptomatic recurrent infections are extremely common and cause no
physical distress, although patients with these infections are contagious
and can transmit the virus to susceptible individuals. Reinfection with
a new strain of either HSV-­1 or HSV-­2 at a previously infected anatomic site (e.g., the genital tract) can occur but is relatively uncommon,
suggesting that host immunity, perhaps site-­specific local immunity,
resulting from the initial infection affords protection against exogenous reinfection.

ETIOLOGY

HSVs contain a double-­stranded DNA genome of approximately 152
kb that encodes at least 84 proteins. The DNA is contained within an
icosadeltahedral capsid, which is surrounded by an outer envelope
composed of a lipid bilayer containing at least 12 viral glycoproteins.
These glycoproteins are the major targets for humoral immunity,
whereas other nonstructural proteins are important targets for cellular
immunity. Two encoded proteins, viral DNA polymerase and thymidine kinase, are targets for antiviral drugs. HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 have a
similar genetic composition with extensive DNA and protein homology. One important difference in the two viruses is their glycoprotein
G proteins, which have been exploited to develop a new generation
of commercially available, accurate, type-­specific serologic tests that
can be used to discriminate whether a patient has been infected with
HSV-­1 or HSV-­2 or both.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

HSV infections are ubiquitous, and there are no seasonal variations in
risk for infection. The only natural host is humans, and the mode of
transmission is direct contact between mucocutaneous surfaces. There
are no documented incidental transmissions from inanimate objects
such as toilet seats.
All infected individuals harbor latent infection and experience
recurrent infections, which may be symptomatic or may go unrecognized and thus are periodically contagious. This information helps
explain the widespread prevalence of HSV.
HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 are equally capable of causing initial infection at any anatomic site but differ in their capacity to cause recurrent infections. HSV-­1 has a greater propensity to cause recurrent
oral infections, whereas HSV-­2 has a greater proclivity to cause
recurrent genital infections. For this reason, HSV-­
1 infection
typically results from contact with contaminated oral secretions,
whereas HSV-­2 infection most commonly results from anogenital
contact.
HSV seroprevalence rates are highest in developing countries and
among lower socioeconomic groups, although high rates of HSV-­1
and HSV-­2 infections are found in developed nations and among
persons of the highest socioeconomic strata. Incident HSV-­1 infections are more common during childhood and adolescence but are
also found throughout later life. Data on HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 antibody
prevalence from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) among persons age 14-­49 years showed the prevalence
of HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 to be 47.8% and 11.9%, respectively. Prevalence
of both HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 increased linearly with age and was higher
among females than males.
Modifiable factors that predict HSV-­2 seropositivity include less
education, poverty, cocaine use, and a greater lifetime number of sexual partners. Studies show that only approximately 10–20% of HSV-­2–
seropositive subjects report a history of genital herpes, emphasizing
the asymptomatic nature of most HSV infections.

A 3-­year longitudinal study of Midwestern adolescent females
12-­15 years of age found that 44% were seropositive for HSV-­1 and
7% for HSV-­2 at enrollment. At the end of the study, 49% were seropositive for HSV-­1 and 14% for HSV-­2. The attack rates, based on
the number of cases per 100 person-­years, were 3.2 for HSV-­1 infection among all females and 4.4 for HSV-­2 infection among females
who reported being sexually experienced. Findings of this study
indicate that sexually active young women have a high attack rate
for genital herpes and suggest that genital herpes should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any young woman who reports
recurrent genitourinary complaints. In this study, participants with
preexisting HSV-­1 antibodies had a significantly lower attack rate
for HSV-­2 infection, and those who became infected were less likely
to have symptomatic disease than females who were HSV seronegative when they entered the study. Prior HSV-­1 infection appears
to afford adolescent females some protection against becoming
infected with HSV-­2; in adolescent females infected with HSV-­2,
the preexisting HSV-­1 immunity appears to protect against development of symptomatic genital herpes.
Neonatal herpes is an uncommon but potentially fatal infection of
the fetus or more likely the newborn. It is not a reportable disease in
most states, and therefore there are no solid epidemiologic data regarding its frequency in the general population. The overall U.S. incidence
of neonatal HSV was estimated to be 9.6 per 100,000 births in 2006,
which is higher than reported for the reportable perinatally acquired
sexually transmitted infections such as congenital syphilis and gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum. More than 90% of the cases are the
result of maternal-­child transmission. The risk for transmission is
greatest during a primary or nonprimary first infection (30–50%) and
much lower when the exposure is during a recurrent infection (<2%).
HSV viral suppression therapy in mothers does not consistently eliminate the possibility of neonatal infection. Infants born to mothers
dually infected with HIV and HSV-­2 are also at higher risk for acquiring HIV than infants born to HIV-­positive mothers who are not HSV-­2
infected. It is estimated that approximately 25% of pregnant women are
HSV-­2 infected and that approximately 2% of pregnant women acquire
HSV-­2 infection during pregnancy.
HSV is a leading cause of sporadic, fatal encephalitis in children and
adults. In the United States the annual hospitalization rate for HSV
encephalitis has been calculated to be 10.3 ± 2.2 cases/million in neonates, 2.4 ± 0.3 cases/million in children, and 6.4 ± 0.4 cases/million
in adults.

PATHOGENESIS

In the immunocompetent host the pathogenesis of HSV infection
involves viral replication in skin and mucous membranes followed by
replication and spread in neural tissue. Viral infection typically begins
at a cutaneous portal of entry such as the oral cavity, genital mucosa,
ocular conjunctiva, or breaks in keratinized epithelia. The virus enters
the cell through attachment and fusion, a multistep process mediated
by interaction of viral envelope glycoproteins (e.g., gB and gH-­gL) with
host surface receptors (e.g., Nectin-­1). Virus replicates locally, resulting in the death of the cell, and sometimes produces clinically apparent
inflammatory responses that facilitate the development of characteristic herpetic vesicles and ulcers. Virus also enters nerve endings and
spreads beyond the portal of entry to sensory ganglia by intraneuronal
transport. Virus replicates in some sensory neurons, and the progeny
virions are sent via intraneuronal transport mechanisms back to the
periphery, where they are released from nerve endings and replicate further in skin or mucosal surfaces. It is virus moving through this neural
arc that is primarily responsible for the development of characteristic
herpetic lesions, although most HSV infections do not reach a threshold necessary to cause clinically recognizable disease. Although many
sensory neurons become productively infected during the initial infection, some infected neurons do not initially support viral replication. It
is in these neurons that the virus establishes a latent infection, a condition in which the viral genome persists within the neuronal nucleus
in a largely metabolically inactive state. Intermittently throughout the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 299 u Herpes Simplex Virus
life of the host, undefined changes can occur in latently infected neurons that trigger the virus to begin to replicate. This replication occurs
despite the host’s having established a variety of humoral and cellular
immune responses that successfully controlled the initial infection.
With reactivation of the latent neuron, progeny virions are produced
and transported within nerve fibers back to cutaneous sites somewhere
in the vicinity of the initial infection, where further replication occurs
and causes recurrent infections. Recurrent infections may be symptomatic (with typical or atypical herpetic lesions) or asymptomatic. In
either case, virus is shed at the site where cutaneous replication occurs
and can be transmitted to susceptible individuals who come in contact
with the site or with contaminated secretions. Latency and reactivation
are the mechanisms by which the virus is successfully maintained in
the human population.
Viremia, or hematogenous spread of the virus, does not appear to
play an important role in HSV infections in the immunocompetent
host but can occur in neonates, individuals with eczema, and severely
malnourished children. It is also seen in patients with depressed or
defective cell-­
mediated immunity, as occurs with HIV infection,
malignancy, or immunosuppressive therapies. Viremia can result in
dissemination of the virus to visceral organs, including the liver and
adrenals. Hematogenous dissemination of virus to the central nervous
system appears to only occur in neonates.
The pathogenesis of HSV infection in newborns is complicated by
their relative immunologic immaturity. The source of virus in neonatal infections is typically but not exclusively the mother. Transmission generally occurs during delivery, although it is well documented
to rarely occur with cesarean delivery with intact fetal membranes.
The most common portals of entry are the conjunctiva, mucosal
epithelium of the nose and mouth, and breaks or abrasions in the
skin that occur with scalp electrode use or forceps delivery. With
prompt antiviral therapy, virus replication may be restricted to the
site of inoculation (the skin, eye, or mouth). However, virus may also
extend from the nose to the respiratory tract to cause pneumonia,
move via intraneuronal transport to the central nervous system to
cause encephalitis, or spread by hematogenous dissemination to visceral organs and the brain. Factors that may influence neonatal HSV
infection include the virus type, portal of entry, inoculum of virus to
which the infant is exposed, gestational age of the infant, and presence of maternally derived antibodies specific to the virus causing
infection. Latent infection is established during neonatal infection,
and survivors may experience recurrent cutaneous and neural infections. Persistent central nervous system infection may affect the neurodevelopment of the infant.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The hallmarks of common HSV infections are skin vesicles and
shallow ulcers. Classic infections manifest as small, 2-­to 4-­mm
vesicles that may be surrounded by an erythematous base. These
may persist for a few days before evolving into shallow, minimally
erythematous ulcers. The vesicular phase tends to persist longer
when keratinized epithelia is involved and is generally brief and
sometimes just fleeting when moist mucous membranes are the
site of infection. Because HSV infections are common, and their
natural history is influenced by many factors, including portal of
entry, immune status of the host, and whether it is an initial or
recurrent infection, the typical manifestations are seldom classic.
Most infections are asymptomatic or unrecognized, and nonclassic
presentations, such as small skin fissures and small erythematous
nonvesicular lesions, are common.

Acute Oropharyngeal Infections

Herpes gingivostomatitis most often affects children 6 months to 5
years of age but is seen across the age spectrum. It is an extremely painful condition with sudden onset, pain in the mouth, drooling, refusal to
eat or drink, and fever of up to 40.0–40.6°C (104–105.1°F). The gums
become markedly swollen, and vesicles may develop throughout the
oral cavity, including the gums, lips, tongue, palate, tonsils, pharynx,

1993

Fig. 299.1 Clustered perioral vesicles and erosions in an infant with

primary herpetic gingivostomatitis. (From Schachner LA, Hansen RC,
eds. Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 1988:1078.)

and perioral skin (Fig. 299.1). The vesicles may be more extensively
distributed than typically seen with enteroviral herpangina. During the
initial phase of the illness there may be tonsillar exudates suggestive
of bacterial pharyngitis. The vesicles are generally present only a few
days before progressing to form shallow indurated ulcers that may be
covered with a yellow-­gray membrane. Tender submandibular, submaxillary, and cervical lymphadenopathy is common. The breath may
be foul as a result of overgrowth of anaerobic oral bacteria. Untreated,
the illness resolves in 7-­14 days, although the lymphadenopathy may
persist for several weeks.
In older children, adolescents, and college students, the initial HSV
oral infection may manifest as pharyngitis and tonsillitis rather than
gingivostomatitis. The vesicular phase is often over by the time the
patient presents to a healthcare provider, and signs and symptoms may
be indistinguishable from those of streptococcal pharyngitis, consisting of fever, malaise, headache, sore throat, and white plaques on the
tonsils. The course of illness is typically longer than for untreated streptococcal pharyngitis.

Herpes Labialis

Fever blisters (cold sores) are the most common manifestation of
recurrent HSV-­1 infections. The most common site of herpes labialis is
the vermilion border of the lip, although lesions sometimes occur on
the nose, chin, cheek, or oral mucosa. Older patients report experiencing burning, tingling, itching, or pain 3-­6 hours (rarely as long as 24-­48
hours) before the development of the herpes lesion. The lesion generally begins as a small grouping of erythematous papules that progress
over a few hours to create a small, thin-­walled vesicle. The vesicles may
form shallow ulcers or become pustular. The short-­lived ulcer dries
and develops a crusted scab. Complete healing without scarring occurs
with reepithelialization of the ulcerated skin, usually within 6-­10 days.
Some patients experience local lymphadenopathy but no constitutional
symptoms.

Cutaneous Infections

In the healthy child or adolescent, cutaneous HSV infections are generally the result of skin trauma with macroabrasions or microabrasions
and exposure to infectious secretions. This situation most often occurs
in play or contact sports such as wrestling (herpes gladiatorum) and
rugby (scrum pox). An initial cutaneous infection establishes a latent
infection that can subsequently result in recurrent infections at or near
the site of the initial infection. Pain, burning, itching, or tingling often
precedes the herpetic eruption by a few hours to a few days. Like herpes
labialis, lesions begin as grouped, erythematous papules that progress
to vesicles, pustules, ulcers, and crusts and then heal without scarring in 6-­10 days. Although herpes labialis typically results in a single
lesion, a cutaneous HSV infection results in multiple discrete lesions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1994 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Fig. 299.2 Herpes simplex infection of finger (whitlow). (From Schachner LA, Hansen RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby; 1988:1079.)

and involves a larger surface area. Regional lymphadenopathy may
occur, but systemic symptoms are uncommon. Recurrences are sometimes associated with local edema and lymphangitis or local neuralgia.
Herpes whitlow is a term generally applied to HSV infection of fingers or toes, although strictly speaking it refers to HSV infection of the
paronychia. Among children, this condition is most commonly seen
in infants and toddlers who suck the thumb or fingers and who are
experiencing either a symptomatic or a subclinical oral HSV-­1 infection (Fig. 299.2). An HSV-­2 herpes whitlow occasionally develops in
an adolescent as a result of exposure to infectious genital secretions.
The onset of the infection is heralded by itching, pain, and erythema
2-­7 days after exposure. The cuticle becomes erythematous and tender and may appear to contain pus, although if it is incised, little fluid
is present. Incising the lesion is discouraged, because this maneuver
typically prolongs recovery and increases the risk for secondary bacterial infection. Lesions and associated pain typically persist for about 10
days, followed by rapid improvement and complete recovery in 18-­20
days. Regional lymphadenopathy is common, and lymphangitis and
neuralgia may occur. Unlike other recurrent herpes infections, recurrent herpetic whitlows are often as painful as the primary infection but
are generally shorter in duration.
Cutaneous HSV infections can be severe or life-­
threatening in
patients with disorders of the skin such as eczema (eczema herpeticum), pemphigus, burns, and Darier disease and following laser skin
resurfacing. The lesions are frequently ulcerative and nonspecific in
appearance, although typical vesicles may be seen in adjacent normal
skin (Fig. 299.3). If untreated, these lesions can progress to disseminated infection and death. Recurrent infections are common but generally less severe than the initial infection.

Genital Herpes

Genital HSV infection is common in sexually experienced adolescents
and young adults, but up to 90% of infected individuals are unaware
they are infected. Infection may result from genital-­genital transmission (usually HSV-­2) or oral-­genital transmission (usually HSV-­1).
Symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals periodically shed virus
from anogenital sites and hence can transmit the infection to sexual
partners or, in the case of pregnant women, to their newborns. Classic primary genital herpes may be preceded by a short period of local
burning and tenderness before vesicles develop on genital mucosal
surfaces or keratinized skin and sometimes around the anus or on the
buttocks and thighs. Vesicles on mucosal surfaces are short lived and
rupture to produce shallow, tender ulcers covered with a yellowish gray
exudate and surrounded by an erythematous border. Vesicles on keratinized epithelium persist for a few days before progressing to the pustular stage and then crusting.
Patients may experience urethritis and dysuria severe enough
to cause urinary retention and bilateral, tender inguinal and pelvic
lymphadenopathy. Women may experience a watery vaginal discharge,

Fig. 299.3 Widespread cutaneous herpes infection in a child with underlying eczema (eczema herpeticum).

and men may have a clear mucoid urethral discharge. Significant local
pain and systemic symptoms such as fever, headache, and myalgia are
common. Aseptic meningitis develops in an estimated 15% of cases.
The course of classic primary genital herpes from onset to complete
healing is 2-­3 weeks.
Most patients with symptomatic primary genital herpes experience
at least one recurrent infection in the following year. Recurrent genital herpes is usually less severe and of shorter duration than the primary infection. Some patients experience a sensory prodrome with
pain, burning, and tingling at the site where vesicles subsequently
develop. Asymptomatic recurrent anogenital HSV infections are
common, and all HSV-­2–seropositive individuals appear to periodically shed virus from anogenital sites. Most sexual transmissions and
maternal-­neonatal transmissions of virus result from asymptomatic
shedding episodes.
Genital infections caused by HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 are indistinguishable, but HSV-­1 causes significantly fewer subsequent episodes of
recurrent infection; hence, knowing which virus is causing the infection has important prognostic value. Genital HSV infection increases
the risk for acquiring HIV infection.
Rarely, genital HSV infections are identified in young children
and preadolescents. Although genital disease in children should
raise concerns about possible sexual abuse, there are documented
cases of autoinoculation, in which a child has inadvertently transmitted virus from contaminated oral secretions to his or her own
genitalia.

Ocular Infections

HSV ocular infections may involve the conjunctiva, cornea, or retina
and may be primary or recurrent. Conjunctivitis or keratoconjunctivitis is usually unilateral and is often associated with blepharitis
and tender preauricular lymphadenopathy. The conjunctiva appears
edematous but there is rarely purulent discharge. Vesicular lesions
may be seen on the lid margins and periorbital skin. Patients typically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 299 u Herpes Simplex Virus

Central Nervous System Infections

HSV encephalitis is the leading cause of sporadic, nonepidemic
encephalitis in children and adults in the United States. It is an acute
necrotizing infection generally involving the frontal and/or temporal cortex and the limbic system and, beyond the neonatal period,
is almost always caused by HSV-­1. The infection may manifest as
nonspecific findings, including fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, nausea, vomiting, generalized seizures, and alteration of consciousness.
Injury to the frontal or temporal cortex or limbic system may produce findings more indicative of HSV encephalitis, including anosmia, memory loss, peculiar behavior, expressive aphasia and other
changes in speech, hallucinations, and focal seizures. The untreated
infection progresses to coma and death in 75% of cases. Examination
of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) typically shows a moderate number
of mononuclear cells and polymorphonuclear leukocytes, a mildly
elevated protein concentration, a normal or slightly decreased glucose concentration, and often a moderate number of erythrocytes.
HSV has also been associated with autoimmune (NMDA receptor)
encephalitis (see Chapter 638.4). Genetic factors that increase the
susceptibility to HSV encephalitis include pathogenic variants in
toll-­like receptor-­3 (TLR3)-­dependent interferon immunity, DBR1,
RNA5SP141, TRAF3, and other genes involved in TLR3 sensing or
downstream signaling.
HSV is also a cause of aseptic meningitis and is the most common
cause of recurrent aseptic meningitis (Mollaret meningitis).

Infections in Immunocompromised Persons

Severe, life-­threatening HSV infections can occur in patients with
compromised immune functions, including neonates, the severely
malnourished, those with primary or secondary immunodeficiency
diseases (including AIDS), and those receiving some immunosuppressive regimens, particularly for cancer and organ transplantation.
Mucocutaneous infections, including mucositis and esophagitis, are
most common, although their presentations may be atypical and
can result in lesions that slowly enlarge, ulcerate, become necrotic,
and extend to deeper tissues. Other HSV infections include tracheobronchitis, pneumonitis, and anogenital infections. Disseminated infection can result in a sepsis-­like presentation, with liver
and adrenal involvement, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy,
and shock.

Perinatal Infections

HSV infection may be acquired in utero, during the birth process, or
during the neonatal period. Intrauterine (prenatal) and postpartum
(cutaneous lesions in caretakers) infections are well described but
occur infrequently. Postpartum transmission may be from the mother
or another adult with a nongenital (typically HSV-­1) infection such
as herpes labialis. Most cases of neonatal herpes result from maternal
infection and transmission, usually during passage through an infected
birth canal of a mother with asymptomatic genital herpes. Transmission is well documented in infants delivered by cesarean section. Fewer
than 30% of mothers of an infant with neonatal herpes have a history of
genital herpes. The risk for infection is higher in infants born to mothers with primary genital infection (>30%) than with recurrent genital
infection (<2%). Use of scalp electrodes may also increase risk. There

14
Disseminated
12
Number of subjects

have fever. Untreated infection generally resolves in 2-­3 weeks. Obvious corneal involvement is rare, but when it occurs it can produce
ulcers that are described as appearing dendritic or geographic. Extension to the stroma is uncommon although more likely to occur in
patients inadvertently treated with corticosteroids. When it occurs,
it may be associated with corneal edema, scarring, and corneal perforation. Recurrent infections tend to involve the underlying stroma
and can cause progressive corneal scarring and injury that can lead
to blindness.
Retinal infections are rare and are more likely among infants with
neonatal herpes and immunocompromised persons with disseminated
HSV infections.

1995

CNS

10
8

SEM

6
4
2
0
0−7d

8−14d

15−21d

22−28d

>28d

Fig. 299.4 Herpes simplex virus (HSV). Age at presentation by HSV

disease type. SEM, skin, eye, mouth. (From Curfman AL, Glissmeyer
EW, Ahmad FA, et al. Initial presentation of neonatal herpes simplex
virus infection. J Pediatr. 2016;172:121–126, p. 124.)

also have been rare cases of neonatal herpes associated with Jewish
ritual circumcisions, but only with ritual oral contact with the circumcision site.
Neonatal HSV infection is thought to never be asymptomatic. Its
clinical presentation reflects timing of infection, portal of entry, and
extent of spread. Infants with the rare onset of intrauterine infection
typically have skin vesicles or scarring; eye findings, including chorioretinitis and keratoconjunctivitis; and microcephaly or hydranencephaly that are present at delivery.
Few infants survive without therapy, and those who do generally have severe sequelae. Infants infected during delivery or the
postpartum period present with one of the following three patterns of disease: (1) disease localized to the skin, eyes, or mouth;
(2) encephalitis with or without skin, eye, and mouth disease; and
(3) disseminated infection involving multiple organs, including the
brain, lungs, liver, heart, adrenals, and skin (Fig. 299.4). Most present in the first 28 days of life. Approximately 20% present between
5 and 9 weeks of age.
Infants with skin, eye, and mouth disease generally present at
5-­11 days of life and typically demonstrate a few clustered small
vesicles, particularly on the presenting part or at sites of trauma
such as sites of scalp electrode placement. If untreated, skin, eye,
and mouth disease in infants may progress to encephalitis or disseminated disease.
Infants with encephalitis typically present at 8-­17 days of life with
clinical findings suggestive of bacterial meningitis, including irritability, lethargy, poor feeding, poor tone, and seizures. Fever or hypothermia may occur but is not universal; skin vesicles occur in only
approximately 60% of cases (Fig. 299.5). If untreated, 50% of infants
with HSV encephalitis die and most survivors have severe neurologic
sequelae.
Infants with disseminated HSV infections generally become ill at
5-­11 days of life. Their clinical picture is similar to that of infants
with bacterial sepsis, consisting of hyperthermia or hypothermia,
irritability, poor feeding, and vomiting. They may also exhibit respiratory distress, cyanosis, apneic spells, jaundice, purpuric rash, and
evidence of central nervous system infection; seizures are common.
Skin vesicles are seen in approximately 75% of cases. If untreated,
the infection causes shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation; approximately 90% of these infants die, and most survivors have
severe neurologic sequelae.
Infants with neonatal herpes whose mothers received antiherpes
antiviral drugs in the weeks before delivery may present later than their
untreated counterparts; whether the natural history of the infection in
these infants is different is an unanswered question.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1996 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Because most HSV diagnostic tests take at least a few days to complete, treatment should not be withheld but rather initiated promptly
so as to ensure the maximum therapeutic benefit.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Most self-­limited HSV infections cause few changes in routine laboratory parameters. Mucocutaneous infections may cause a moderate
polymorphonuclear leukocytosis. In HSV meningoencephalitis there
can be an increase in mononuclear cells and protein in CSF, the glucose content may be normal or reduced, and red blood cells may be
present. The electroencephalogram and MRI of the brain may show
temporal lobe abnormalities in HSV encephalitis beyond the neonatal
period. Encephalitis in the neonatal period tends to be more global and
not limited to the temporal lobe (Fig. 299.6). Disseminated infection
may cause elevated liver enzymes, thrombocytopenia, and abnormal
coagulation.

TREATMENT AND PREVENTION

Fig. 299.5 Vesicular-­pustular lesions on the face of a neonate with

herpes simplex virus infection. (From Kohl S. Neonatal herpes simplex
virus infection. Clin Perinatol. 1997;24:129–150.)

DIAGNOSIS

The clinical diagnosis of HSV infections, particularly life-­threatening
infections and genital herpes, should be confirmed by laboratory test,
preferably isolation of virus or detection of viral DNA by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). Histologic findings or imaging studies may support the diagnosis but should not substitute for virus-­specific tests.
HSV immunoglobulin M tests are notoriously unreliable, and the demonstration of a fourfold or greater rise in HSV-­specific immunoglobulin G titers between acute and convalescent serum samples is useful
only in retrospect.
The highest yield for virus cultures comes from rupturing a suspected herpetic vesicle and vigorously rubbing the base of the lesion
to collect fluid and cells. Culturing dried, crusted lesions is generally of low yield. Although not as sensitive as viral culture, direct
detection of HSV antigens in clinical specimens can be done rapidly and has very good specificity. The use of DNA amplification
methods such as PCR for detection of HSV DNA is highly sensitive and specific and in some instances can be performed rapidly.
It is the test of choice in examining CSF in cases of suspected HSV
encephalitis.
Evaluation of the neonate with suspected HSV infection should
include cultures and/or PCR of suspicious lesions as well nasopharynx, mouth, conjunctivae, rectum, umbilicus, and scalp electrode site
(if applicable), and PCR of both CSF and blood. In neonates testing
for elevation of liver enzymes may provide indirect evidence of HSV
dissemination to visceral organs. Efforts to develop clinical scoring
systems for invasive HSV in infants have identified younger age, prematurity, seizure at home, ill appearance, abnormal triage temperature
(fever or hypothermia), vesicular rash, thrombocytopenia, and CSF
fluid pleocytosis as predictors.
Culture or antigen detection should be used in evaluating lesions
associated with suspected acute genital herpes. HSV-­2 type-­specific
antibody tests are useful for evaluating sexually experienced adolescents or young adults who have a history of unexplained recurrent
nonspecific urogenital signs and symptoms, but these tests are less useful for general screening in populations in which HSV-­2 infections are
of low prevalence.

See Chapter 292 for more information about principles of antiviral
therapy.
Three antiviral drugs are available in the United States for the management of HSV infections, namely acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir. All three are available in oral form, but only acyclovir is available
in a suspension form. Acyclovir has the poorest bioavailability and
hence requires more frequent dosing. Valacyclovir, a prodrug of acyclovir, and famciclovir, a prodrug of penciclovir, both have very good
oral bioavailability and are dosed once or twice daily. Acyclovir and
penciclovir are also available in a topical form, but these preparations
provide limited or no benefit to patients with recurrent mucocutaneous HSV infections. Only acyclovir has an intravenous formulation.
Early initiation of therapy results in the maximal therapeutic benefit.
All three drugs have exceptional safety profiles and are safe to use
in pediatric patients. Doses should be modified in patients with renal
impairment.
Resistance to acyclovir and penciclovir is rare in immunocompetent persons but does occur in immunocompromised persons and is
usually mediated by mutations within the thymidine kinase and DNA
polymerase genes. Virus isolates from immunocompromised persons
whose HSV infection is not responding or is worsening with acyclovir
therapy should be tested for drug sensitivities. Foscarnet and cidofovir
have been used in the treatment of HSV infections caused by acyclovir-­
resistant mutants.
Topical trifluridine and topical ganciclovir are used in the treatment
of herpes keratitis.
Patients with genital herpes also require counseling to address
psychosocial issues, including possible stigma, and to help them
understand the natural history and management of this chronic
infection.

Acute Mucocutaneous Infections

For gingivostomatitis, limited evidence suggests that oral acyclovir
(15 mg/kg/dose 5 times a day PO for 7 days; maximum: 1 g/day)
started within 72 hours of onset reduces the severity and duration
of the illness. Pain associated with swallowing may limit oral intake
of infants and children, putting them at risk for dehydration. Intake
should be encouraged through the use of cold beverages, ice cream,
and yogurt.
For herpes labialis, oral treatment is superior to topical antiviral
therapy. For treatment of a recurrence in adolescents, oral valacyclovir (2,000 mg bid PO for 1 day), acyclovir (­400 mg 5 times daily PO
for 5 days), or famciclovir (1,500 mg once daily PO for 1 day) shortens the duration of the episode. Long-­term daily use of oral acyclovir
(400 mg bid PO) or valacyclovir (500 mg once daily PO) has been
used to prevent recurrences in individuals with frequent or severe
recurrences.
Anecdotal reports suggest that treatment of adolescents with herpes
gladiatorum with valacyclovir (500 mg bid PO for 7-­10 days) at the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 299 u Herpes Simplex Virus

1997

Fig. 299.6 Involvement of corti-

A

B

C

D

E

F

first signs of the outbreak can shorten the course of the recurrence with
accompanying guidance on the importance of good hydration. For
patients with a history of recurrent herpes gladiatorum, chronic daily
prophylaxis with valacyclovir (500-­1,000 mg/day) has been reported to
prevent recurrences.
There are no clinical trials assessing the benefit of antiviral treatment
for herpetic whitlow. High-­dose oral acyclovir (1,600-­2,000 mg/day
divided in two or three doses PO for 10 days) started at the first signs
of illness has been reported to abort some recurrences and reduce the
duration of others in adults.
Children with mild cases of eczema herpeticum can be treated
with oral acyclovir (10-20 mg/kg three times daily) or valacyclovir
(20 mg/kg per day in three divided doses) for 7-21 days. However, serious infections should be treated with intravenous acyclovir. Oral-­facial
HSV infections can reactivate after cosmetic facial laser resurfacing,
causing extensive disease and scarring. Treatment of adults beginning
the day before the procedure with either valacyclovir (500 mg twice
daily PO for 10-­14 days) or famciclovir (250-­500 mg bid PO for 10
days) has been reported to be effective in preventing the infections.
HSV infections in burn patients can be severe or life-­threatening
and have been treated with intravenous acyclovir (10-­20 mg/kg/day
divided every 8 hours).
Antiviral drugs are not effective in the treatment of HSV-­associated
erythema multiforme, but their daily use as for herpes labialis prophylaxis prevents reoccurrences of erythema multiforme.

Genital Herpes

Pediatric patients, usually adolescents or young adults, with suspected
first-­episode genital herpes should be treated with antiviral therapy.
Treatment of the initial infection reduces the severity and duration of
the illness but has no effect on the frequency of subsequent recurrent
infections. Treatment options for adolescents include acyclovir (400 mg

cospinal tract and thalamus in a 2-­
wk old infant. A, Axial T1-­weighted
MRI demonstrating subtle loss of
T1 hyperintensity corresponding to
myelination in the posterior limb
of the right internal capsule (white
arrow). T1 hyperintensity in the left
posterior limb of the internal capsule is maintained (black arrow). B,
T2 weighted image showing findings similar to those seen on T1-­
weighted imaging. C, Axial T1-­and
(D) T2-­weighted images through the
vertex demonstrating subtle indistinct margins of the cortex around
the right central sulcus (white arrow)
compared to the normal appearance on the left side (black arrow).
E and F, Diffusion-­
weighted images with more extensive diffusion
restriction in the posterior limb of
the right internal capsule and lateral
thalamus (arrows), and in the right
precentral and postcentral gyrus
(arrows). (From Bajaj M, Mody S,
Natarajan G. Clinical and neuroimaging findings in neonatal herpes
simplex virus infection. J Pediatr.
2014;165:404–407. Fig. 1.)

tid PO for 7-­10 days), famciclovir (250 mg tid PO for 7-­10 days), or
valacyclovir (1,000 mg bid PO for 7-­10 days). The twice-­daily valacyclovir option avoids treatment during school hours. For smaller children,
acyclovir suspension can be used at a dose of 10-­20 mg/kg/dose 4 times
daily, not to exceed the adult dose. The first episode of genital herpes
can be extremely painful, and use of analgesics is generally indicated.
Intravenous acyclovir is indicated for those with severe or complicated
primary infections that may require hospitalization. All patients with
genital herpes should be offered counseling to help them deal with psychosocial issues and understand the chronic nature of the illness.
There are three strategic options regarding the management of
recurrent infections. The choice should be guided by several factors,
including the frequency and severity of the recurrent infections,
the psychologic impact of the illness on the patient, and concerns
regarding transmission to a susceptible sexual partner. Option 1 is
no therapy; option 2 is episodic therapy; and option 3 is long-­term
suppressive therapy. For episodic therapy, treatment should be initiated at the first signs of an outbreak. Recommended choices for
episodic therapy in adolescents include famciclovir (1,000 mg bid
PO for 1 day), acyclovir (800 mg tid PO for 2 days), or valacyclovir
(500 mg bid PO for 3 days.) Long-­term suppressive therapy offers
the advantage that it prevents most outbreaks, improves patient
quality of life in terms of the psychosocial impact of genital herpes, and, with daily valacyclovir therapy, also reduces (but does not
eliminate) the risk for sexual transmission to a susceptible sexual
partner. Options for long-­term suppressive therapy are acyclovir
(400 mg bid PO), famciclovir (250 mg bid PO), and valacyclovir
(500 or 1,000 mg qd PO).

Ocular Infections

HSV ocular infections can result in blindness. Management should
involve consultation with an ophthalmologist.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1998 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Central Nervous System Infections

Patients older than neonates who have herpes encephalitis should be
promptly treated with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 hours
given as a 1-­hour infusion for 21 days). Treatment for increased intracranial pressure, management of seizures, and respiratory compromise
may be required.

Infections in Immunocompromised Persons

Severe mucocutaneous and disseminated HSV infections in immunocompromised patients should be treated with intravenous acyclovir
(30 mg/kg per day, in three divided doses for 7-­14 days) until there
is evidence of resolution of the infection. Oral antiviral therapy with
acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir has been used for treatment of
less-­severe HSV infections and for suppression of recurrences during
periods of significant immunosuppression. Drug resistance does occur
occasionally in immunocompromised patients, and in individuals
whose HSV infection does not respond to antiviral drug therapy, viral
isolates should be tested to determine sensitivity. Acyclovir-­resistant
viruses are often also resistant to famciclovir but may be sensitive to
foscarnet or cidofovir.

Perinatal Infections

All infants with proven or suspected neonatal HSV infection should
be treated immediately with high-­dose intravenous acyclovir (60
mg/kg/day divided every 8 hours). Treatment may be discontinued
in infants shown by laboratory testing not to be infected. Infants
with HSV disease limited to skin, eyes, and mouth should be treated
for 14 days, whereas those with disseminated or central nervous
system disease should receive a minimum of 21 days of therapy.
Patients receiving high-­
dose therapy should be monitored for
neutropenia.
Suppressive oral acyclovir therapy for 6 months after completion of
the intravenous therapy has been shown to improve the neurodevelopment of infants with central nervous system infection and to prevent
cutaneous recurrences in infants regardless of disease pattern. Infants
surviving neonatal HSV disease of any classification should receive 300
mg/m2 per dose 3 times daily for 6 months. The absolute neutrophil
count should be measured at weeks 2 and 4 after initiation of treatment
and then monthly.

PROGNOSIS

Most HSV infections are self-­limiting, last from a few days (for
recurrent infections) to 2-­3 weeks (for primary infections) and heal
without scarring. Recurrent oral-­facial herpes in a patient who has
undergone dermabrasion or laser resurfacing can be severe and lead
to scarring. Because genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection, it can be stigmatizing, and its psychologic consequences may
be much greater than its physiologic effects. Some HSV infections
can be severe and may have grave consequences without prompt
antiviral therapy. Life-­threatening conditions include neonatal herpes, herpes encephalitis, and HSV infections in immunocompromised patients, burn patients, and severely malnourished infants
and children. Recurrent ocular herpes can lead to corneal scarring
and blindness.

PREVENTION

Transmission of infection occurs through exposure to virus either
as the result of skin-­to-­skin contact or from contact with contaminated secretions. Good handwashing and, when appropriate, the
use of gloves provide healthcare workers with excellent protection
against HSV infection in the workplace. Healthcare workers with
active oral-­facial herpes or herpetic whitlow should take precautions,

particularly when caring for high-­risk patients such as newborns,
immunocompromised individuals, and patients with chronic skin
conditions. Patients and parents should be advised about good
hygienic practices, including handwashing and avoiding contact with
lesions and secretions, during active herpes outbreaks. Schools and
daycare centers should clean shared toys and athletic equipment such
as wrestling mats at least daily after use. Athletes with active herpes
infections who participate in contact sports such as wrestling and
rugby should be excluded from practice or games until the lesions
are completely healed. Genital herpes can be prevented by avoiding
genital-­genital and oral-­genital contact. The risk for acquiring genital
herpes can be reduced but not eliminated through the correct and
consistent use of condoms. Male circumcision is associated with a
reduced risk of acquiring genital HSV infection. The risk for transmitting genital HSV-­2 infection to a susceptible sexual partner can
be reduced but not eliminated by the daily use of oral valacyclovir by
the infected partner.
For pregnant women with active genital herpes at the time of
delivery, the risk for mother-­to-­child transmission can be reduced
but not eliminated by delivering the baby via a cesarean section. The
risk for recurrent genital herpes, and therefore the need for cesarean
delivery, can be reduced but not eliminated in pregnant women with
a history of genital herpes by the daily use of oral acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir during the last 4 weeks of gestation, which is recommended by the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology.
There are documented cases of neonatal herpes occurring in infants
delivered by cesarean section, as well as in infants born to mothers
who have been appropriately treated with antiherpes antiviral drugs
for the last month of gestation. Therefore a history of cesarean delivery or antiviral treatment at term does not rule out consideration of
neonatal herpes.
Asymptomatic infants delivered vaginally to women with first-­
episode genital herpes are at very high risk for acquiring HSV infection. The nasopharynx, mouth, conjunctivae, rectum, umbilicus, and
scalp electrode site (if applicable) should be cultured (with PCR surface testing if available) at approximately 24 hours after birth for all
infants born to mothers with primary genital herpes. Some also recommend HSV-­PCR on blood and CSF. Some authorities recommend
that these infants receive anticipatory acyclovir therapy for at least
10 days, and others treat such infants if signs develop or if there is
evidence of HSV infection. Infants delivered to women with a history
of recurrent genital herpes are at low risk for development of neonatal herpes. In this setting, while surface cultures and PCRs are done,
empirical acyclovir is not started. Parents should be educated about
the signs and symptoms of neonatal HSV infection and should be
instructed to seek care without delay at the first suggestion of infection. When the situation is in doubt, infants should be evaluated and
tested with surface culture (and PCR) for neonatal herpes as well as
with PCR on blood and CSF; intravenous acyclovir is begun until
culture and PCR results are negative or until another explanation can
be found for the signs and symptoms.
Recurrent genital HSV infections can be prevented by the daily use
of oral acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir, and these drugs have
been used to prevent recurrences of oral-­facial (labialis) and cutaneous
(gladiatorum) herpes. Oral and intravenous acyclovir also have been
used to prevent recurrent HSV infections in immunocompromised
patients. Use of sun blockers is reported to be effective in preventing
recurrent oral-­facial herpes in patients with a history of sun-­induced
recurrent disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 300 u Varicella-Zoster Virus

Chapter 300

Varicella-­Zoster Virus*
Shivang S. Shah, Mona Marin,
Philip S. LaRussa, and Anne A. Gershon
Varicella-­zoster virus (VZV) causes primary, latent, and reactivation
infections. The primary infection manifests as varicella (chickenpox)
and results in establishment of a lifelong latent infection of sensory
ganglionic neurons. Reactivation of the latent infection causes herpes
zoster (shingles). Although often a mild illness of childhood, varicella
can cause substantial morbidity and mortality in otherwise healthy
children. Morbidity and mortality are higher in immunocompetent
infants, adolescents, and adults, as well as in immunocompromised
persons. Varicella predisposes to severe group A streptococcus and
staphylococcus infections. Primary clinical disease can be prevented
by immunization with live-­attenuated varicella vaccine. A clinically
modified disease can occur among vaccinated persons (breakthrough
varicella), usually with milder presentation. Varicella and herpes zoster
can be treated with antiviral drugs. Vaccines are also available to prevent herpes zoster in older adults.

ETIOLOGY

VZV is a neurotropic human herpesvirus with similarities to herpes
simplex virus. VZV enveloped viruses contain double-­stranded DNA
genomes that encode 71 proteins, including proteins that are targets of
cellular and humoral immunity.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Before the introduction of the varicella vaccine in 1995, varicella
was an almost universal communicable infection of childhood in the
United States. Annual varicella epidemics occurred in winter and
spring, and there were about 4 million cases of varicella, 11,000-­13,500
hospitalizations, and 100-­150 deaths every year in the United States.
Most children were infected by 10 years of age, with fewer than 5%
of adults remaining susceptible. This pattern of infection at younger
ages remains characteristic in all countries in temperate climates. By
contrast, in tropical areas, children acquire varicella at older ages and
a higher proportion of young adults remain susceptible, leading to a
higher proportion of cases occurring among adults. Varicella is a more
serious disease in young infants, adults, and immunocompromised persons, in whom there are higher rates of complications and deaths than
in healthy children. Primary varicella is highly transmissible. Within
households, transmission of VZV to susceptible individuals occurs at
a rate of 65–86%; more casual contact, such as occurs in a school classroom, is associated with lower attack rates among susceptible children.
Persons with varicella may be contagious 24-­48 hours before the rash
is evident and until vesicles are crusted, usually 4-­7 days after onset of
rash, consistent with evidence that VZV is spread by aerosolization of
virus in cutaneous lesions; spread from oropharyngeal secretions may
occur but to a much lesser extent. Susceptible persons may also acquire
varicella after close, direct contact with adults or children who have
herpes zoster, again via aerosolization of virus in skin lesions.
Since implementation of the varicella vaccination program in 1995,
there have been substantial declines in varicella morbidity and mortality
in the United States. By 2006, before implementation of the two-­dose
program, one-­dose vaccination coverage had reached 90% and varicella
incidence had declined 90% since 1995 in sites where active surveillance
was being conducted; varicella-­related hospitalizations had declined
84% from prevaccine years. Varicella-­related deaths decreased by 88%
* The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.

1999

from 1990–1994 to 2005–2007; in persons younger than 20 years of age
there was a 97% decline in deaths. Declines in morbidity and mortality
were seen in all age groups, including infants younger than 12 months
of age who were not eligible for vaccination, indicating protection from
exposure by indirect vaccination effects. The continued occurrence of
breakthrough infections and of outbreaks in settings with high one-­dose
varicella vaccine coverage, together with the evidence that one dose is
only 82% effective against all varicella, prompted adoption in 2007 of a
routine two-­dose childhood varicella vaccination program with catch­up vaccination of all individuals without evidence of immunity. Further
declines in morbidity and mortality occurred during the two-dose program so that by 2019, declines reached more than 97% for incidence
and 90% for hospitalizations and deaths. The greatest decline occurred
in persons younger than 20 years of age, born during the varicella vaccination program, with 99%, 97%, and >99% reduction in incidence,
hospitalizations, and deaths, respectively. Additionally, the two-dose
program led to a reduction in the number, size, and duration of varicella
outbreaks. Although the age-specific incidence has declined in all age
groups, the median age at infection has increased, with cases occurring
predominantly in children in ages 7-10 years rather than in the preschool
years. This change in varicella epidemiology highlights the importance
of offering vaccine to every susceptible child, adolescent, and adult.
Herpes zoster is caused by the reactivation of latent VZV. It is not
common in childhood and shows no seasonal variation in incidence.
Zoster is not caused by exposure to a patient with varicella; in fact, exposures to varicella boost the cell-­mediated immune response to VZV in
individuals with prior infection, decreasing the likelihood of reactivation
of latent virus. The lifetime risk for herpes zoster for individuals with
a history of varicella is at least 30%, with 75% of cases occurring after
45 years of age. Herpes zoster is unusual in healthy children younger
than 10 years of age, with the exception of those infected with VZV in
utero or in the first year of life, who have an increased risk for development of zoster in the first few years of life. Herpes zoster in otherwise
healthy children tends to be milder than herpes zoster in adults, is less
frequently associated with acute pain, and is generally not associated
with postherpetic neuralgia. In children receiving immunosuppressive
therapy for malignancy or other diseases and in those who have HIV
infection, herpes zoster occurs more frequently, occasionally multiple
times, and may be severe. The attenuated VZV in the varicella vaccine
can establish latent infection and reactivate as herpes zoster. However,
the risk for development of subsequent herpes zoster is much lower after
vaccination than after natural VZV infection among both healthy and
immunocompromised children. Although the Oka vaccine type VZV is
attenuated, in children the severity of zoster caused by the Oka strain
seems to be similar to or slightly milder than that caused by the natural
or wild-­type VZV. Vaccinated children who do develop zoster may have
disease resulting from either vaccine or wild-­type VZV, due to breakthrough varicella or subclinical infection of some vaccinees with wild-­
type VZV occurring at some point after immunization.

PATHOGENESIS

Primary infection (varicella) results from inoculation of the virus onto
the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract and tonsillar lymphoid tissue.
During the early part of the 10-­to 21-­day incubation period, virus replicates in the local lymphoid tissue and spreads to T lymphocytes, causing
a viremia that delivers the virus to skin where innate immunity controls
VZV replication for several days. After innate immunity is overcome
in skin, widespread cutaneous lesions develop as the incubation period
ends. Adaptive host immune responses, especially cellular immunity,
limit viral replication and lead to recovery from infection. In the immunocompromised child, the failure of adaptive immunity, especially cellular immune responses, results in continued viral replication that may
lead to prolonged and/or disseminated infection with resultant complications of infection in the lungs, liver, brain, and other organs.
Latent infection develops during the incubation period or the disease itself. VZV is transported in a retrograde manner through sensory
axons to the dorsal root ganglia in the spinal cord and to cranial nerve
ganglia. Latency may also develop from viremia, infecting spinal and
cranial nerve ganglia as well as autonomic ganglia that do not project to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2000 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
the skin, including the enteric nervous system of the intestine. Latency
of VZV occurs only in ganglionic neurons. Subsequent reactivation
of latent VZV causes herpes zoster, usually manifested by a vesicular
rash that is unilateral and dermatomal in distribution. Reactivation of
VZV may also occur without a rash; examples are unilateral dermatomal pain without rash (zoster sine herpete), aseptic meningitis, and
gastrointestinal illness (enteric zoster). During herpes zoster, necrotic
changes may be produced in the neurons and surrounding satellite
cells in associated ganglia. The skin lesions of varicella and herpes
zoster have identical histopathology, and infectious VZV is present
in both. Varicella elicits humoral and cell-­mediated immunity that is
highly protective against symptomatic reinfection. Suppression of cell-­
mediated immunity to VZV correlates with an increased risk for VZV
reactivation as herpes zoster.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Varicella is an acute febrile rash illness that was common in children
in the United States before the universal childhood vaccination program. It has variable severity but is usually self-­limited. It may be
associated with severe complications, including bacterial superinfection, especially with staphylococci and group A streptococci, pneumonia, encephalitis, bleeding disorders, congenital infection, and
life-­threatening perinatal infection. Herpes zoster is not common in
children and typically causes localized cutaneous symptoms, but may
disseminate in immunocompromised patients.

Varicella in Unvaccinated Individuals

The illness usually begins 14-­16 days after exposure, although the
incubation period can range from 10-­21 days. Subclinical varicella is
rare; almost all exposed, susceptible persons experience a rash, albeit
so mild in some cases that it may go unnoticed. Prodromal symptoms
may be present, particularly in older children and adults. Fever, malaise, anorexia, headache, and occasionally mild abdominal pain may
occur 24-­48 hours before the rash appears. Temperature elevation is
usually 37.8–38.9°C (100–102°F) but may be as high as 41.1°C (106°F);
fever and other systemic symptoms usually resolve within 2-­4 days
after the onset of the rash.
Varicella lesions often appear first on the scalp, face, or trunk. The
initial exanthem consists of intensely pruritic erythematous macules
that evolve through the papular stage to form clear, fluid-­filled vesicles.
Clouding and umbilication of the lesions begin in 24-­48 hours. While
the initial lesions are crusting, new crops form on the trunk and then
the extremities; the simultaneous presence of lesions in various stages
of evolution is characteristic of varicella (Fig. 300.1). The distribution
of the rash is predominantly central or centripetal, with the greatest
concentration on the trunk and proximally on the extremities. Ulcerative lesions involving the mucosa of the oropharynx and vagina are
also common; many children have vesicular lesions on the eyelids and
conjunctivae, but corneal involvement and serious ocular disease are

A

B

Fig. 300.1 A, Varicella lesions in unvaccinated persons display the

characteristic “cropping” distribution, or manifest themselves in clusters; the simultaneous presence of lesions in various stages of evolution
is characteristic. B, Breakthrough varicella lesions are predominantly
maculopapular, and vesicles are less common; the illness is most commonly mild with <50 lesions. (Courtesy Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and Dr. John Noble, Jr.)

rare. The average number of varicella lesions is about 300, but healthy
children may have fewer than 10 to more than 1,500 lesions. In cases
resulting from secondary household spread and in older children,
more lesions usually occur, and new crops of lesions may continue to
develop for more than 7 days. The exanthem may be much more extensive in children with skin disorders, such as eczema or recent sunburn.
Hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation of lesion sites persists for
days to weeks in some children, but severe scarring is unusual unless
the lesions were secondarily infected.
The differential diagnosis of varicella includes vesicular rashes
caused by other infectious agents, such as herpes simplex virus, enterovirus, monkey pox (mpox), rickettsial pox, and Staphylococcus aureus;
drug reactions; disseminated herpes zoster; contact dermatitis; and
insect bites (especially for breakthrough varicella). Severe varicella was
the most common illness confused with smallpox before the eradication of smallpox.

Varicelliform Rashes in Vaccinated Individuals

Varicelliform rashes that occur after vaccination could be a result of
wild-­type VZV, vaccine strain VZV, or other causes (e.g., insect bites,
coxsackievirus). During days 0-­42 after vaccination, the likelihood of
rash from wild-­type or vaccine strain VZV varies depending on the
stage of a country’s vaccination program. In the early stages of a vaccination program, rash within 1-­2 weeks is still most commonly caused
by wild-­type VZV, reflecting exposure to varicella before vaccination
could provide protection. Rash occurring 14-­42 days after vaccination
is a result of either wild-­type or vaccine strains, reflecting exposure and
infection before protection from vaccination or an adverse event of
vaccination (vaccine-­associated rash), respectively. As wild-­type varicella continues to decline as a consequence of the vaccination program,
wild-­type VZV circulation will also decline and rashes in the interval 0-­42 days after vaccination will be less commonly caused by wild-­
type VZV, as is the case in the United States. Spread of vaccine type
VZV from a vaccinee with skin lesions has occurred but is rare. The
resulting illness in contacts is commonly mild with only a few vesicular lesions. Clinical reversion of the vaccine virus to virulence has not
been described.
Breakthrough varicella is disease caused by wild-­type virus in a
vaccinated person, occurring after 42 days past vaccination. One dose
of varicella vaccine is 98% effective in preventing moderate and severe
varicella and is 82% effective in preventing all disease after exposure to
wild-­type VZV. This means that after close exposure to VZV, as may
occur in a household or an outbreak setting in a school or daycare center, about 1 of every 5 children who received one dose of vaccine may
experience breakthrough varicella. Exposure to VZV may also result
in asymptomatic infection in the previously immunized child. The
rash in breakthrough disease is frequently atypical and predominantly
maculopapular, and vesicles are seen less commonly. The illness is most
commonly mild with fewer than 50 lesions, shorter duration of rash,
fewer complications, and little or no fever. However, approximately
25–30% of breakthrough cases in vaccinees who received one dose
are not mild, with clinical features more similar to those of wild-­type
infection. Breakthrough cases are overall less contagious than wild-­
type infections within household settings, but contagiousness varies
proportionally with the number of lesions; typical breakthrough cases
(<50 lesions) are about one-­third as contagious as disease in unvaccinated cases, whereas breakthrough cases with ≥50 lesions are as contagious as wild-­type cases. Consequently, children with breakthrough
disease should be considered potentially infectious and excluded from
school until lesions have crusted or, if there are no vesicles present,
until no new lesions are occurring. Transmission has been documented
to occur from breakthrough cases in household, childcare, and school
settings.
Two doses of varicella vaccine provide better protection than a
one-­dose schedule. One clinical trial estimated the two-­dose vaccine efficacy for preventing all disease at 98%; the estimate is 92% in
conditions of everyday clinical practice. Institution of two doses routinely in the United States substantially reduced the school outbreaks
that were occurring among children who had received only one dose.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 300 u Varicella-­Zoster Virus

2001

Breakthrough cases have been reported among two-­dose vaccinees;
however, recipients of two doses of varicella vaccine are less likely to
have breakthrough disease than those who received one dose. Additionally, data suggest that breakthrough varicella may be further attenuated among two-­dose vaccine recipients.

Neonatal Varicella

Mortality is particularly high in neonates born to susceptible mothers who contract varicella around the time of delivery. Infants whose
mothers demonstrate varicella in the period from 5 days before delivery to 2 days afterward are at high risk for severe varicella. These
infants acquire the infection transplacentally as a result of maternal
viremia, which may occur up to 48 hours before onset of maternal
rash. The infant’s rash usually occurs toward the end of the first week
to the early part of the second week of life (although it may be as soon
as 2 days). Because the mother has not yet developed a significant
antibody response, the infant receives a large dose of virus without
the moderating effect of maternal anti-­VZV antibody. If the mother
demonstrates varicella more than 5 days before delivery, she still may
pass virus to the soon-­to-­be-­born child, but infection is attenuated
because of transmission of maternal VZV-­specific antibody across
the placenta. This moderating effect of maternal antibody is present
if delivery occurs after about 30 weeks of gestation, when maternal
immunoglobulin (Ig) G (IgG) is able to cross the placenta in significant amounts. The recommendations for use of human varicella-­zoster
immunoglobulin (VZIG) differ based on when the infant is exposed
to varicella. Newborns whose mothers develop varicella during the
period of 5 days before to 2 days after delivery should receive VZIG
as soon as possible after birth. Although neonatal varicella may occur
in about half of these infants despite administration of VZIG, it is
milder than in the absence of VZIG administration. All premature
infants born <28 weeks of gestation to a mother with active varicella
at delivery (even if the maternal rash has been present for >1 week)
should receive VZIG. If VZIG is not available, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may provide some protection, although varicella-­
specific antibody titers may vary from lot to lot. Because perinatally
acquired varicella may be life threatening, the infant should usually be
treated with acyclovir (10-15 mg/kg every 8 hours IV) when lesions
develop. Neonatal varicella can also follow a postpartum exposure of
an infant delivered to a mother who was susceptible to VZV, although
the frequency of complications declines rapidly in the weeks after
birth. Recommendations for VZIG administration for these infants
are presented in the postexposure prophylaxis section. Neonates with
community-­acquired varicella who experience severe varicella, especially those who have a complication such as pneumonia, hepatitis,
or encephalitis, should also receive treatment with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 hours). Infants with neonatal varicella who
receive prompt antiviral therapy have an excellent prognosis.

Congenital Varicella Syndrome

In utero transmission of VZV can occur; however, because most adults
in temperate climates are immune, pregnancy complicated by varicella
is unusual in these settings. When pregnant women do contract varicella early in pregnancy, experts estimate that as many as 25% of the
fetuses may become infected. Fortunately, clinically apparent disease
in the infant is uncommon: the congenital varicella syndrome occurs
in approximately 0.4% of infants born to women who have varicella
during pregnancy before 13 weeks of gestation and in approximately
2% of infants born to women with varicella between 13 and 20 weeks
of gestation. Rarely, cases of congenital varicella syndrome have been
reported in infants of women infected after 20 weeks of pregnancy, the
latest occurring at 28 weeks of gestation. Before availability of varicella
vaccine in the United States, 44 cases of congenital varicella syndrome
were estimated to occur each year. The congenital varicella syndrome
is characterized by cicatricial skin scarring in a zoster-­like distribution; limb hypoplasia; and abnormalities of the neurologic system (e.g.,
microcephaly, cortical atrophy, seizures, and intellectual disability),
eye (e.g., chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, and cataracts), renal system
(e.g., hydroureter and hydronephrosis), and autonomic nervous system

Fig. 300.2 Newborn with congenital varicella syndrome. The infant

had severe malformations of both lower extremities and cicatricial scarring over his left abdomen.

(e.g., neurogenic bladder, swallowing dysfunction, and aspiration
pneumonia). Low birthweight is common among infants with congenital varicella syndrome. Most of the manifestations can be attributed to virus-­induced injury to the nervous system, although there is
no obvious explanation why certain regions of the body are preferentially infected during fetal VZV infection. The characteristic cutaneous
lesion has been called a cicatrix, a zigzag scarring, in a dermatomal
distribution, often associated with atrophy of the affected limb (Fig.
300.2). Many infants with severe manifestations of congenital varicella
syndrome (atrophy and scarring of a limb) have significant neurologic
deficiencies. Alternatively, there may be neither skin nor limb abnormalities, but the infant may show cataracts or even extensive aplasia of
the entire brain.
There are rare case reports of fetal abnormalities after the development of herpes zoster in the mother; whether these cases truly represent the congenital varicella syndrome is unclear. If it does occur, the
congenital syndrome acquired as a result of maternal herpes zoster is
exceedingly rare. Maternal herpes zoster was associated with typical
congenital varicella syndrome in one case, but the mother had disseminated herpes zoster (at 12 weeks of gestation).
The diagnosis of VZV fetopathy is based mainly on the history of
gestational varicella combined with the presence of characteristic
abnormalities in the newborn infant. Virus cannot be cultured from
the affected newborn, but viral DNA may be detected in tissue samples
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Because many infants with congenital varicella syndrome develop zoster before a year of age, it may
be possible to isolate VZV from that rash. Alternatively, use of PCR to
identify VZV DNA in vesicular fluid or scabs from zoster lesions in
such an infant may be diagnostic. VZV-­specific IgM antibody is detectable in the cord blood sample in some infants, although the IgM titer
drops quickly in the postpartum period and can be nonspecifically positive. Chorionic villus sampling and fetal blood collection for the detection of viral DNA, virus, or antibody have been used in an attempt to
diagnose fetal infection and embryopathy. The usefulness of these tests
for patient management and counseling has not been defined. Because
these tests may not distinguish between infection and disease, their
utility may primarily be that of reassurance when the result is negative.
Ultrasound may be useful to try to identify limb atrophy, which is common in congenital varicella syndrome. A persistently positive VZV IgG
antibody titer at 12-­18 months of age is a reliable indicator of prenatal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2002 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
infection in the asymptomatic child, as is the development of zoster in
the first year of life without evidence of postnatal infection.
VZIG has often been administered to the susceptible mother
exposed to varicella to modify maternal disease severity; it is uncertain whether this step modifies infection in the fetus, although some
evidence suggests that it may be beneficial for the fetus too. Similarly,
acyclovir treatment may be given to the mother with severe varicella.
A prospective registry of acyclovir use in the first trimester demonstrated that the occurrence of birth defects approximates that found
in the general population. Acyclovir is a class B drug for pregnancy
and should be considered when the benefit to the mother outweighs
the potential risk to the fetus. The efficacy of acyclovir treatment of the
pregnant woman in preventing or modifying the severity of congenital
varicella is not known, but its use should be considered to protect the
mother from severe disease. Because the damage caused by fetal VZV
infection does not progress in the postpartum period, antiviral treatment of infants with congenital VZV syndrome is not indicated.

COMPLICATIONS

The complications of VZV infection (varicella or zoster) occur more commonly in immunocompromised patients. In the otherwise healthy child,
asymptomatic transient varicella hepatitis is relatively common. Mild
thrombocytopenia occurs in 1–2% of children with varicella and may
be associated with petechiae. Purpura, hemorrhagic vesicles, hematuria, and gastrointestinal bleeding are rare complications that may have
serious consequences. Other complications of varicella, some of them
rare, include acute cerebellar ataxia, encephalitis, pneumonia, nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, arthritis, myocarditis, pericarditis, pancreatitis, orchitis, and acute retinal necrosis.
A reduction in the number and rates of varicella-­related complications
is seen in vaccinated populations. Reports of serious varicella-­related
complications in vaccinated persons (breakthrough) are rare (meningitis, pneumonia, acute transverse myelitis, encephalitis [one fatal case
in an apparently immunocompetent child], and sepsis). Severe breakthrough varicella can occur among healthy persons, but cases appear
to be more common among immunocompromised persons who are
usually not recommended to receive varicella vaccine.
Declines in varicella-­
related hospitalizations and deaths in the
United States since implementation of the varicella vaccination program provide supporting evidence that varicella vaccine reduces severe
complications from varicella. Approximately 105 deaths (with varicella
listed as the underlying cause of death) occurred in the United States
annually before the introduction of the varicella vaccine; during 2017–
2019 the annual average number of varicella deaths was 18. In both the
pre-­and postvaccine eras, the majority of deaths (>80%) have been
among persons without high-­risk preexisting conditions.

Bacterial Infections

Secondary bacterial infections of the skin, usually caused by group A
streptococcus or S. aureus, may occur in children with varicella. These
range from impetigo to cellulitis, lymphadenitis, and subcutaneous
abscesses. An early manifestation of secondary bacterial infection is
erythema of the base of a new vesicle. Recrudescence of fever 3-­4 days
after the initial exanthem may also herald a secondary bacterial infection. Varicella is a well-­described risk factor for serious invasive infections caused by group A streptococcus, which can have a fatal outcome.
The more invasive infections, such as varicella gangrenosa, bacterial
sepsis, pneumonia, arthritis, osteomyelitis, cellulitis, and necrotizing
fasciitis, account for much of the morbidity and mortality of varicella
in otherwise healthy children. Bacterial toxin–mediated diseases (e.g.,
toxic shock syndrome) also may complicate varicella. A substantial
decline in varicella-­related invasive bacterial infections is associated
with the use of the varicella vaccine.

Encephalitis and Cerebellar Ataxia

Encephalitis (1 per 50,000 cases of varicella in unvaccinated children) and acute cerebellar ataxia (1 per 4,000 cases of varicella in
unvaccinated children) are well-­described neurologic complications

of varicella; morbidity from central nervous system complications
is highest among patients younger than 5 years and older than 20
years. Nuchal rigidity, altered consciousness, and seizures characterize meningoencephalitis. Patients with cerebellar ataxia have a gradual
onset of gait disturbance, nystagmus, and slurred speech. Neurologic
symptoms usually begin 2-­6 days after the onset of the rash but may
occur during the incubation period or after resolution of the rash.
Clinical recovery is typically rapid, occurring within 24-­72 hours, and
is usually complete. Although severe hemorrhagic encephalitis, analogous to that caused by herpes simplex virus, is very rare in children
with varicella, the consequences are similar to those of herpes simplex
virus encephalitis. Reye syndrome (hepatic dysfunction with hypoglycemia and encephalopathy) associated with varicella and other viral
illnesses such as influenza is rare now that salicylates are no longer used
as antipyretics in these situations (see Chapter 405).

Pneumonia

Varicella pneumonia (viral, due to VZV) is a severe complication that
accounts for most of the increased morbidity and mortality from varicella
in adults and other high-­risk populations, but viral pneumonia may also
complicate varicella in young children. Respiratory symptoms, which may
include cough, dyspnea, cyanosis, pleuritic chest pain, and hemoptysis,
usually begin within 1-­6 days after the onset of the rash. Smoking has been
described as a risk factor for severe pneumonia complicating varicella. The
frequency of varicella pneumonia may be greater in the parturient.

Progressive Varicella

Progressive varicella, with visceral organ involvement, coagulopathy,
severe hemorrhage, and continued vesicular lesion development after
7 days, is a severe complication of primary VZV infection. Severe
abdominal pain, which may reflect involvement of mesenteric lymph
nodes or the liver, or the appearance of hemorrhagic vesicles in otherwise healthy adolescents and adults, immunocompromised children,
pregnant women, and newborns, may herald severe, and potentially
fatal, disease. Although rare in healthy children, the risk for progressive varicella is highest in children with congenital cellular immune
deficiency disorders and those with malignancy, particularly if chemotherapy, and especially corticosteroids, had been given during the incubation period and the absolute lymphocyte count is <500 cells/μL. The
mortality rate for children who acquired varicella while undergoing
treatment for malignancy and who were not treated with antiviral therapy approached 7%; varicella-­related deaths usually occurred within 3
days after the diagnosis of varicella pneumonia. Children who acquire
varicella after organ transplantation are also at risk for progressive
VZV infection. Children undergoing long-­term, low-­dose systemic
or inhaled corticosteroid therapy are not considered to be at higher
risk for severe varicella, but progressive varicella does occur in patients
receiving high-­dose corticosteroids. There are case reports in patients
receiving inhaled corticosteroids as well as in asthmatic patients receiving multiple short courses of systemic corticosteroid therapy. Unusual
clinical findings of varicella, including lesions that develop a hyperkeratotic appearance and continued new lesion formation for weeks
or months, have been described in children with untreated, late-­stage
HIV infection. Immunization of HIV-­infected children who have a
CD4+ T-­lymphocyte percent ≥15%, as well as children with leukemia
and solid organ tumors who are in remission and whose chemotherapy
can be interrupted for 2 weeks around the time of immunization or has
been terminated, have reduced frequency of severe disease. Moreover,
since the advent of the universal immunization program in the United
States, many children who would become immunocompromised later
in life because of disease or treatment are protected before the immunosuppression occurs; also, as a result of reductions in varicella incidence, immunocompromised children are less likely to be exposed to
varicella.

Herpes Zoster

Herpes zoster manifests as vesicular lesions clustered within one or,
less commonly, two adjacent dermatomes (Fig. 300.3). In the elderly,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 300 u Varicella-­Zoster Virus

2003

virus reactivates less commonly than wild-­type VZV. A study of HIV-­
infected vaccinated children found no cases of zoster 4.4 years after
immunization, which was significantly different from the rate in children who had experienced varicella. Studies to date indicate that the
risk for herpes zoster in healthy children who have received one or
more doses of vaccine is 78% lower than in children who had wild-­type
varicella, with two-­dose vaccination providing 50% greater protection
than one-­dose. Many more years of follow-­up are needed to determine
whether this lower risk is maintained among older persons who are at
greatest risk for herpes zoster.

DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 300.3 Herpes zoster involving the lumbar dermatome. (From
Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005:1783.)

Fig. 300.4 Many groups of blisters occurring over the arm in a child
with herpes zoster. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli J. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002: Fig.
8-­28.)

herpes zoster typically begins with burning pain or itching followed
by clusters of skin lesions in a dermatomal pattern. Almost half of the
elderly with herpes zoster experience complications; the most frequent complication is postherpetic neuralgia, a painful condition that
affects the nerves despite resolution of the skin lesions. Approximately
4% of patients suffer a second episode of herpes zoster; three or more
episodes are rare. Unlike herpes zoster in adults, zoster in children is
infrequently associated with localized pain, hyperesthesia, pruritus,
low-­grade fever, or complications. In children, the rash is mild, with
new lesions appearing for a few days (Fig. 300.4); symptoms of acute
neuritis are minimal; and complete resolution usually occurs within
1-­2 weeks. Unlike in adults, postherpetic neuralgia is unusual in children. An increased risk for herpes zoster early in childhood has been
described in children who acquire infection with VZV in utero or in
the first year of life.
Immunocompromised children may have more severe herpes zoster, similar to the situation in adults, including postherpetic neuralgia.
Immunocompromised patients may also experience disseminated
cutaneous disease that mimics varicella, with or without initial dermatomal rash, as well as visceral dissemination with pneumonia, hepatitis,
encephalitis, and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Severely
immunocompromised children, particularly those with advanced HIV
infection, may have unusual, chronic, or relapsing cutaneous disease,
retinitis, or central nervous system disease without rash. The finding
of a lower risk for herpes zoster among vaccinated children with leukemia than in those who have had varicella suggested that the vaccine

Varicella and herpes zoster are usually diagnosed primarily by their
clinical appearance. Laboratory evaluation has not been considered
necessary for diagnosis or management. However, as varicella disease has declined to low levels, laboratory confirmation has become
increasingly necessary. The atypical nature of breakthrough varicella,
with a higher proportion of papular rather than vesicular rashes, poses
both clinical and laboratory diagnostic challenges.
Rapid laboratory diagnosis of VZV is often important in high-­risk
patients and can be important for infection control, especially for
breakthrough cases that have mild or atypical presentations. Confirmation of VZV infections can be accomplished by many referral
hospital laboratories and all state health laboratories. VZV can be
identified quickly by either PCR amplification testing (vesicular fluid,
crusts) or direct fluorescence assay of cells from cutaneous lesions
(vesicular fluid). In the absence of vesicles or scabs, scrapings of maculopapular lesions can be collected for PCR or direct fluorescence
assay testing. Infectious virus may be recovered by means of tissue
culture methods; such methods require specific expertise, and virus
may take days to weeks to grow. Of available tests, PCR is the most
sensitive and also allows for differentiation of wild-­type and vaccine
strains. Direct fluorescence assay is specific and less sensitive than
PCR but when available allows for rapid diagnosis. Although multinucleated giant cells can be detected with nonspecific stains (Tzanck
smear), they have poor sensitivity and do not differentiate VZV from
herpes simplex virus infections. Strain identification (genotyping)
can distinguish wild-­type VZV from the vaccine strain in a vaccinated child; however, genotyping is available only at specialized
reference laboratories. Laboratory tests of lesions cannot be used to
distinguish between varicella and disseminated herpes zoster. VZV
IgG antibodies can be detected by several methods, and a fourfold
or greater rise in IgG antibodies is confirmatory of acute infection
(although this requires a 2-­to 3-­week delay to collect a convalescent
specimen). In vaccinated persons, commercially available tests are
not sufficiently sensitive to always detect antibodies following immunization, and a fourfold rise in IgG antibodies may not occur. Testing for VZV IgM antibodies is not useful for routine confirmation or
ruling out of varicella because commercially available methods are
unreliable and the kinetics of the IgM response have not been well
defined. IgM is inconsistently detected, even among patients with
PCR-­confirmed disease. Furthermore, IgM detection does not confirm a primary infection because specific IgM antibodies are transiently produced on each exposure to VZV, whether through primary
infection, reinfection, or reactivation from latency, even subclinical.
Serologic tests are not useful for the initial diagnosis of herpes zoster,
but a significant rise in IgG titer in convalescent titer in the presence of an atypical zoster rash is confirmatory. As with any laboratory
test, a negative varicella test should be considered in the context of
the clinical presentation. Clinicians should use clinical judgment to
decide on the best course of therapy. VZV IgG antibody can be useful
to determine the immune status of individuals whose clinical history
of varicella is unknown or equivocal. However, caution must be taken
in interpreting tests for immunity to VZV, especially in immunocompromised patients after a close exposure to VZV. Due to the possibility of false-positive results, it is preferable to rely on clinical rather
than laboratory information, and if in doubt, assume the individual
is susceptible to varicella and proceed accordingly.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2004 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
TREATMENT

Antiviral treatment with acyclovir or valacyclovir modifies the course
of both varicella and herpes zoster. Antiviral drug resistance is rare for
VZV but has occurred, primarily in children with HIV infection and
other immunocompromising conditions in which frequent relapse of
VZV infections has resulted in multiple courses of antiviral therapy.
Foscarnet and cidofovir may be useful for the treatment of acyclovir-­
resistant VZV infections, but consultation of an infectious diseases
specialist is recommended.

Varicella

Given the safety profile of acyclovir and valacyclovir, and their demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of varicella, treatment of all children, adolescents, and adults with varicella is acceptable. Oral therapy
with acyclovir (20 mg/kg/dose; maximum: 800 mg/dose) given as
four doses/day for 5 days can be used to treat uncomplicated varicella.
Therapy is particularly important for individuals at increased risk for
moderate to severe varicella: individuals older than 12 years of age;
individuals older than 12 months of age with chronic cutaneous or
pulmonary disorders; individuals receiving short-­term, intermittent,
or aerosolized corticosteroid therapy; individuals receiving long-­term
salicylate therapy; and possibly secondary cases among household
contacts. To be most effective, treatment should be initiated as early
as possible, preferably within 24 hours of the onset of the exanthem.
There is less clinical benefit if treatment is initiated more than 72 hours
after onset of the exanthem. Acyclovir therapy does not interfere with
the induction of VZV immunity. Acyclovir has been successfully used
to treat varicella in pregnant women. Valacyclovir or famciclovir may
be given to older children who can swallow tablets. These drugs are
highly active against VZV by the same mechanism as acyclovir and are
better absorbed by the oral route than acyclovir. Valacyclovir (20 mg/
kg/dose; maximum: 1,000 mg/dose, administered 3 times daily for 5
days) is licensed for treatment of varicella in children 2 to <18 years of
age, and both valacyclovir and famciclovir are approved for treatment
of herpes zoster in adults. Patients receiving these antivirals should be
well hydrated, and for prolonged use, renal function and white blood
cell counts (especially neutrophils) should be monitored frequently.
Common adverse symptoms during valacyclovir treatment are neurologic (headache, agitation, dizziness) and gastrointestinal (nausea,
abdominal pain).
Intravenous therapy is indicated for severe disease and for varicella in immunocompromised patients (even if begun more than 72
hours after onset of rash). Any patient who has signs of disseminated
VZV, including pneumonia, severe hepatitis, thrombocytopenia,
or encephalitis, should receive immediate treatment. Intravenous
acyclovir therapy (10 mg/kg or 500 mg/m2 every 8 hours) initiated
within 72 hours of development of initial symptoms decreases the
likelihood of progressive varicella and visceral dissemination in high-­
risk patients. Treatment is continued for 7-­10 days or until no new
lesions have appeared for 48 hours. Delaying antiviral treatment in
high-­risk individuals until it is obvious that prolonged new lesion
formation is occurring is not recommended because visceral dissemination occurs during the same period.
Acyclovir-­resistant VZV has been identified primarily in children
infected with HIV. These children may be treated with intravenous
foscarnet (120 mg/kg/day divided every 8 hours). The dose should be
modified in the presence of renal insufficiency. Resistance to foscarnet has been reported with prolonged use. Cidofovir is also useful in
this situation. Because of the increased toxicity profile of foscarnet and
cidofovir, these two drugs should be initiated in collaboration with an
infectious diseases specialist.

Herpes Zoster

Antiviral drugs are effective for treatment of herpes zoster. In healthy
adults, acyclovir (800 mg 5 times a day PO for 5-­7 days), famciclovir
(500 mg tid PO for 7 days), and valacyclovir (1,000 mg tid PO for 7
days) reduce the duration of the illness but do not prevent development

of postherpetic neuralgia. In otherwise healthy children, herpes zoster is a less-­severe disease, and postherpetic neuralgia usually does not
occur. Therefore treatment of uncomplicated herpes zoster in the child
with an antiviral agent may not always be necessary, although some
experts would treat with oral acyclovir (20 mg/kg/dose; maximum: 800
mg/dose) to shorten the duration of the illness. It is important to start
antiviral therapy as soon as possible. Delay beyond 72 hours from onset
of rash limits its effectiveness.
In contrast, herpes zoster in immunocompromised children can be
severe, and disseminated disease may be life-­threatening. Patients at
high risk for disseminated disease should receive intravenous acyclovir
(500 mg/m2 or 10 mg/kg every 8 hours). Oral acyclovir, famciclovir,
and valacyclovir are options for immunocompromised patients with
uncomplicated herpes zoster, who are considered at low risk for visceral dissemination. Neuritis with herpes zoster should be managed
with appropriate analgesics.
Use of corticosteroids in the treatment of herpes zoster in children
is not recommended.

PROGNOSIS

Primary varicella in unvaccinated persons has a mortality rate of 2-­3
per 100,000 cases, with the lowest case fatality rates among children
1-­9 years of age (∼1 deaths/100,000 cases). Compared with these age
groups, infants have a 4 times greater risk of dying and adults have
a 25 times greater risk of dying. The most common complications
among people who died from varicella were pneumonia, central nervous system complications, secondary infections, and hemorrhagic
conditions. The mortality rate of untreated primary infection was 7%
in immunocompromised children in the 1960s. In the era of antiviral
therapy and improved supportive care, the prognosis has improved
with treatment administered early in the course of illness, but deaths
have continued to occur. Herpes zoster among healthy children has
an excellent prognosis and is usually self-­limited. Severe presentation
with complications and sometimes fatalities can occur in immunocompromised children.

PREVENTION

VZV transmission is difficult to prevent, especially from persons with
varicella, because a person with varicella may be contagious for 24-­
48 hours before the rash is apparent. Herpes zoster is less infectious
than varicella; nonetheless, transmission has been reported even in the
absence of direct contact with the patient. Infection control practices,
including caring for patients with varicella in isolation rooms with
filtered air systems, are essential. All healthcare workers should have
evidence of varicella immunity (Table 300.1). Unvaccinated healthcare
workers without other evidence of immunity who have had a close
exposure to VZV should be furloughed for days 8-­21 after exposure
because they are potentially infectious during this period. Routine testing for VZV antibodies after vaccination is not useful for identifying
individuals who are immune to varicella because the tests are insensitive for this purpose.

Vaccine

Varicella is a vaccine-­preventable disease. Varicella vaccine contains
live, attenuated VZV (Oka strain) and is indicated for subcutaneous or intramuscular administration. In the United States, varicella
vaccine is recommended for routine administration as a two-­dose
regimen to healthy children at ages 12-­15 months and 4-­6 years.
Administration of the second dose earlier than 4-­6 years of age is
acceptable, but it must be at least 3 months after the first dose. Catch­up vaccination with the second dose is recommended for children
and adolescents who received only one dose. Vaccination with two
doses is recommended for all persons without evidence of immunity.
The minimum interval between the two doses is 3 months for persons
12 years of age or younger and 4 weeks for older children, adolescents, and adults. Administration of varicella vaccine within 4 weeks
of measles-­mumps-­rubella (MMR) vaccination is associated with a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 300 u Varicella-­Zoster Virus
Table 300.1  Evidence of Immunity to Varicella
Evidence of immunity to varicella consists of any of the following:
• Documentation of age-­appropriate vaccination with a varicella
vaccine:
• Preschool-­age children (i.e., age ≥12 mo): one dose
• School-­age children, adolescents, and adults: two doses*
• Laboratory evidence of immunity† or laboratory confirmation of
disease
• Birth in the United States before 1980‡
• Diagnosis or verification of a history of varicella disease by a
healthcare provider§
• Diagnosis or verification of a history of herpes zoster by a
healthcare provider
*For children who received their first dose at younger than age 13 years and for
whom the interval between the two doses was 28 or more days, the second dose is
considered valid.
†Commercial assays can be used to assess disease-­induced immunity, but they lack
sensitivity to always detect vaccine-­induced immunity (i.e., they might yield false-­
negative results).
‡For healthcare personnel, pregnant women, and immunocompromised persons, birth
before 1980 should not be considered evidence of immunity.
§Verification of history or diagnosis of typical disease can be provided by any healthcare
provider (e.g., school or occupational clinic nurse, nurse practitioner, physician
assistant, or physician). For persons reporting a history of, or reporting with, atypical
or mild cases, assessment by a physician or his/her designee is recommended, and
one of the following should be sought: (1) an epidemiologic link to a typical varicella
case or to a laboratory-­confirmed case or (2) evidence of laboratory confirmation if
it was performed at the time of acute disease. When such documentation is lacking,
persons should not be considered as having a valid history of disease, because other
diseases might mimic mild atypical varicella.

higher risk for breakthrough disease; therefore it is recommended
that the varicella and MMR vaccines either be administered simultaneously at different sites or be given at least 4 weeks apart. Varicella
vaccine can be administered as a monovalent vaccine (for all healthy
persons ≥12 months of age) or as the quadrivalent measles-­mumps-­
rubella-­
varicella (MMRV) vaccine (for children age 12 months
through 12 years only).
Varicella vaccine is contraindicated for persons who have a history
of anaphylactic reaction to any component of the vaccine; pregnant
women; persons with cell-­mediated immune deficiencies, including
those with leukemia, lymphoma, and other malignant neoplasms
affecting the bone marrow or lymphatic systems; persons receiving
immunosuppressive therapy; and persons who have a family history of congenital or hereditary immunodeficiency in first-­degree
relatives unless the immune competence of the potential vaccine
recipient is demonstrated. Children with isolated humoral immunodeficiencies may receive varicella vaccine. The monovalent varicella
vaccine has been studied in clinical trial settings in children with
acute lymphocytic leukemia and certain solid tumors who were in
remission, but this practice is not recommended except in a research
setting. Varicella vaccine can be administered to patients with leukemia, lymphoma, or other malignancies whose disease is in remission,
who have restored immunocompetence, and whose chemotherapy
has been terminated for at least 3 months.
The vaccine should be considered for HIV-­infected children with a
CD4+ T-­lymphocyte count ≥200 cells/mm3 or percentage ≥15%. These
children should receive two doses of the monovalent vaccine, 3 months
apart. Specific guidelines for immunizing these children should be
reviewed before vaccination. Data indicate that varicella vaccine is
highly effective in preventing herpes zoster among children infected
with HIV. MMRV should not be administered as a substitute for the
component vaccines in HIV-­infected children.
A recombinant subunit (non-­live) adjuvanted vaccine is available in
the United States for use for prevention of herpes zoster and its related
complications among individuals 50 years and older and among those
19 years and older who are or will be immunodeficient or immunosuppressed because of disease or therapy. The zoster vaccine is not

2005

indicated for primary prevention of varicella, or for the treatment of
zoster or postherpetic neuralgia.

Vaccine-­Associated Adverse Events

Varicella vaccine is safe and well tolerated. The incidence of injection site complaints observed ≤3 days after vaccination was slightly
higher after dose 2 (25%) than after dose 1 (22%). A mild vaccine-­
associated varicelliform rash was reported in approximately 1–5%
of healthy vaccinees, consisting of 6-­10 papular-­vesicular, erythematous lesions with peak occurrence 8-­21 days after vaccination. Serious adverse reactions confirmed to be caused by the vaccine strain
are rare and include pneumonia, hepatitis, meningitis, recurrent
herpes zoster, severe rash, and seven deaths (all deaths occurred
in persons with immunocompromising conditions). Transmission
of vaccine virus to susceptible contacts is a very rare event from
healthy vaccine recipients (13 instances from 11 immunocompetent varicella vaccine recipients, all in the presence of a rash in the
vaccinee, 6 varicella-­like and 5 herpes zoster). MMRV vaccine is
associated with a greater risk for febrile seizures 5-­12 days after
the first dose among children 12-­23 months of age compared with
simultaneous MMR and varicella vaccines (one extra febrile seizure
for every 2,500 children vaccinated).

Postexposure Prophylaxis

Vaccine given to healthy children within 3 and up to 5 days after
exposure (as soon as possible is preferred) is effective in preventing or
modifying varicella. Varicella vaccine is recommended for postexposure use and for outbreak control. Oral acyclovir administered late in
the incubation period may modify subsequent varicella in the healthy
child; however, its use in this manner is not recommended until it can
be further evaluated.
High-­titer anti-­VZV immune globulin as postexposure prophylaxis is recommended for immunocompromised children, pregnant
women, and newborns exposed to varicella. Since 2012 the product
licensed for use in the United States is VariZIG. VariZIG is commercially available from a broad network of specialty distributors
in the United States (list available at https://www.varizig.com). The
recommended dose is 1 vial (125 units) for each 10-­kg increment
of body weight (maximum: 625 units), except for infants weighing
≤2 kg who should receive 0.5 vial. VariZIG should be given intramuscularly as soon as possible but may be efficacious up to 10 days
after exposure.
Newborns whose mothers have varicella 5 days before to 2 days
after delivery should receive VariZIG (0.5 vial for those weighing ≤2
kg and 1 vial for those weighing >2 kg). VariZIG is also indicated for
pregnant women and immunocompromised persons without evidence
of varicella immunity; hospitalized premature infants born at <28
weeks of gestation (or weight <1,000 g) who were exposed to varicella,
regardless of maternal varicella immunity; and hospitalized premature
infants born at ≥28 weeks of gestation who were exposed to varicella
and whose mothers have no evidence of varicella immunity. Patients
given VariZIG should be monitored closely and treated with acyclovir
if necessary once lesions develop.
Close contact between a susceptible high-­risk patient and a patient
with herpes zoster is also an indication for VariZIG prophylaxis. Passive antibody administration or treatment does not reduce the risk for
herpes zoster or alter the clinical course of varicella or herpes zoster
when given after the onset of symptoms.
Although licensed pooled IVIG preparations contain anti-­
VZV
antibodies, the titer varies from lot to lot. In situations in which administration of VariZIG is not possible, IVIG can be administered (400 mg/
kg administered once within 10 days of exposure). Immunocompromised patients who have received high-­dose IVIG (>400 mg/kg) for
other indications within 3­ weeks before VZV exposure can be expected
to have serum antibodies to VZV.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2006 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 301

Epstein-­Barr Virus
Terri L. Stillwell and Jason B. Weinberg
Infectious mononucleosis is the best-­known clinical syndrome caused
by Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV). It is characterized by systemic somatic
complaints consisting primarily of fatigue, malaise, fever, sore throat,
and generalized lymphadenopathy. Originally described as glandular
fever, it derives its name from the mononuclear lymphocytosis with
atypical-­appearing lymphocytes that accompany the illness.

ETIOLOGY

EBV is a double-­stranded DNA virus that is a member of the gammaherpesviruses and causes >90% of cases of infectious mononucleosis.
Two distinct types of EBV, type 1 and type 2 (also called type A and
type B), have been characterized and have 70–85% sequence homology. EBV-­1 is more prevalent worldwide, although EBV-­2 is more common in Africa than in the United States and Europe. Both types lead
to persistent, lifelong, latent infection. Dual infections with both types
have been documented among immunocompromised persons. EBV-­1
induces in vitro growth transformation of B lymphocytes more efficiently than does EBV-­2, but no type-­specific disease manifestations or
clinical differences have been identified.
As many as 5–10% of infectious mononucleosis–like illnesses are
caused by other types of primary infections, particularly cytomegalovirus but also pathogens such as Toxoplasma gondii, adenovirus, hepatitis
viruses, and HIV. In the majority of EBV-­negative cases of infectious
mononucleosis, the exact cause remains unknown.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

EBV infects more than 95% of the world’s population. It is transmitted primarily via oral secretions. Among children, transmission may
occur by exchange of saliva from child to child, such as occurs between
children in out-­of-­home childcare. EBV is shed in oral secretions consistently for more than 6 months after acute infection and then intermittently for life. As many as 20–30% of healthy EBV-­infected persons
shed virus at any particular time. EBV is also found in male and female
genital secretions, and some studies suggest the possibility of spread
through sexual contact. Nonintimate contact, environmental sources,
and fomites do not contribute to transmission of EBV.
Infection with EBV in developing countries and among socioeconomically disadvantaged populations in developed countries usually

occurs during infancy and early childhood. In central Africa, almost
all children are infected by 3 years of age. Among more affluent populations in industrialized countries, half of the population is infected
by 6-­8 years of age, with approximately 30% of infections occurring
during adolescence and young adulthood. In the United States, seroprevalence increases with age, from approximately 54% for children
6-­8 years to 83% for patients 18-­19 years. Seroprevalence at each age is
substantially higher for Mexican-­Americans and non-­Hispanic Blacks
than for non-­Hispanic Whites. Large differences are seen by family
income, with highest seroprevalence in children of families with lowest
income.
The epidemiology of the disease manifestations of infectious mononucleosis is related to the age of acquisition of EBV infection. Primary
infection with EBV during childhood is usually asymptomatic or mild
and indistinguishable from other childhood infections. Primary EBV
infection in adolescents and adults manifests in 30–50% of cases as the
classic triad of fatigue, pharyngitis, and generalized lymphadenopathy, which constitute the major clinical manifestations of infectious
mononucleosis. This syndrome may be seen at all ages but is rarely
apparent in children younger than 4 years of age, when most EBV infections are asymptomatic, or in adults older than 40 years of age, when
most individuals have already been infected by EBV. The true incidence
of the syndrome of infectious mononucleosis is unknown but is estimated to occur in 20-­70 per 100,000 person-­years. In young adults,
the incidence increases to approximately 100 per 100,000 person-­years.
The prevalence of serologic evidence of past EBV infection increases
with age; almost all adults in the United States are seropositive.
EBV infection has been implicated in other diseases, including both
nonmalignant and malignant disorders such as lymphoproliferative
diseases and lymphomas (Table 301.1). In addition, various monogenic immune susceptibility defects predispose to EBV-­
associated
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, lymphoproliferative disorders,
or lymphoma (Fig. 301.1; see also Chapter 174.3).

PATHOGENESIS

After transmission by saliva to the oral cavity, EBV infects both oral
epithelial cells and tonsillar B lymphocytes, although it is unclear which
cells are the primary initial targets. Ongoing viral replication leads to
viremia and dissemination of infected B lymphocytes into peripheral
blood and the lymphoreticular system, including the liver and spleen.
Clinical manifestations of infectious mononucleosis, which are due
to the host immune response to EBV infection, occur after a 6-­week
incubation period following acute infection. The atypical lymphocytes
that are frequently detected in patients with infectious mononucleosis
are primarily CD8 T lymphocytes. Polyclonal CD8 T lymphocyte activation occurs early during the incubation period following infection,
whereas expansion of EBV-­specific CD8 T lymphocytes is detected
closer to the time of symptom onset. Natural killer (NK) cells also

Table 301.1  Diseases Caused by Epstein-­Barr Virus Infection
INFECTED CELL TYPE

NONMALIGNANT DISEASES

MALIGNANT DISEASES

B lymphocytes

• B-­lymphoproliferations (B-­LPD)
• Posttransplant B-­LPD
• Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)

• Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)
• Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
• Burkitt lymphoma (BL)

T/NK lymphocytes

• Systemic T/NK-­cell type chronic active EBV (CAEBV)
• Cutaneous CAEBV
• Hydroa vacciniforme–like lymphoproliferation (HVL)
• Severe mosquito bite allergy (SMBA)
• HLH

• Systemic EBV+ T-­cell lymphoma of
childhood (STLC)
• Extranodal NK/T-­cell lymphoma (ENKTL)
• Aggressive NK cell leukemia (ANKL)

Smooth muscle cells

• Smooth muscle tumor/leiomyoma (SMT)

Epithelial cells

• Hairy leukoplakia*

• Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC)
• Gastric carcinoma

*Hairy leukoplakia is a benign epithelial/mucosal disease caused by uncontrolled lytic infection that occurs in immunocompromised patients. It is characterized by white patches with
hairy appearance on the tongue.
From Fournier B, Latour S. Immunity to EBV as revealed by immunodeficiencies. Curr Opin Immunol. 2021;72:107–115. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 301 u Epstein-­Barr Virus
Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis

2007

B-cell lymphoproliferative
disorders/Lymphoma

SH2D1A
XIAP
ITK, MAGT1,
(30% lymphoma)
UNC13D
CTPS1,
CD27
STX11, STXBP2
(20% HLH) RASGRP1,
RAB27
DEF6,
TNFRSF9
LYST
(20% HLH) CD70, TNFSF9
PERF1

T/NK-cell cytotoxicity
defects

T-cell activation/expansion
defects

Fig. 301.2 Tonsillitis with membrane formation in infectious mononucleosis. (Courtesy Alex J. Steigman, MD.)

Fig. 301.1 Classification of gene defects predisposing to Epstein-­
Barr virus (EBV)-­driven hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) or
B-­cell lymphoproliferative disorders. Red circle, Gene defects associated with impaired cell-­cytotoxicity causing HLH. Green circle, Gene
defects associated with impaired T-­cell activation/expansion causing B
cell lymphoproliferative disorder (B-­LPD)/lymphoma. Gene defects with
a highly selective predisposition to EBV are in bold. In parentheses is
the percentage of patients having developed HLH or B lymphoma for
defects associated with both HLH and B-­LPD/lymphoma. (From Fournier B, Latour S. Immunity to EBV as revealed by immunodeficiencies.
Curr Opin Immunol. 2021;72:107–115. Fig.1.)

expand in frequency and number following infection, particularly a
CD56dim CD16− NK cell subset that is more effective than other NK
cell subsets at recognizing infected cells. The host immune response
is effective in rapidly reducing the EBV viral load, although persistent
shedding of high levels of virus can be detected in the oropharynx for
up to 6 months. Intermittent shedding from the oropharynx occurs for
many years following primary infection.
EBV, like the other herpesviruses, establishes lifelong latent infection
after the primary infection. Latent virus persists primarily in memory
B lymphocytes. The EBV genome persists as an episome in the nucleus
of an infected cell and replicates with cell division. Viral integration
into the cell genome is not typical. Only a few viral proteins, including
the EBV-­determined nuclear antigens (EBNAs), are produced during
latency. These proteins are important in maintaining the viral episome
during the latent state. Reactivation and new viral replication occur at
a low rate in populations of latently infected cells and is responsible
for intermittent viral shedding in oropharyngeal secretions of infected
individuals. Reactivation is unlikely to be accompanied by distinctive
clinical symptoms.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period of infectious mononucleosis in adolescents is 30-­
50 days. In children, it may be shorter. The majority of cases of primary
EBV infection in infants and young children are clinically silent. In older
patients, the onset of illness is usually insidious and vague. Patients may
complain of malaise, fatigue, acute or prolonged (>1 week) fever, headache, sore throat, nausea, abdominal pain, and myalgia. This prodromal
period may last 1-­2 weeks. The complaints of sore throat and fever gradually increase until patients seek medical care. Splenic enlargement may
be rapid enough to cause left upper quadrant abdominal discomfort and
tenderness, which may be the presenting complaint.
The classic physical examination findings are generalized lymphadenopathy (90% of cases), splenomegaly (50% of cases), and hepatomegaly (10% of cases). Lymphadenopathy occurs most commonly
in the anterior and posterior cervical nodes and the submandibular
nodes and less commonly in the axillary and inguinal lymph nodes.
Epitrochlear lymphadenopathy is particularly suggestive of infectious
mononucleosis. Although liver enzymes are usually elevated, symptomatic hepatitis or jaundice is uncommon. Splenomegaly to 2-­3 cm
below the costal margin is typical (15–65% of cases); massive enlargement is uncommon.

Fig. 301.3 Amoxicillin-­induced rash in Epstein-­Barr virus infection.

Morbilliform maculopapular rash on the leg, which appeared shortly
after starting amoxicillin. The rash is typical of that seen in the context
of Epstein-­Barr virus infection in patients treated with amoxicillin or ampicillin. (From Norman SD, Murray IA, Shetty D, et al. Jaundice, abdominal pain, and fever in a young woman. Lancet. 2017;390:1713–1714.
Fig. A.)

The sore throat is often accompanied by moderate to severe pharyngitis with marked tonsillar enlargement, occasionally with exudates
(Fig. 301.2). Palatal petechiae at the junction of the hard and soft palate are frequently seen. The pharyngitis is similar to that caused by
streptococcal infection. Other clinical findings may include rashes
and edema of the eyelids. Rashes are usually maculopapular and have
been reported in 3–15% of patients. Patients with infectious mononucleosis who are treated with ampicillin or amoxicillin may experience an ampicillin rash, which may also occur with other β-­lactam
antibiotics (Fig. 301.3). This morbilliform, vasculitic rash is probably
immune mediated and resolves without specific treatment. EBV can
also be associated with Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome, a symmetric rash on
the cheeks with multiple erythematous papules, which may coalesce
into plaques and persist for 15-­50 days. The rash has the appearance of
atopic dermatitis and may also appear on the extremities and buttocks.

DIAGNOSIS

A presumptive diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis may be made by
the presence of classic clinical symptoms with atypical lymphocytosis
in the peripheral blood. The diagnosis is usually confirmed by serologic
testing, either for heterophile antibody or specific EBV antibodies.

Differential Diagnosis

EBV is the most common cause of infectious mononucleosis. Infectious mononucleosis–like illnesses may also be caused by primary
infection with other pathogens, such as cytomegalovirus, T. gondii, adenovirus, and HIV. Streptococcal pharyngitis may cause sore
throat and cervical lymphadenopathy indistinguishable from that of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2008 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
infectious mononucleosis, but it is not typically associated with hepatosplenomegaly. Approximately 5% of cases of EBV-­associated infectious
mononucleosis have throat cultures positive for group A Streptococcus,
representing pharyngeal streptococcal carriage. Failure of a patient
with presumed streptococcal pharyngitis to improve within 48-­72
hours should evoke suspicion of infectious mononucleosis. Hematologic malignancies should also be considered in a patient with an infectious mononucleosis–like illness, particularly when lymphadenopathy
and hepatosplenomegaly are appreciated and the results of an initial
laboratory evaluation are not consistent with an infectious etiology.

Laboratory Diagnosis

The majority of patients (>90%) have a leukocytosis of 10,000-­20,000
cells/μL, of which at least two thirds are lymphocytes; atypical lymphocytes usually account for 20–40% of the total number. The atypical
cells are mature T lymphocytes that have been antigenically activated.
Compared with regular lymphocytes microscopically, atypical lymphocytes are larger overall, with larger, eccentrically placed indented
and folded nuclei with a lower nuclear-­to-­cytoplasm ratio. Although
atypical lymphocytosis may be seen with many other infections associated with lymphocytosis, the highest degree of atypical lymphocytes
is classically seen with EBV infection. Mild thrombocytopenia to
50,000-­200,000 platelets/μL occurs in more than 50% of patients but
only rarely is associated with purpura. Mild elevation of hepatic transaminases occurs in approximately 75% of uncomplicated cases, but it is
usually asymptomatic and without jaundice.

Detection of Heterophile Antibodies

Heterophile antibodies are cross-­reactive immunoglobulin (Ig) M
antibodies that agglutinate mammalian erythrocytes but are not EBV-­
specific. Heterophile antibody tests, such as the monospot test, are
positive in 90% of cases of EBV-­associated infectious mononucleosis
in adolescents and adults during the second week of illness, but in only
up to 50% of cases in children younger than 4 years of age. Test results
can remain positive for up to 12 months. The false-­positive rate is low,
generally <10%. A positive heterophile antibody test in a patient with
classic clinical manifestations of mononucleosis strongly supports that
diagnosis. However, because of the nonspecific nature of heterophile
antibody testing, EBV-­specific antibody testing should be performed
when a precise diagnosis is necessary.

Detection of Epstein-­Barr Virus–Specific Antibodies

If the heterophile test result is negative and an EBV infection is suspected, EBV-­specific antibody testing is indicated. Measurement of
antibodies to EBV proteins, including viral capsid antigen (VCA),
Epstein-­Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA), and early antigen (EA), are used
most frequently (Fig. 301.4 and Table 301.2). The acute phase of infectious mononucleosis is characterized by rapid IgM and IgG antibody
responses to VCA in all cases and an IgG response to EA in most cases.
The IgM response to VCA is transient but can be detected for at least
4 weeks and occasionally up to 3 months; in rare cases, anti-­VCA IgM
can persist even longer. The IgG response to VCA usually peaks late in
the acute phase, declines slightly over the next several weeks to months,
and then persists at a relatively stable level for life.
Anti-­EA IgG antibodies are usually detectable for several months
but may persist or be detected intermittently at low levels for many
years. Antibodies to the diffuse-­staining component of EA (EA-­D) are
found transiently in 80% of patients during the acute phase of infectious mononucleosis. Antibodies to the cytoplasmic-­restricted component of EA (EA-­R) emerge transiently in the convalescence from
infectious mononucleosis. High levels of antibodies to EA-­D or EA-­R
may be found also in immunocompromised patients with persistent
EBV infections and active EBV replication.
Anti-­EBNA IgG antibodies are the last to develop in infectious
mononucleosis and gradually appear 3-­4 months after the onset of
illness and remain at low levels for life. Absence of anti-­EBNA when
other antibodies are present implies recent infection, whereas the presence of anti-­EBNA implies infection occurring more than 3-­4 months
previously. The wide range of individual antibody responses and the

various laboratory methods used can occasionally make interpretation
of an antibody profile difficult. The detection of IgM antibody to VCA
is generally sufficient to confirm the diagnosis of acute EBV infection,
although false positive results can still occasionally occur.

Detection of Viral DNA

EBV DNA can be detected and viral genome copy number quantified
in whole blood, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and
plasma using real-­time polymerase chain reaction. EBV DNA can be
detected in PBMCs and plasma of patients with infectious mononucleosis for a brief period after the onset of symptoms and in PBMCs
for an extended period. However, detection of EBV DNA is usually not
necessary to diagnose infectious mononucleosis in immunocompetent
patients with typical manifestations of disease. In contrast, serial measurements of EBV genome copy number are often used following solid
organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation as surveillance for
posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD). Very high or consistently increasing EBV genome copy number suggests an increased
risk for PTLD, although definitive diagnosis is typically based on tissue
biopsy. The frequency and duration of monitoring EBV genome copy
number is determined by the time after transplant and risk factors such
as the type of transplant and the degree of immunosuppression. Serial
measurement of EBV genome copy number can be useful in monitoring response to therapy for PTLD. Measurement of EBV genome copy
number can also be used for screening and to determine prognosis
for some EBV-­associated malignancies, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma and Hodgkin lymphoma.

COMPLICATIONS

Severe complications are unusual in patients with infectious mononucleosis. Splenic rupture, either spontaneous or following mild trauma,
may occur in approximately 0.1% of cases but is rarely fatal. Airway
obstruction due to swelling of oropharyngeal lymphoid tissue occurs in
<5% of cases. A variety of neurologic conditions have been associated
with EBV infectious mononucleosis. Headache is a common symptom,
but symptomatic meningitis or encephalitis is uncommon. More severe
neurologic manifestations, such as seizures and ataxia, may occur in
1–5% of cases. Perceptual distortions of sizes, shapes, and spatial relationships, known as the Alice in Wonderland syndrome (metamorphopsia), may be a presenting symptom. Some reports suggest an
association between infectious mononucleosis and the possible development of multiple sclerosis. Hematologic abnormalities such as mild
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia are relatively
common, but aplastic anemia, severe thrombocytopenia, and severe
neutropenia are rare. Other rare complications include myocarditis,
interstitial pneumonia, pancreatitis, parotitis, and orchitis.
Patients with dysregulated immune responses to primary infection,
such as individuals with primary or secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), can develop severe, life-­threatening complications with primary EBV infection (see Fig. 301.1). Patients with
other primary immunodeficiencies that result in failure to control EBV
infection and/or abnormal inflammatory responses to infection are at
risk for severe manifestations of EBV infection, often with fulminant
infectious mononucleosis, chronic viremia, dysgammaglobulinemia,
and lymphoproliferation. Immunodeficiencies most commonly linked
to severe EBV infection tend to be those affecting aspects of NK cell,
T lymphocyte, and NKT lymphocyte function. Examples include
X-­linked lymphoproliferative (XLP) syndrome, which is caused by
variants in genes encoding the signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM)-­associated protein (SAP) or X-­linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP); X-­linked immunodeficiency with magnesium defect, EBV
infection, and neoplasia (XMEN), caused by mutations in MAGT1,
which encodes a magnesium transporter protein; and deficiencies in
interleukin-­2–inducible T-­cell kinase (ITK), CD27, or CD70 (see Fig.
301.1; Chapter 174.3).

ONCOGENESIS

Infection with EBV, the first human virus to be associated with malignancy, accounts for up to 2% of cancers worldwide (see Table 301.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 301 u Epstein-­Barr Virus

VCA-IgG

Antibody titer

Infectious mononucleosis

VCA-IgM

0

EA-IgG

EBNA-IgG

2
Weeks

4

2

4
6
Months
Time after onset of symptoms

1

2
Years

3

Fig. 301.4 Kinetics of antibody responses to Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV)

antigens in infectious mononucleosis. EA, Early antigen; EBNA, EBV-­
determined nuclear antigens; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglobulin M; VCA, viral capsid antigen.

Table 301.2  Correlation of Clinical Status and Antibody
Responses to Epstein-­Barr Virus Infection
CLINICAL
­ TATUS
S

VCA IgM

VCA IgG

EA IgG

EBNA IgG

Susceptible

−

−

−

−

Acute primary
infection

+

+

±

−

Recent primary
infection

±

+

±

±

Past infection

−

+

±

+

EA, Early antigen (typically the diffuse staining component, or EA-­D); EBNA, EBV-­
determined nuclear antigens; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM,
immunoglobulin M; VCA, viral capsid antigen.

Manipulation of infected cells by EBV can lead to transformation and
oncogenesis. EBV is associated with lymphoid malignancies, such as
Burkitt lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, aggressive NK cell leukemia,
T-­and NK-­cell lymphoproliferative disorder, and epithelial cell malignancies such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma and gastric carcinoma.
Endemic Burkitt lymphoma is the most common childhood cancer
in equatorial East Africa and Papua New Guinea. These regions are
holoendemic for Plasmodium falciparum malaria and have a high rate
of EBV infection early in life. Constant exposure to malaria is thought
to act as a B lymphocyte mitogen that contributes to the polyclonal
B-­lymphocyte proliferation with EBV infection, impairs T lymphocyte
surveillance of EBV-­infected B lymphocytes, and increases the risk for
developing Burkitt lymphoma. Approximately 98% of cases of endemic
Burkitt lymphoma contain the EBV genome compared with only 20%
of nonendemic (sporadic) Burkitt lymphoma cases in other areas of
the world.
The incidence of Hodgkin lymphoma peaks in childhood in developing countries and in young adulthood in developed countries. Infection with EBV increases the risk for Hodgkin lymphoma by a factor
of 2-­4, with the risk of developing Hodgkin lymphoma peaking at
2.4 years following infectious mononucleosis. EBV is associated with
more than half of cases of mixed-­cellularity Hodgkin lymphoma and
approximately one quarter of cases of the nodular sclerosing subtype,
but it is rarely associated with lymphocyte-­
predominant Hodgkin

2009

lymphoma. Immunohistochemical studies have localized EBV to the
Reed-­Sternberg cells and their variants, the pathognomonic malignant
cells of Hodgkin lymphoma.
Numerous congenital and acquired immunodeficiency syndromes are associated with an increased incidence of EBV-­associated
B-­lymphocyte lymphoma, especially central nervous system lymphoma
and leiomyosarcoma (see Fig. 301.1). Congenital immunodeficiencies
predisposing to EBV-­associated lymphoproliferation include XLP syndrome, common-­
variable immunodeficiency, ataxia-­
telangiectasia,
Wiskott-­
Aldrich syndrome, and Chédiak-­
Higashi syndrome. Individuals with acquired immunodeficiencies resulting from anticancer
chemotherapy, immunosuppression after solid organ or hematopoietic
cell transplantation, or HIV infection have a significantly increased
risk for EBV-­associated lymphoproliferation. The lymphomas may
be focal or diffuse and are usually histologically polyclonal but may
become monoclonal. EBV-­associated PTLD can occur following solid
organ transplantation and, less commonly, allogeneic hematopoietic
cell transplantation. The most important risk factors for PTLD are
the degree of T lymphocyte immunosuppression and recipient EBV
serostatus.

TREATMENT

There is no specific treatment for infectious mononucleosis. The mainstays of management are rest, adequate fluid and nutrition intake,
and symptomatic treatment to manage fever, throat discomfort, and
malaise. Bed rest is necessary only when the patient has debilitating
fatigue. As soon as there is definite symptomatic improvement, the
patient should be encouraged to resume normal activities. Because
blunt abdominal trauma may predispose patients to splenic rupture,
it is customary and prudent to advise against participation in contact
sports and strenuous athletic activities during the first 2-­3 weeks of illness or while splenomegaly is present.
Antiviral therapy is not recommended. Although nucleoside analogs
such as acyclovir and ganciclovir inhibit viral replication in vitro and
decrease the duration of oropharyngeal viral shedding in patients with
infectious mononucleosis, they have not been shown to provide consistent clinical benefit for patients with infectious mononucleosis or
EBV-­associated malignancies. Short courses of corticosteroids may be
helpful for selected complications of infectious mononucleosis, such as
airway obstruction, but there are insufficient data to support the use
of corticosteroids to control typical symptoms in patients with infectious mononucleosis. Adoptive immunotherapy involving the infusion
of EBV-­specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes has shown some promise in
early trials for transplant recipients with PTLD and for other patients
with EBV-­associated malignancies.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for complete recovery is excellent. The major symptoms
typically last 2-­4 weeks, followed by gradual recovery within 2 months
of symptom onset. Cervical lymphadenopathy and fatigue may resolve
more slowly. Prolonged and debilitating fatigue and malaise may wax
and wane for several weeks to 6 months and are common complaints
even in otherwise unremarkable cases. Occasional persistence of
fatigue for a few years after infectious mononucleosis is well recognized. There is no convincing evidence linking EBV infection or EBV
reactivation to chronic fatigue syndrome.

PREVENTION

Vaccination against EBV would be an appealing strategy to prevent
acute disease (infectious mononucleosis) and complications such as
EBV-­
associated malignancies. Early clinical trials using strategies
targeting the EBV gp350 envelope glycoprotein demonstrated some
protection against symptomatic infectious mononucleosis, although
vaccination did not prevent EBV infection. No EBV vaccine is currently approved for clinical use.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2010 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 302

Cytomegalovirus
Suresh B. Boppana and William J. Britt
Human cytomegalovirus (CMV) is ubiquitous in the population, with
serologic evidence of infection in >50% of adults in the United States
and >96% in many populations in South America, Africa, and Asia.
Individuals who become infected remain persistently infected for life
and shed infectious virus intermittently from mucosal surfaces, thus
serving as a source of infectious virus for transmission within populations. Although CMV infection rarely causes symptoms in immunocompetent individuals, it is an important cause of morbidity and
sometimes death in immunocompromised hosts. CMV remains a well-­
recognized cause of disease in the newborn infant following intrauterine infection (congenital CMV) and in allograft recipients undergoing
posttransplantation immunosuppression. CMV emerged as the most
common opportunistic infection in HIV/AIDS patients before the
advent of effective antiretroviral therapy. Invasive CMV infections can
also be observed in patients treated with immunosuppressive biologics
such as anti–tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antibodies. In each of these
clinical settings that share some degree of immunosuppression, the
association of disease with CMV infection has been linked to high levels of virus replication and end organ disease, usually associated with
virus dissemination. In contrast, there is likely another group of disease
states associated with chronic effects of persistent CMV infection that
reflects the robust inflammatory response induced by this virus during
persistent infection. Such associations have been proposed to include
coronary artery disease, transplant vasculopathy and cardiac allograft
loss, renal tubular sclerosis and renal allograft loss, exacerbations of
inflammatory bowel disease, and possibly even some cancers such as
glioblastoma. Whether definitive evidence will eventually directly link
CMV to these disease states is uncertain.

THE VIRUS AND ITS HOST INTERACTIONS

CMV is the largest of the human herpesviruses, with an estimated size of
190 nm. The 230-­kb double-­stranded DNA genome is about 50% larger
than the herpes simplex virus genome and encodes over 200 open reading frames, which conservatively estimated includes >100 unique virion
proteins and an unknown number of nonstructural proteins. Viral DNA
replication takes place in the nucleus of the infected cell followed by
virus assembly in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. The structure of the
virus is typical of herpesviruses and includes a complex envelope composed of host cell–derived membrane studded with virion glycoproteins,
a less well-­structured area between the envelope and the capsid called
the tegument layer, and an icosahedral capsid that contains the virion
DNA. The tegument layer is highly immunogenic and induces strong
adaptive immune responses, including CMV specific CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes that are thought to play a pivotal role in controlling CMV
replication in the infected host. Likewise, the protein components of the
viral envelope are also immunogenic and induce antibody responses that
have been correlated with virus neutralization, antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), antibody dependent cellular phagocytosis
(ADCP), and other potential protective effector functions. In vivo, CMV
appears to replicate in nearly all tissue and cell types, whereas in vitro
productive virus replication (production of infectious progeny) occurs
in primary fibroblasts and cells derived from epithelial tissue. Human
CMV is species specific and productively infects only cells of human
origin. Each strain of CMV that is isolated from epidemiologically unrelated individuals is genetically unique, a finding that suggests an extraordinarily large and undefined number of genetically unique viruses exist
in the human population. Furthermore, studies using next-­generation
sequencing technologies have provided evidence that CMV can exist
as genetically diverse populations of viruses within an individual. This

finding has argued that during replication, CMV DNA synthesis is error
prone, resulting in sequence error rates in its genome that are much
higher than previous studies would predict and/or a high likelihood
of recombination events between viral genomes if permissive cells are
infected with genetically diverse populations of viruses. Thus repeated
exposures to CMV over time could result in an individual acquiring a
library of CMVs as reinfection of previously infected individuals with
new strains of CMV also appears commonplace. These observations
have led many investigators to argue that CMV must express an armamentarium of immune evasion functions that allow it to persist even in
the presence of robust host immunity. This relationship between host
and virus is best illustrated by the finding that over years a persistently
infected individual can maintain a stable virus load in sites of persistence, unwavering antiviral antibody responses, and, in some individuals, up to 15% of total peripheral blood CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte
activity can be directed at CMV antigens derived from a diverse number
of virus-­encoded proteins. These observations have resulted in a central
paradigm of CMV biology in which, following infection, a detente is
established between virus replication and host innate and adaptive antiviral immunity. Thus CMV can efficiently persist in an infected host for
a lifetime while inducing chronic immune activation. This latter characteristic of the biology of CMV infection has supported a linkage between
CMV and chronic inflammation, a link that could provide a common
mechanism for many of the chronic diseases that have been associated
with this ubiquitous virus.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

CMV infections can be acquired through several settings: (1) community exposure, (2) nosocomial transmission, and (3) intrauterine infection leading to congenital infection.
Community acquisition of CMV occurs throughout life and is
linked by exposure to CMV shed from mucosal surfaces such as saliva,
genital secretions, and urine. Peaks in exposure to infectious virus
occur during childhood and in adolescents and young adults, presumably secondary to initiation of sexual activity in the latter age group.
In addition, differences in age-­specific and overall rates of virus infection in the United States are observed in different racial, ethnic, and
socioeconomic groups. Common routes of infection of the very young
infant include perinatal exposure to infected genital secretions during birth and ingestion of CMV-­containing breast milk. Breastfeeding is the most common route of CMV infection in infancy. Ingestion
of breast milk from seropositive women results in a rate of infection
of about 60% in infants. Infection is most common during the first
several months of breastfeeding, but the risk continues for the duration of breastfeeding. Infants infected through breast milk can shed
large amounts of virus in the saliva and urine for prolonged periods
measured in months to years, thus serving as a reservoir of virus for
transmission to other infants, children, and adults. After this period of
intense exposure to CMV during the first year of life, infection in the
remainder of childhood and early teenage years depends on specific
exposures such as enrollment in group childcare facilities and/or exposure to infected, similarly aged siblings. Up to 50% of young infants
and children attending group care facilities can be excreting CMV, a
source of virus that can result in infection of children enrolled in the
facility and in some cases the adult workers within the facility. Furthermore, infants and children who acquire CMV in a group care setting
can then transmit virus to their parents and siblings, thus providing
a mechanism for spread of CMV within the community. Throughout
childhood and early adulthood, CMV is transmitted by exposure to
saliva and urine. However, in adolescence and early adulthood there is
a spike in infection presumably associated with sexual exposure. CMV
is considered a sexually transmitted infection (STI); data have shown
an increased rate of CMV infection in sexually active populations and
high rates of virus transmission in CMV-­discordant couples.
Nosocomial infections with CMV are well described and can be
associated with exposure to blood products containing CMV or to an
allograft following transplantation of an organ from a CMV-­infected
donor. Before improvements in blood banking that limited the number
of leukocytes in red cell transfusions and that more efficiently identified

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 302 u Cytomegalovirus
CMV infected donors, transmission of CMV by blood transfusion was
not uncommon and was closely related to the volume of blood that
was transfused. Transfusion-­acquired CMV infections often resulted
in symptomatic illness, with laboratory findings including hepatitis
and thrombocytopenia in children and adults. Severe and sometimes
fatal infections can develop following exposure to CMV-­infected blood
products in newborn infants who lack transplacentally transferred
antibodies to CMV either as a result of being born to women without
seroimmunity to CMV or secondary to extreme prematurity. Similarly,
immunocompromised patients who receive CMV-­containing blood
can also develop severe infection, regardless of their prior exposure to
CMV. Methodologies that efficiently deplete contaminating leukocytes
and the use of blood products from CMV seronegative donors have
greatly decreased the incidence of transfusion-­associated CMV infections. CMV transmission through infected allografts is well described;
infections arising from CMV transferred in an infected allograft are a
major cause of morbidity in both the early and late period after transplantation. Severe infections and graft loss following solid organ transplantation (SOT) are more often associated with mismatches between
the donor and recipient, such as that following transplantation of an
organ from a donor with a history of CMV infection (donor, CMV
positive) into a recipient who has not been exposed to CMV (recipient, CMV negative; D+/R− mismatch). However, clinically significant
CMV infections can occur even in moderate-­risk allograft recipients
(D+/R+). In contrast to the risk stratification for CMV infection and
disease in SOT recipients, the highest risk of posttransplant CMV
infection and disease occurs follows reactivation of CMV in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients with prior CMV infection (D+/–/R+) presumably because the risk of transmission in the
graft is considerably lower than reactivation of persistent infection in
the previously infected recipient. Even with effective antiviral therapy
to modify CMV infections in the early posttransplant period during
intense immunosuppression, CMV infection is linked to long-­term
graft dysfunction and graft loss and in specific patient groups such as
cardiac and lung transplant recipients, can represent a barrier to long-­
term graft survival.
Congenital CMV infection (present at birth) occurs following
intrauterine transmission of CMV and infection of the fetus. Rates of
congenital infection between 0.4% and 1.0% have been reported in the
United States, with perhaps the best estimate being about 0.4% based
on a large multicenter study of nearly 100,000 births. Rates as high
as 2% in some areas in Asia and Africa have been described. CMV
is thought to be transferred to the developing fetus following hematogenous spread of CMV to the placenta, infection of resident cells of
the placenta followed by cell-­free transfer of virus to the fetal blood
system. The rate of transmission to the fetus is about 30% in nonimmune women with primary infection during pregnancy; in utero infections also occur in previously immune women (nonprimary infection),
albeit at a reduced rate that has been suggested to be ∼1–2%. The rate
of transmission of CMV is more frequent following primary maternal
infection; the absolute number of congenitally infected infants born
to women with nonprimary infections in most populations outnumber those resulting from primary maternal infection by threefold to
fourfold. This is particularly true in Africa, South America, and Asia,
where maternal seroimmunity to CMV often exceeds 95%. Interestingly, many of these highly CMV seroimmune maternal populations
also have the highest prevalence of congenital CMV infections and
almost certainly account for overall burden of congenital CMV infections in most regions of the world. In fact, recent estimates based on
the prevalence of congenital CMV infections in sub-­Saharan Africa,
Asia, and South America suggest that 90% of all cases of congenital
CMV infections followed nonprimary material infections. The source
of nonprimary maternal infection remains less well defined. Reinfection by genetically distinct strains of CMV is frequent in previously
infected women and viruses acquired by maternal reinfection can be
transmitted to the developing fetus. The reinfection rates are ∼15–20%,
with annualized rates as high as 25%. Thus immunity to CMV is far
from protective, although it can modify the risk of transmission to the
developing fetus.

2011

In addition to the impact of maternal to fetal transmission, the
type of maternal infection (primary versus nonprimary) has also been
shown to be a major determinant in the outcome of the intrauterine
infection. The existing paradigm is that maternal immunity can modify
the severity of the intrauterine infection, thus maternal infections in
women with preexisting CMV immunity (nonprimary maternal infections) that result in intrauterine transmission are less likely to result in
a severe infection in the fetus. Nonetheless, severe CMV infections may
occur in fetuses infected following a nonprimary maternal infection,
suggesting that the characteristics of the fetal infection such as timing
of infection during gestation could be as important to the outcome of a
fetal infection as the maternal immune status during pregnancy. Studies have documented a higher frequency of severe infections in fetuses
that were infected in the first and early second trimester of gestation,
findings that parallel similar risk stratifications for other intrauterine
infections, including those caused by Zika virus, rubella virus, and
Toxoplasma gondii.

Mechanisms of Disease Associated with
Cytomegalovirus Infections

The mechanism(s) of disease associated with CMV infections remains
either undefined or incompletely defined for many of the clinical syndromes that follow CMV infection. Several reasons have contributed
to the overall lack of understanding of the pathogenesis of CMV infections and include (1) the asymptomatic nature of infections in almost
all immunocompetent individuals; (2) the complexity of the multiple
disease processes in immunocompromised hosts that can confound
the assignment of specific manifestations of CMV infection; (3) the
species-­specific tropism of human CMV; and, perhaps most importantly, (4) limitations inherent in observational studies in humans.
Although CMV replicates in a limited number of cell types in vitro,
CMV inclusions, antigens, and nucleic acids can be demonstrated in
almost all organ systems and most cell types in individuals with severe,
disseminated infections. Thus CMV does not exhibit strict cellular or
organ system tropism in vivo. Hematogenous dissemination has been
argued to be associated primarily with cell-­associated virus, and significant levels of plasma virus are usually detected only in severely
immunocompromised hosts with high levels of total-­blood viral loads.
Virus and viral DNA can be recovered from neutrophils, monocytes,
and endothelial cells present in peripheral blood, thus providing evidence for the significance of cell-­associated spread of this virus. High
levels of virus replication can result in end-­organ disease secondary to
direct virus-­mediated cellular damage. These manifestations of CMV
infections are thought to result from uncontrolled virus replication,
dissemination, and virus-­induced cytopathology secondary to deficits in innate and adaptive immune responses to CMV. In some cases,
clinical disease has also been observed in patients without significant
levels of virus replication, a finding suggesting indirect mechanisms of
disease such as immunopathologic responses to CMV. Such a mechanism of disease was shown to be operative in patients with immune
recovery vitritis, a pathologic T-­lymphocyte–mediated response to
CMV in HIV/AIDS patients with CMV retinitis that developed after
successful active retroviral therapy and reconstitution of their CMV-­
specific T lymphocyte responses. Likewise, the level of virus replication
has not been closely correlated with several chronic diseases thought
to be linked to CMV, an observation that is consistent with indirect
mechanisms of disease such as immunopathologic responses to a persistent infection.
From early observations in allograft recipients with invasive CMV
infections it was apparent that immunosuppressive therapies that
resulted in altered T lymphocyte function predisposed these patients
to severe infections. Definitive evidence consistent with the critical
role of CMV-­specific T lymphocyte immunity in protection from disease in these patients was provided by a clinical study in which in vitro
expanded, CMV-­specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes limited invasive
infection in hematopoietic cell transplant recipients. Invasive infections associated with end-­organ disease, such as retinitis and colitis in HIV/AIDS patients with very low CD4+ T-­lymphocyte counts,
also clearly demonstrated the importance of T lymphocyte response

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2012 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
control of invasive CMV infections, as the risk for these manifestations
of CMV infections could be predicted in models that were based on
CD4+ T-­lymphocyte counts in these patients. However, a role of anti-­
CMV antibodies in limiting the early events of CMV infection was also
shown in studies in SOT recipients. These early studies demonstrated
the transfer of immune globulins containing high titers of anti-­CMV
antibodies when used in a prophylaxis protocol could provide some
degree of protection from CMV infections and end-­organ disease.
This important finding was consistent with the proposed role of antiviral antibodies in limiting CMV dissemination and disease in animal
models of invasive CMV infections. The importance of innate immune
responses such as natural killer (NK) cells and γδ T lymphocytes in
limiting invasive infections have been well documented in animal
models. Similarly, NK cells have been associated with both control of
CMV reactivation and limiting the severity of CMV end-­organ disease in human HCST and SOT recipients. Effector molecules such as
interferon-­γ appear to contribute to the control of local CMV infections in animal models, but evidence of a similar role in humans has
not been demonstrated.
Studies in immunocompromised human hosts have shown that
the control of acute CMV infection depends on an effective adaptive
immune response; however, even a vigorous T lymphocyte response
is not sufficient to eliminate CMV from the infected host, because
CMV persists for the lifetime of the host either as a low-­level chronic
infection and/or as a latent infection with limited transcription from
multiple regions of its genome. The inability of the host to completely
clear CMV remains incompletely understood, but the large array of
immune evasion functions encoded by this virus likely contributes to
the blunted innate and adaptive immune response. Examples of these
functions include (1) inhibition of cell death functions of infected
cells, including apoptosis, necroptosis, and pyroptosis, (2) inhibition
of interferon-­regulated responses, (3) inhibition of NK cell activation, (4) downregulation of class I major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) expression and inhibition of class II MHC function, and
(5) mechanisms to limit antibody recognition of envelope proteins,
including carbohydrate masking of antibody recognition sites and
variation in amino acid sequences in virion envelope proteins targeted by antiviral antibodies. Although each of these functions by
itself could potentially have only limited effects on virus clearance,
the redundancy of these viral immune evasion functions when acting in concert likely provide the virus a sufficient advantage to favor
persistence.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of CMV infection reflect two parameters
of the infection that are often linked: (1) the level of virus replication
and (2) the degree of end-­organ involvement. The manifestations of
CMV infections that have been most well described in clinical studies are those that are present in acutely infected individuals without
existing immunity to the virus. Such infections are termed acute or
primary infections to distinguish these infections from persistent
infections that are established after an acute infection. Similar clinical findings can be observed in patients with significant underlying
deficits in innate and adaptive immune responses, regardless if infection follows an acute infection or recurrence/reactivation of persistent infection and reflect loss of immune control of virus replication.
In contrast, the clinical manifestations of persistent or chronic CMV
infections are frequently overlaid on underlying disease syndromes
such as cardiovascular disease, thus confounding the contribution of
CMV to the primary disease process and clinical findings in these
patients.

Normal Host

In the overwhelming majority of patients with acute CMV infections,
there are no specific symptoms or clinical findings. In patients with
symptomatic, acute CMV infection, clinical findings have been most
commonly reported to resemble a mononucleosis-­like syndrome, with
fatigue and occasionally cervical adenopathy. Up to 20% of heterophile

antibody-­negative mononucleosis may be attributed to CMV. Laboratory findings can include mild elevation of hepatic transaminases and
decreased platelet counts.

Immunocompromised Host

The clinical presentation of CMV infection in immunocompromised hosts often reflects the magnitude of the immunodeficiency.
Profoundly immunocompromised hosts such as HSCT recipients
can present with disseminated infection and clinical manifestations
of disease in multiple organ systems, including liver, lung, gastrointestinal tract, and, less frequently, the CNS. Organ-­threatening and
life-­threatening disease is not infrequent in these patients. In less
immunocompromised patients such as the case of most SOT recipients, CMV infection can present with fever, fatigue, hematologic
abnormalities, including leukopenia and thrombocytopenia, and
mild hepatocellular dysfunction, a collection of laboratory findings
and symptoms described as the CMV syndrome (Table 302.1). In
contrast to renal and liver SOT recipients, heart-­lung and lung transplant recipients are at high risk for severe manifestations from CMV
infection, presumably because the transplanted organ is a site of virus
replication, disease, and virus-­induced life-­threatening organ dysfunction (see Table 302.1). Before the widespread use of antivirals for
prophylaxis of allograft recipients, clinical disease usually developed
between 30 and 60 days after transplantation. Prolonged antiviral
prophylaxis has greatly reduced the frequency of CMV disease in the
early posttransplant period in most SOT and HCST recipients; late
manifestations of CMV infection often become apparent after discontinuation of antiviral prophylaxis. These late manifestations are most
worrisome in HSCT recipients, because they may signal deficits in
graft function that in turn predispose these patients to invasive CMV
infections. Long-­term graft function has been reported to be influenced by CMV infection. This has been most well studied in renal
allograft recipients and is thought by many investigators to represent
a significant cause of chronic graft dysfunction and eventual loss of
the graft. Perhaps the most dramatic impact of CMV infection late in
the posttransplant period can be seen in heart transplant recipients,
in whom CMV is thought to play a major role in transplant vascular
sclerosis, a vasculopathy of the coronary arteries in the allograft leading to loss of the transplanted heart allograft.

Congenital Infection

Congenital infection with CMV can present with clinically apparent
(symptomatic) infection (Table 302.2) in about 10% of infected newborns, whereas 90% of infected infants will have no clinical manifestations of infection in the newborn period (asymptomatic infection)
and can be identified only by screening newborns for the presence

Table 302.1  Findings in Cytomegalovirus Infections in
Solid Organ Transplant Recipients
CLINICAL FINDINGS
CMV SYNDROME
Fever, nonspecific
findings, fatigue
END-­ORGAN DISEASE
Gastrointestinal disease,
including esophagitis,
colitis, and hepatitis

LABORATORY FINDINGS
Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
reactive lymphocytosis, hepatitis,
CMV DNA in blood
Detection of CMV DNA in blood;
detection of CMV in tissue biopsy;
hepatitis, including elevated bilirubin

Lung disease; hypoxemia

Abnormalities in lung imaging
CMV in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid

Encephalitis

CSF pleocytosis, elevated CSF protein
Abnormalities in CNS imaging

Allograft dysfunction

Evidence of graft rejection

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 302 u Cytomegalovirus

2013

Table 302.2  Findings in Infants with Symptomatic
Congenital Cytomegalovirus Infection
FINDINGS

% OF INFANTS

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Prematurity (<37 wk)

24

Jaundice (direct bilirubin >2 mg/dL)

42

Petechiae

54

Hepatosplenomegaly

19

Purpura

3

Microcephaly

35

IUGR

28

1 clinical finding

41

2 clinical findings

59

LABORATORY FINDINGS
Elevated ALT (>80 IU/mL)

71

Thrombocytopenia (<100,000 k/mm3)

43

Direct hyperbilirubinemia (>2 mg/dL)

54

Head CT abnormalities

42

Findings in 70 infants with symptomatic congenital CMV infection identified during
newborn screening program for infants with congenital CMV infection at the
University of Alabama Hospitals over an approximate 20-­yr interval.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; IUGR, in utero growth restriction; ALT, alanine aminotransferase.

of CMV in saliva, urine, or, less commonly, blood. Severe multiorgan disease is infrequent and occurs in approximately 30% of infants
with symptomatic congenital CMV infections. The clinical findings
in infants with symptomatic congenital CMV infections can include
hepatosplenomegaly, petechial rashes, jaundice, and microcephaly.
Intrauterine growth restriction is also a finding of symptomatic congenital CMV infection. Laboratory findings are consistent with the
clinical findings and include direct hyperbilirubinemia, elevation of
hepatic transaminases, thrombocytopenia, and abnormal findings on
cranial ultrasonography/computed tomography/MRI (Fig. 302.1). If
cerebrospinal fluid is obtained, there can be evidence of encephalitis, with elevation of mononuclear cell number and, in some cases,
elevation of protein. A small number of symptomatically infected
infants (<10%) will have chorioretinitis. Because hearing loss is the
most common long-­term sequela associated with congenital CMV
infection, the failure of an infant to pass a newborn hearing screening exam should alert caregivers to the possibility of congenital CMV
infection. Hearing loss in the older infant and young child should
also alert the clinician to the possibility of congenital CMV infection, because about 50% of infants with hearing loss associated with
congenital CMV infection will pass an initial hearing screening exam
but will exhibit hearing loss in later infancy and early childhood.
Importantly, hearing loss can be progressive in infants with congenital CMV infections and late-­onset hearing loss and/or progression
of hearing loss can only be identified by follow-­up testing of hearing
in congenitally infected infants (see later). Finally, the diagnosis of
congenital CMV infection must be made within the first 2-­3 weeks of
life, and congenital CMV infection cannot be assumed to be the cause
of hearing loss in older infants without evidence of CMV infection in
the newborn period.
An organized plan for follow-­up is an important component of
the clinical management of infants with congenital CMV infection.
Because permanent sequelae are limited to disorders of the central
nervous system (CNS), long-­term follow-­up should include appropriate assessment of development and neuromuscular function in
infected infants, with referral to specialized care if necessary. This is
particularly important for infected infants who present with evidence

Fig. 302.1 Cytomegalovirus (CMV). One-­
day-­
old with congenital

CMV infection. Noncontrast CT of the head demonstrates multiple areas of confluent calcifications within the periventricular regions bilaterally (arrows), typical of the expected distribution of calcification secondary to CMV. Note the abnormal sulcal pattern of the right hemisphere,
indicating associated polymicrogyria (arrowheads). (From Rothenberg
Maddocks AB, Pollok AN. Infection and inflammation. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 34.31, p. 342.)

of CNS damage such as microcephaly, seizures, or obvious motor deficits. Overall, about 11% of infected infants will exhibit some degree of
hearing loss; hearing loss in some infants will progress during infancy
or less frequently, develop later in infancy. Thus comprehensive audiologic testing and follow-­up are mandatory in these patients. Other
sequelae such as vision loss are infrequent, but vision testing and comprehensive eye examinations should be included in the care plan of
infants with congenital CMV infection.

Perinatal Infection

Perinatal infections can be acquired during birth or following ingestion
of CMV-­containing breast milk. In almost all cases perinatal infections
have not been associated with clinical manifestations of the infection
and have not been associated with long-­term sequelae that have been
described in infants with congenital CMV infections. In rare cases such
as is seen in breast milk transmission of CMV to extremely premature
infants or infants born to nonimmune women, perinatal infection can
result in severe, disseminated infections associated with end-­organ disease and death. These more severe infections are thought to develop in
infants that lack transplacentally acquired antiviral antibodies, either
secondary to extreme prematurity or as the product of a mother lacking anti-­CMV antibodies.

DIAGNOSIS

In the nonimmunocompromised individual, diagnosis of CMV infection has required evidence of a primary or acute infection. Serologic
reactivity for CMV is lifelong following primary infection; therefore
the presence of immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibody to CMV does not
provide evidence of acute infection unless the absence of CMV-­
specific IgG reactivity in a prior serum specimen can be demonstrated, thus providing evidence of IgG seroconversion. In addition,
IgM reactivity for CMV can be detected for prolonged periods after
acute infection and cannot be used to reliably estimate the duration
of a primary infection. Furthermore, recovery of virus from body
fluids such as saliva or urine does not in itself permit diagnosis of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2014 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
CMV infection, because persistently infected individuals can intermittently shed virus. In contrast, in the immunocompromised host,
CMV can frequently be recovered from patients in the absence of
evidence of invasive CMV infection. Thus assignment of CMV as
a cause of disease in immunocompromised patients must be made
carefully, and other potential causes of symptoms and clinical findings in these patients must also be considered. Serologic assays are of
limited value in the transplant recipient secondary to the impact of
immunosuppression on antibody responses in the allograft recipient.
Moreover, IgM antibodies can be produced following a nonprimary
infection in these patients. Sequential viral load measurements by
nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) such as polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) in relevant body fluids such as blood and detection
of CMV DNA in biopsy tissue can be of great value in establishing
CMV as a cause of disease in allograft recipients because increasing
viral loads can provide evidence of the lack of host control of CMV
replication (Table 302.3). Detection of CMV in urine, saliva, blood,
and tissue specimens obtained at biopsy can most reliably be accomplished by NAAT, and because findings can be quantified, treatment
responses can be monitored. However, conventional culture of CMV
using human dermal fibroblasts often combined with immunofluorescence detection of CMV-­encoded immediate early antigens also
remains standard in many institutions. Histopathologic studies of
tissue specimens that permit detection of CMV-infected cells containing characteristic nuclear inclusions (owl’s-eye inclusions) are
relatively insensitive but can aid in the diagnosis of an invasive CMV
infection. The addition of immunohistochemistry for the detection of
CMV-­encoded proteins and/or in situ hybridization for the detection
of CMV nucleic acids has greatly improved the sensitivity of histologic detection of CMV in tissue and/or biopsy specimens (see Table
302.3).
In practice, in nonimmunocompromised patients the demonstration of CMV-­specific IgG seroconversion or the presence of CMV-­
specific IgM antibodies is considered evidence of a recently acquired
CMV infection. However, in the case of pregnant women the timing
of a primary infection often requires a more precise estimate of when
the infection was acquired because CMV infections before conception

carry significantly less risk to the developing fetus than infections
acquired after conception. Furthermore, as noted in previous sections,
maternal infections acquired in the first and early second trimester
are more frequently associated with severe intrauterine infections and
result in more significant long-­term sequelae in infants with congenital
CMV infections. Because IgM anti-­CMV antibody reactivity can persist for months depending on the sensitivity of the particular assay, the
use of IgM detection to precisely time the acquisition of CMV is of limited value. However, when combined with IgG avidity assays in which
CMV-­specific binding antibodies are eluted with increasing concentrations of chaotropic agents such as urea, IgG serology can provide
a more accurate estimate of the duration of infection. Thus the IgG
avidity assay has been used almost exclusively in the management of
CMV infections during pregnancy to aid in identifying primary maternal infections in women who present at the first prenatal visits with
CMV-­specific IgM antibodies. The presence of CMV-­specific IgG antibodies with high avidity argues for an infection that occurred in the
distant past, whereas low-­avidity CMV-­specific IgG antibodies argues
for a more proximal timing of infection. The presence of anti-­CMV
IgG antibodies with intermediate avidity is considered uninterpretable
(see Table 302.3).

Congenital Infections

The diagnosis of congenital CMV infections requires the recovery of
replicating virus and/or viral nucleic acids within the first 2-­3 weeks of
life. Sources of virus and viral nucleic acids include urine, saliva, and
blood. Methods of detection include routine virus culture combined
with immunofluorescence and NAAT. Although quantification of virus
in various specimens can suggest the likelihood of long-­term sequelae
such as hearing loss for a population of infected newborns, the predictive value for the individual patient remains limited. A considerable
amount of effort has been devoted to identifying screening assays that
would be suitable for populations of newborn infants. Initial interest
centered on dried blood spots, because these samples are routinely collected as a component of newborn screening programs. Unfortunately,
studies have indicated that the sensitivity of detection of congenitally
infected infants using dried blood spots is too low to be considered

Table 302.3  Laboratory Detection of Cytomegalovirus Infection
ASSAY

APPLICATION

TISSUE CULTURE
Virus isolation
HISTOPATHOLOGY
Histopathology
Viral antigen detection
(immunohistochemistry)

Detection of virus in clinical material

Requires prolonged culture periods; low sensitivity
compared with molecular techniques; expensive

Identification of CMV infected cells (owl’s
eye inclusions)

Routine for most laboratories; low sensitivity is
improved with IHC (see below)

Sensitive and allows detection of CMV-­
infected cells in variety of specimens

Rapid and can be quantitative

MOLECULAR METHODOLOGIES
Nucleic acid amplification (NAAT),
Quantitation of CMV DNA and viral RNA
including quantitative PCR, transcription-­
mediated amplification (TMA)
DNA/RNA in-­situ hybridization

CHARACTERISTICS OF ASSAY

Rapid, sensitive, and quantitative;
can be applied to variety of clinical specimens (blood,
saliva, urine, biopsy specimens, etc.)

Sensitive detection of CMV DNA or RNA
transcripts in tissue specimens

Technically more difficult than NAAT, long turnaround
times, can identify specific cells infected with CMV

Screening for recent infections

Variability in duration of response and low levels of
IgM antibodies decrease sensitivity and specificity

CMV-­specific IgG serology

Detection of infection with HCMV, useful
for seroprevalence studies

Rapid, specific, and quantitative; gold standard for
CMV infection (acute and past)

CMV-­specific IgG avidity

Estimate of duration of HCMV infection

Interpretation limited to high and low values of
avidity; useful for timing of recent CMV infections in
pregnancy; not useful in allograft recipients

SEROLOGIC TESTING
CMV-­specific IgM serology

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 302 u Cytomegalovirus
useful for screening. In contrast, newborn screening using saliva has
proven sensitive and specific and is used for newborn screening in
many institutions. The identification of an infected infant by screening of saliva requires confirmation, preferably by assaying urine for the
presence of CMV.

TREATMENT

Treatment of immunocompromised hosts with invasive CMV disease
limits both the morbidity and the mortality in the patient with disseminated CMV infections with end-­organ disease. This has been
shown in allograft transplant recipients and patients with HIV/AIDS.
Similarly, antiviral prophylaxis can limit the development of clinically
important CMV disease in allograft recipients and is the standard of
care in most transplant centers, with the remaining centers using preemptive treatment in which antivirals are given once a predetermined
level of CMV viremia is detected during routine monitoring in the
posttransplant period. Several agents are licensed for CMV infections, including ganciclovir, foscarnet, and cidofovir; all have appreciable toxicity. Letermovir is another agent that has been licensed for
use in adults; it is expected that indications for this agent will extend
into pediatrics in the future. The antiviral agent, maribavir, has been
licensed to treat refractory CMV infections in adult transplant recipients. In some transplant centers, high-­titer CMV immunoglobulins
have been included as a component of prophylaxis, most commonly
in heart and lung SOT recipients. Early on, when the treatment of
CMV infections with antiviral agents was in its infancy, treatment
with CMV immunoglobulins was shown to alter the natural history
of CMV infection in renal and liver allograft recipients. However, the
efficacy of antiviral agents when used as prophylaxis in the immediate posttransplant period has resulted in less frequent use of these
biologics.
Treatment of congenitally infected infants with ganciclovir has
been studied in several clinical trials, and a significant number of
infected infants with symptomatic congenital CMV infections have
been treated off-­label with this agent. In addition, infants with
severe perinatal CMV infection following breast milk ingestion
with documented end-­organ disease have been successfully treated
with ganciclovir. Two studies have suggested that 6 weeks of intravenously administered ganciclovir or 6 months of valganciclovir, an
oral preparation of ganciclovir, could limit hearing loss and possibly improve developmental outcome of infected infants followed for
approximately 2 years. In contrast to the apparent efficacy of valganciclovir treatment in congenitally CMV infected infants in these
studies with relatively short-­term follow-­up, another study reported
that valganciclovir failed to provide evidence of efficacy in altering
the long-­term outcomes of congenitally infected infants when followed over a longer time. Currently, there are no recommendations
for the treatment of infants with congenital CMV infection.

PREVENTION
Passive Immunoprophylaxis

Passive transfer of anti-­CMV antibodies has been used to limit disease but not infection in allograft recipients. A similar approach has
also been considered for prevention of intrauterine transmission of
CMV; disease based on studies from limited observational data suggests that antiviral antibodies could limit disease following CMV
infections in the perinatal period. An uncontrolled trial of human
immune globulin provided provocative evidence that passive transfer of anti-­CMV antibodies to pregnant women undergoing primary
CMV infection could limit intrauterine transmission and disease. A
second study using the same immune globulin preparation failed
to demonstrate that immune globulins provided protection from
intrauterine transmission or disease. Another multicenter trial
sponsored by the NIH was terminated secondary to the lack of any
efficacy of the treatment. It remains to be determined if passively

2015

transferred anti-­CMV antibodies can modulate infection and disease following intrauterine exposure to CMV.

Active Immunoprophylaxis

Active immunization for the prevention of congenital CMV infection (and in transplant recipients) has been a goal of biomedical
research for over 3 decades. A number of different vaccine platforms
have been explored, including replicating attenuated CMV vaccines,
protein-­based vaccines, heterologous virus-­vectored CMV vaccines,
DNA vaccines, and mRNA-­based vaccines. In all cases, some level
of immunity has been induced by each of these candidate vaccines.
Larger scale trials have been carried out using replication competent, attenuated CMV vaccines and adjuvanted recombinant protein
vaccines. Current approaches are directed toward development of
an adequately attenuated replicating CMV strain that retains sufficient immunogenicity to induce protective responses. In contrast to
programs testing candidate attenuated CMV vaccines, considerable
progress has been made in the testing of adjuvanted recombinant
viral proteins. An adjuvanted recombinant glycoprotein B, a major
protein component of the envelope and target of neutralizing antibodies, has been shown to induce virus neutralizing antibodies and
CD4+ T lymphocyte proliferative responses. Moreover, this vaccine
reduced virus acquisition by about 50% in a trial carried out in young
women. Closer examination of this particular trial revealed that protection was very short-­lived and that the effectiveness of the vaccine
was not convincingly demonstrated because of the small numbers of
subjects in the trial, despite attaining minimal statistical significance.
A follow-­up trial in adolescent women using the same vaccine preparation failed to show any statistically significant difference between
vaccine and placebo recipients. A major question that will face all
vaccine programs is whether existing immunity in seropositive
women can be augmented to a level to prevent damaging infection
in their offspring. The maternal population with existing immunity
to CMV before childbearing age is responsible for the vast majority of congenitally infected infants in almost all regions of the world;
thus merely recapitulating naturally acquired adaptive immunity to
CMV with a vaccine may not be sufficient to prevent congenital CMV
infection and/or limit disease.

Counseling

Studies of the natural history of CMV have repeatedly demonstrated
that transmission requires repeated close, often direct contact with
infected material such as secretions from the oral or genitourinary
tract. Although limited data suggest that CMV can be transmitted
on fomites, infectivity can persist for hours on surfaces such as toys.
Limiting exposure to such secretions and attention to hygiene such
as handwashing can drastically limit acquisition of CMV. Counseling has been shown to be very effective in the prevention of
CMV infection in women of childbearing age. In fact, counseling
programs have been shown to be more effective in limiting CMV
infection during pregnancy than any vaccine that has been tested
to date. Sexual transmission is an important route of infection,
because CMV is considered to be an STI. Limiting sexual transmission through education and counseling should be considered
in sexually active individuals. The acquisition of CMV by hospital
workers and other healthcare providers has been shown to be less
than in age-­matched individuals in the general public. Importantly,
these early studies in healthcare workers were carried out before
universal precautions that are in place in most hospitals today. Thus
patient education with an emphasis on describing the sources of
infectious virus in communities and attention to general hygiene
could dramatically reduce community-­acquired CMV, particularly
in women of childbearing age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2016 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 303

Roseola (Human
Herpesviruses 6 and 7)
Brenda L. Tesini
Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-­6A and HHV-­6B) and human herpesvirus 7 (HHV-­7) cause ubiquitous infection in infancy and early childhood. HHV-­6B is responsible for the majority of cases of roseola
infantum (exanthem subitum or sixth disease) and is associated with
other diseases, including encephalitis, especially in immunocompromised hosts. A small percentage of children with roseola have primary
infection with HHV-­7.

ETIOLOGY

HHV-­6A, HHV-­6B, and HHV-­7 are the sole members of the Roseolovirus genus in the Betaherpesvirinae subfamily of human herpesviruses. Human cytomegalovirus, the only other β-­herpesvirus, shares
limited sequence homology with HHV-­6 and HHV-­7. Morphologically
all human herpesviruses are composed of an icosahedral nucleocapsid,
protein-­dense tegument, and lipid envelope. Within the nucleocapsid,
HHV-­6 and HHV-­7 both contain large, linear, double-­stranded DNA
genomes that encode more than 80 unique proteins.
Initially, two strain groups of HHV-­6 were recognized: HHV-­6 variant A and HHV-­6 variant B. Despite sharing highly conserved genomes
with approximately 90% sequence identity, the two variants could be
distinguished by restriction fragment length polymorphisms, reactivity with monoclonal antibodies, differential cell tropism, and epidemiology. Because of these differences, the two were reclassified as separate
species in the genus Roseolovirus by the International Committee on
the Taxonomy of Viruses in 2012. HHV-­6A detection is quite rare,
and HHV-­6B is the overwhelmingly predominant virus found in both
immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. Previous reports
of HHV-­6A detection in children in Africa have not been substantiated
in a large cohort using a more specific PCR target.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Primary infection with HHV-­6B is acquired rapidly by essentially all
children after the loss of maternal antibodies in the first few months of
infancy, with 95% of children being infected by 2 years of age. The peak
age of primary HHV-­6B infection is 6-­9 months of life, with infections
occurring sporadically and without seasonal predilection or contact
with other ill individuals. Infection with HHV-­7 is also widespread but
occurs later in childhood and at a slower rate; only 50% of children
have evidence of prior infection with HHV-­7 by 3 years of age. Seroprevalence reaches 75% by 6 years of age. In a small study of children
with primary HHV-­7 infection, the mean age of the patients was 26
months, significantly older than that of children with primary HHV-­6
infection.
Preliminary data suggest that the majority of children acquire primary infection with HHV-­6 from the saliva or respiratory droplets of
asymptomatic adults or older children. However, congenital infection
with HHV-­6 occurs in 1% of newborns. Two mechanisms of vertical
transmission of HHV-­6 have been identified: transplacental infection
and chromosomal integration. HHV-­6 is unique among the human herpesviruses in that it is integrated at the telomere end of human chromosomes at a frequency of 0.2–2.2% of the population and is passed from
parent to child via the germline. Chromosomal integration of HHV-­7
has been suggested in only a single case report thus far. Chromosomal
integration has been identified as the major mechanism by which
HHV-­6 is vertically transmitted, accounting for 86% of congenital

infections, with one third resulting from HHV-­6A, a percentage much
higher than in primary infection in the United States. The clinical consequences of chromosomal integration or transplacental infection with
HHV-­6 have yet to be determined. In one series of infants identified
with HHV-­6 congenital infection, no evidence of disease was present
in the early neonatal period. However, reactivation of chromosomally
integrated HHV-­6 virus has been demonstrated following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Primary infection with HHV-­7
is presumed to be spread by the saliva of asymptomatic individuals.
DNA of both HHV-­6 and HHV-­7 has been identified in the cervical
secretions of pregnant women, suggesting an additional role for sexual
or perinatal transmission of these viruses. Breast milk does not appear
to play a role in transmission of either HHV-­6 or HHV-­7.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Primary HHV-­6B infection causes a viremia that can be demonstrated by co-­culture of the patient’s peripheral blood mononuclear
cells with mitogen-­stimulated cord blood mononuclear cells. HHV-­6
has a recognizable cytopathic effect, consisting of the appearance of
large refractile mononucleated or multinucleated cells with intracytoplasmic and/or intranuclear inclusions. Infected cells exhibit a slightly
prolonged life span in culture; however, lytic infection predominates.
HHV-­6 infection also induces apoptosis of T cells. In vitro, HHV-­6 can
infect a broad range of cell types, including primary T cells, monocytes,
natural killer cells, dendritic cells, and astrocytes. HHV-­6 has also been
documented to infect B-­cell, megakaryocytic, endothelial, and epithelial cell lines. Human astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia have
been infected with HHV-­6 ex vivo. The broad tropism of HHV-­6 is
consistent with the recognition that CD46, present on the surface of all
nucleated cells, is a cellular receptor for HHV-­6, HHV-­6A in particular.
CD134, a member of the TNFR superfamily, is the main entry receptor
for HHV-­6B and may explain some of the differences in tissue tropism
noted between HHV-­6A and HHV-­6B. The CD4 molecule has been
identified as a receptor for HHV-­7. HHV-­7 has been demonstrated to
reactivate HHV-­6 from latency in vitro, but whether this phenomenon
occurs in vivo is not clear.
Primary infection with HHV-­6 and HHV-­7 is followed by lifelong
latency or persistence of virus at multiple sites. HHV-­6 exists in a true
state of viral latency in monocytes and macrophages. The detection of
replicating HHV-­6 in cultures of primary CD34+ hematopoietic stem
cells has also been described, suggesting that cellular differentiation is
a trigger of viral reactivation. This observation is clinically significant
because HHV-­6 may cause either primary or reactivated infection during HSCT. Additionally, HHV-­6 and HHV-­7 infection may be persistent in salivary glands, and DNA of both HHV-­6 and HHV-­7 can be
routinely detected in the saliva of both adults and children. HHV-­7
can also be isolated in tissue culture from saliva, but HHV-­6 cannot.
HHV-­6 DNA has been identified in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of
children, both during and subsequent to primary infection, as well as
in brain tissue from immunocompetent adults at autopsy, implicating
the central nervous system (CNS) as an additional important site of
either viral latency or persistence. HHV-­7 DNA has also been found in
adult brain tissue but at a significantly lower frequency.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Roseola infantum (exanthem subitum, or sixth disease) is an acute,
self-­limited disease of infancy and early childhood. It is characterized
by the abrupt onset of high fever, which may be accompanied by fussiness. The fever usually resolves acutely after 72 hours (crisis) but may
gradually fade over a day (lysis) coincident with the appearance of a
faint pink or rose-­colored, nonpruritic, 2-­to 3-­mm morbilliform rash
on the trunk (Fig. 303.1). The rash usually lasts 1-­3 days but is often
described as evanescent and may be visible only for hours, spreading
from the trunk to the face and extremities. Because the rash is variable in appearance, location, and duration, it is not distinctive and may
be missed. Associated signs are few but can include mild injection of
the pharynx, palpebral conjunctivae, or tympanic membranes and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 303 u Roseola (Human Herpesviruses 6 and 7) 2017
Results of CSF analyses reported in patients with encephalitis
thought to be caused by HHV-­6 have been normal or demonstrated
only minimal CSF pleocytosis with mild elevations of protein, especially early in the course of the disease, which may progress with
time. Areas of hyperintense signal on T2 weighted and fluid attenuation inversion recovery images of the hippocampus, uncus, and
amygdala have been found on MRI, and increased metabolism within
the hippocampus has been observed on positron emission tomography scanning.

DIAGNOSIS

enlarged suboccipital nodes. In Asian countries, ulcers at the uvulopalatoglossal junction (Nagayama spots) are commonly reported in
infants with roseola.
High fever (mean: 39.7°C [103.5°F]) is the most consistent finding associated with primary HHV-­
6B infection. Rash detected
either during the illness or following defervescence has been
reported in approximately 20% of infected children in the United
States. Additional symptoms and signs include irritability, inflamed
tympanic membranes, rhinorrhea and congestion, gastrointestinal
complaints, and encephalopathy. Symptoms of lower respiratory
tract involvement such as cough are identified significantly less frequently in children with primary HHV-­6B infection than in children
with other febrile illnesses. The mean duration of illness caused by
primary HHV-­6B infection is 6 days, with 15% of children having
fever for 6 or more days. Primary infection with HHV-­6B accounts
for a significant burden of illness on the healthcare system; one
study found that 24% of visits to emergency departments by infants
between 6 and 9 months of age were because of primary HHV-­6B
infection. A population-­based study of primary HHV-­6B infection
confirmed that 93% of infants had symptoms and were more likely
to visit a physician than noninfected infants. Fever was less likely
to be present with HHV-­6B infection in children younger than 6
months of age but was significantly more common in older infants
and children.
Much less is known about the clinical manifestations of HHV-­7
infection. Primary infection with HHV-­7 has been identified in a small
number of children with roseola in whom the illness is indistinguishable from that caused by HHV-­6B. Secondary cases of roseola caused
by infection with HHV-­7 have also been reported. Additionally, primary infection with HHV-­7 may be asymptomatic or may cause a nonspecific febrile illness lasting approximately 3 days.

Although roseola is generally a benign self-­limited disease, its diagnosis
can exclude other, more serious disorders that cause fever and rash. A
history of 3 days of high fever in an otherwise nontoxic 10-­month-­old
infant with a blanching maculopapular rash on the trunk suggests a
diagnosis of roseola. A specific diagnosis of HHV-­6 is not usually
necessary except in situations in which the manifestations of the
infection are severe or unusual and might benefit from antiviral
therapy.
The diagnosis of primary infection with either HHV-­6 or HHV-­7
is confirmed by demonstrating the presence of actively replicating
virus in the patient’s blood sample coupled with seroconversion.
Viral culture is the gold standard method to document active viral
replication. Unfortunately, culture is expensive, time consuming, and
available only in research laboratories. Two other methods used to
identify active HHV-­6 replication are the detection of viral DNA by
PCR on acellular fluids such as plasma or reverse transcriptase PCR
on peripheral blood mononuclear cell samples designed to detect viral
transcription and protein production. Quantitative PCR for HHV-­6
genome copy numbers on various specimens is also frequently reported
and is commercially available. However, the role of this methodology
is not clear, as a specific value of DNA that can discriminate between
patients with viremia and those who are culture negative has not been
determined. Complicating the use of molecular assays for the detection of active replication of HHV-­6 is the recognition that individuals
with chromosomally integrated HHV-­6 have persistent HHV-­6 DNA
in plasma, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and CSF in the absence
of disease and replicating virus.
Serologic methods such as indirect immunofluorescence assays,
enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent assays, neutralization assays, and
immunoblot have been described for the measurement of concentrations of antibodies to HHV-­6 and HHV-­7 in serum or plasma and
are commercially available. Although immunoglobulin M antibody is
produced early in infection with HHV-­6, assays designed to measure
this response have not proved useful in the diagnosis of primary or
reactivated infection. The absence of immunoglobulin G antibody in
an infant older than 6 months of age combined with the presence of
replicating virus is strong evidence of primary infection with either
HHV-­6 or HHV-­7. Alternatively, the demonstration of seroconversion between acute and convalescent samples also confirms primary
infection but is not clinically useful in the acute care setting. Unfortunately, serologic assays have not been found reliable in the detection of
HHV-­6 reactivation and cannot be used to differentiate between infection with HHV-­6A and infection with HHV-­6B. Additionally, limited
antibody cross-­reactivity has been demonstrated between HHV-­6 and
HHV-­7, complicating the interpretation of serologic assays, especially
if low titers are reported.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Differential Diagnosis

A

B

Fig. 303.1 Roseola infantum. A, Erythematous, blanching macules

and papules in an infant who had high fever for 3 days preceding development of the rash. B, On closer inspection some lesions reveal a
subtle peripheral halo of vasoconstriction. (From Paller AS, Mancinin
AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2006: p. 434)

The most characteristic laboratory findings noted in children with primary HHV-­6B infection are lower mean numbers of total white blood
cells (8,900/μL), lymphocytes (3,400/μL), and neutrophils (4,500/μL)
than in febrile children without primary HHV-­6B infection. Similar
hematologic findings have been reported during primary infection
with HHV-­7. Thrombocytopenia, elevated serum transaminase values,
and atypical lymphocytes have also been noted sporadically in children
with primary HHV-­6B infection.

Primary infection with either HHV-­6B or HHV-­7 usually causes
an undifferentiated febrile illness that may be very difficult to distinguish from other common viral infections of childhood. This
difficulty also applies to the early stages of roseola, before the development of rash. Once the rash is present, roseola may be confused
with other exanthematous diseases of childhood, especially measles
and rubella. Children with rubella often have a prodrome characterized by mild illness with low-­grade fever, sore throat, arthralgia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2018 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
and gastrointestinal complaints, unlike those with roseola. On physical examination, suboccipital and posterior auricular lymph nodes
are prominent up to 1 week before the rash of rubella is evident and
persist during the exanthematous phase. Additionally, the rash of
rubella usually begins on the face and spreads to the chest, like that in
measles. The associated symptoms of measles virus infection include
cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis, with high fever coincident with the
development of rash, unlike in roseola. Roseola may also be confused
with scarlet fever, though the latter is rare in children younger than 2
years of age and causes a characteristic sandpaper-­like rash concurrent with fever.
Roseola may be confused with illness caused by enterovirus
infections, especially in the summer and fall months. Drug hypersensitivity reactions may also be difficult to distinguish from
roseola. Antibiotics are frequently prescribed for children with
fever from roseola before the appearance of rash. A child who then
demonstrates rash after the resolution of fever may erroneously be
labeled as being drug allergic.

COMPLICATIONS

Convulsions are the most common complication of roseola and are
recognized in up to one third of patients. Seizures are also the most
common complication of children with documented primary HHV­6B infection, occurring in approximately 15%, with a peak age of
12-­15 months. Children with primary HHV-­6B infection are also
reported to have a higher frequency of partial seizures, prolonged
seizures, postictal paralysis, and repeated seizures than are children
with febrile seizures not associated with HHV-­6. In a study limited
to children with primary HHV-­6B infection and seizures, 30% of
patients had prolonged seizures, 29% had focal seizures, and 38% had
repeated seizures. A prospective study of children 2-­35 months of age
with suspected encephalitis or severe febrile illness with convulsions
found that 17% had primary infection with either HHV-­6 or HHV-­7,
and status epilepticus was the most common presentation. Among
children with febrile status epilepticus (FSE), primary or reactivated
infection with HHV-­6B or HHV-­7 has been identified in approximately one third.
An association between recurrent seizures and reactivated or persistent infection of the CNS by HHV-­6 has also been suggested. Studies evaluating brain tissue specimens implicate HHV-­6 in as many as
60% of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), high viral loads
being found in the hippocampus or lateral temporal lobe regions.
HHV-­6 is postulated to induce neuroinflammation and potential
injury via innate and adaptive immune system activation as a result
of the broad tissue tropism of the virus. Subsequent neuronal hyperexcitability through the loss of glutamate regulatory control and
increased blood-­brain barrier permeability have been proposed as
possible mechanisms for the development of recurrent seizures based
on animal models and clinical data of patients with TLE and HHV-­6
DNA detected in CNS specimens. Contrary to these findings, limited
clinical data suggest that there may be a decreased risk of recurrent
seizures after primary infection with HHV-­6 and febrile seizures than
of febrile seizures from other causes. Additionally, children with FSE
associated with HHV-­6B and HHV-­7 had similar seizure characteristics and a similar proportion of electroencephalography and MRI
hippocampal abnormalities as children with FSE not associated with
HHV-­6B or HHV-­7, suggesting a shared pathogenesis to other etiologies of FSE.
Case reports and small-­patient series have described additional
complications in children with primary HHV-­6B infection, including
encephalitis, acute disseminated demyelination, autoimmune encephalitis, acute cerebellitis, hepatitis, and myocarditis. Late-­developing
long-­term sequelae, including developmental disabilities and autistic-­
like features, are reported rarely in children who have CNS symptoms
during primary HHV-­6B infection.

Reactivation of HHV-­6 has been reported in several different populations with and without disease with the use of various methods of
detection. The best documentation of HHV-­6 reactivation has been in
immunocompromised hosts, especially those patients who have undergone HSCT. Such reactivation occurs in approximately 50% of patients,
typically at 2-­4 weeks after transplantation, and the risk of reactivation is associated with a lack of donor-­derived HHV-­6–specific T-­cell
immunity. Many of the clinical complications seen following HSCT
have been associated with HHV-­6B reactivation, including fever, rash,
delayed engraftment of platelets or monocytes, and graft-­versus-­host
disease, with variable degrees of support in the literature for each.
HHV-­6 reactivation has been associated with worse overall survival
compared with HSCT recipients who did not experience reactivation.
HHV-­6B reactivation has also been reported as a cause of encephalitis in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. A distinct syndrome of posttransplant acute limbic encephalitis (PALE)
has been described primarily in patients following HSCT, especially
cord blood stem cell transplantation; it is characterized by short-­term
memory dysfunction, confusion, and insomnia, with seizures noted
either clinically or on prolonged electroencephalography monitoring.
HHV-­6B DNA has been identified in the CSF in the majority of these
patients, with additional evidence of reactivation by detection of HHV­6B DNA in plasma. HHV-­6 proteins were identified in the astrocytes of
the hippocampus in one postmortem specimen, consistent with active
HHV-­6B infection at the time of death. The development of PALE is
associated with increased mortality and long-­
term neurocognitive
sequelae.

TREATMENT

Supportive care is usually all that is needed for infants with roseola. Parents should be advised to maintain hydration and may use
antipyretics if the child is especially uncomfortable with the fever.
Specific antiviral therapy is not recommended for routine cases of
primary HHV-­6B or HHV-­7 infection. Unusual or severe manifestations of primary or presumed reactivated HHV-­6B infection such
as encephalitis/PALE, especially in immunocompromised patients,
may benefit from treatment. Ganciclovir, foscarnet, and cidofovir
all demonstrate inhibitory activity against HHV-­6 in vitro, similar to their activity against cytomegalovirus. Case reports suggest
that all three drugs, alone or in combination, can decrease HHV-­6
viral replication, as evidenced by decreased viral loads in plasma
and CSF. However, clinical data regarding efficacy are sparse and
contradictory, with no randomized trials to guide use. Additionally,
in vitro resistance of HHV-­6 to all three drugs has been described.
Despite these drawbacks, treatment with ganciclovir or foscarnet as
first-­line agents has been recommended for a minimum of 3 weeks
in patients with PALE. Foscarnet appears to be most likely to have
activity against HHV-­7 on the basis of in vitro testing, but no clinical data are available.

PROGNOSIS

Roseola is generally a self-­limited illness associated with complete
recovery. The majority of children with primary infections with
HHV-­6B and HHV-­7 also recover uneventfully without sequelae.
Although seizures are a common complication of primary infection
with HHV-­6B and HHV-­7, the risk of recurrent seizures does not
appear to be higher than that associated with other causes of simple
febrile seizures.

PREVENTION

Primary infections with HHV-­6 and HHV-­7 are widespread throughout the human population with no current means of interrupting
transmission.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 304 u Human Herpesvirus 8 2019

HHV-­8 is a γ2-­human herpesvirus similar to Epstein-­Barr virus. The
virus contains a large DNA genome encoding 85-­95 unique proteins. Infection is followed by both lytic and latent viral states, with
different degrees of viral replication associated with distinct disease
manifestations.

transfusion-­associated primary infection with HHV-­8 is associated
with an increased risk of mortality.
Even in regions with high rates of seroprevalence, the development of KS is uncommon. KS has several different clinical forms;
each includes multifocal, angiogenic lesions arising from vascular
endothelial cells infected with HHV-­8. Classic KS is an indolent
disorder seen in elderly men with limited involvement of the skin
of the lower extremities. Endemic KS is more aggressive, occurring
in children and young people, primarily in Africa, and can include
visceral involvement as well as widespread cutaneous lesions
(patches, plaques, or nodules). Posttransplantation KS and AIDS-­
related KS are the most severe forms, with disseminated lesions,
often in the gastrointestinal tract and lungs, with or without cutaneous findings.
Primary effusion–based lymphoma is a rare disease caused by
HHV-­8 that is seen most commonly in HIV-­infected individuals. It
consists of lymphomatous invasion of the serosal surfaces of the pleura,
pericardium, and peritoneum. Similarly, multicentric Castleman
disease is an unusual lymphoproliferative disorder characterized by
anemia, thrombocytopenia, generalized lymphadenopathy, and constitutional symptoms and is frequently associated with HHV-­8 infection
and a high degree of viral replication.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

DIAGNOSIS

Chapter 304

Human Herpesvirus 8
Brenda L. Tesini
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-­8) is an oncogenic virus identified in tissue specimens from patients with Kaposi sarcoma (KS). Because of this
association, it is also known as Kaposi sarcoma–associated herpesvirus. HHV-­8 is the etiologic agent of two additional lymphoproliferative
disorders: primary effusion–based lymphoma (PEL) and multicentric Castleman disease (MCD).

ETIOLOGY

The prevalence of infection with HHV-­8 varies both geographically and
by population and roughly matches the epidemiology of KS. HHV-­8
infection is endemic in Africa and parts of South America, with infection rates of up to 30–60% by adolescence. Seroprevalence >20% has
also been found in regions bordering the Mediterranean. In contrast,
infection rates <5% are noted in North America, Central Europe, and
Asia. However, within geographic regions, the prevalence of infection
varies with risk behaviors, with rates of 30–75% being found among
men who have sex with men in North America and Europe. HHV-­8
DNA can be detected in saliva, blood, semen, and tissues. Based on
large-­scale epidemiologic studies and the high prevalence of viral shedding in oral secretions, saliva is believed to be the major mode of transmission. Other less common routes of HHV-­8 transmission include
blood transfusion, bone marrow transplantation, and solid organ
transplantation. Vertical transmission and transmission via breast milk
may occur in regions where HHV-­8 is highly endemic, but the risk
appears low.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

HHV-­8 contains multiple genes that affect cell-­cycle regulation and
the host immune response. Viral proteins interfere with the function of the tumor suppressor molecules, induce the expression of
proangiogenesis factors, and lead to upregulation of the rapamycin
pathway target, which is instrumental in the control of cell growth
and metabolism. HHV-­8 also encodes a homolog of human interleukin-­6, which can bind and activate cytokine receptors and serve
as a host cell autocrine growth factor. Additionally, viral proteins are
associated with the constitutive expression of the transcription factor
nuclear factor-­κB. All of these proteins may be potential targets for
therapeutic intervention.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although subclinical infection appears to be common, symptomatic
primary HHV-­8 infection has been described in immunocompetent
children. Patients commonly have fever and a maculopapular rash or
a mononucleosis-­like syndrome, with full recovery the rule. In immunocompromised patients, primary infection has been associated with
fever, rash, splenomegaly, pancytopenia, and lymphoid hyperplasia
and may be quite severe. Additionally, preliminary data suggest that

Serologic assays, including immunofluorescence and enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent assays, are the primary methods of
diagnosing infection with HHV-­8. However, testing has limited
sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility and is primarily a research
tool with no universally recognized standard assays. Additionally,
the loss of antibodies over time, referred to as seroreversion, has been
described, further complicating serodiagnosis. Immunohistochemistry and molecular methods are available for the detection of HHV-­8
in tissue samples and are used in the diagnosis of KS, PEL, and MCD,
alongside their disease-­specific clinical manifestations. Nucleic acid
testing of blood and other body fluids is also available but has a limited
diagnostic role.

TREATMENT

Treatment for KS, PEL, and MCD is multifaceted and includes attempts
to control malignant proliferations with traditional chemotherapeutic
regimens and biologic agents as well as agents aimed at specific cellular pathways targeted by HHV-­8 proteins. Combined antiretroviral therapy (ART) is a mainstay of both prevention and therapy for
HHV-­8–related disease in HIV-­infected patients. In HIV-­associated
KS, treatment with ART alone is often used for the control of mild (i.e.,
cutaneous) disease, whereas ART plus chemotherapy is used for more
severe disease. In transplantation-­associated KS, the first line of treatment includes decreasing immunosuppression, often in association
with a switch from calcineurin inhibitors to sirolimus (rapamycin) to
block the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway. Severe disease frequently requires the use of traditional chemotherapy as well. The role
of specific antiherpesvirus antiviral treatment is unclear. Valganciclovir
and ganciclovir treatment have been associated with decreased viral
replication and rates of development of KS in HIV-­infected individuals. However, results of using antivirals in the treatment of established
disease have been generally disappointing. The prognosis for PEL tends
to be poor despite the use of traditional chemotherapy, whereas rituximab (anti-­CD20)–based therapy has been highly successful for MCD
treatment. However, relapse and the development of lymphoma after
treatment can still occur. Rituximab treatment may also worsen concurrent KS without additional agents.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2020 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Influenza Viruses

A/Victoria/361/2011(H3N2). The HA and NA antigens from influenza
B and C viruses do not receive subtype designations, because there is
less variation among influenza B and C antigens. However, influenza B
viruses can be further broken down into lineages, with recent examples
including the B/Yamagata and B/Victoria lineages.

Flor M. Munoz

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Chapter 305

Influenza viral infections cause a broad array of respiratory illnesses that
are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality in children during seasonal epidemics. Influenza A viruses also have the potential to
cause global pandemics, which can happen when a new (novel) influenza A virus emerges and transmits efficiently from person to person.

ETIOLOGY

Influenza viruses are large, single-­stranded RNA viruses belonging to
the family Orthomyxoviridae, which includes three genera (or types):
A, B, and C. Influenza A and B viruses are the primary human pathogens causing seasonal epidemics, whereas influenza virus type C is a
sporadic cause of predominantly mild upper respiratory tract illness.
Influenza A viruses are further divided into subtypes based on two surface proteins that project as spikes from the lipid envelope, the hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) proteins (Fig. 305.1). Strain
variants are identified by antigenic differences in their HA and NA and
are designated by the geographic area from which they were originally
isolated, isolate number, and year of isolation—for example, influenza

Hemagglutinin

Neuraminidase

M2 ion channel

RNP

Fig. 305.1 Graphical representation of influenza virus. The key at
bottom identifies the surface protein constituents: the hemagglutinin,
neuraminidase, matrix protein 2 (M2) ion channel, and ribonucleoprotein (RNP). (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Public
Health Image Library, Image ID#11822. https://phil.cdc.gov/Details.as
px?pid=11822; courtesy CDC/Douglas Jordan and Dan Higgins, 2009.)

Influenza has generally been thought to be transmitted primarily via
respiratory droplets, but transmission through contact with secretions and small-­particle aerosols may also occur. The typical incubation period ranges from 1 to 4 days, with an average of 2 days. Healthy
adults are generally considered potentially infectious from a day before
symptoms develop until 5-­7 days after becoming ill. Children with primary influenza infection have higher influenza viral loads and more
prolonged viral shedding than adults; therefore children may be able to
infect others for a longer time. Influenza outbreaks occur commonly in
schools and childcare settings. Healthcare-­associated influenza infections can also occur in healthcare settings, and outbreaks in long-­term
care facilities and hospitals may cause significant morbidity.
In the United States, seasonal influenza viruses can be detected year-­
round, but circulating viruses are most common during the fall and
winter. Transmission through a community is rapid, with the highest
incidence of illness occurring within 2-­3 weeks of introduction.

Antigenic Variation

Influenza A and B viruses contain a genome consisting of 8 single-­
stranded RNA segments. Minor changes within a subtype continually
occur through point mutations during viral replication, particularly in
the HA gene, and result in new influenza strains of the same HA type.
This phenomenon, termed antigenic drift, occurs in both influenza A
and B viruses. Variation in antigenic composition of influenza virus
surface proteins occurs almost yearly, which confers a selective advantage to a new strain and contributes to annual epidemics. For this reason, the formulation of the influenza vaccine is reviewed each year and
updated as needed.
Less frequent but more dramatic major changes in virus subtype can
occur, resulting in a new influenza A subtype to which most people
have little to no immunity. This process is called antigenic shift and
can occur through reassortment of viral gene segments when there is
simultaneous infection by more than one strain of influenza in a single
host, or by direct adaptation of an animal virus to a human host. Antigenic shift occurs in influenza A viruses, which have multiple avian and
mammalian hosts acting as reservoirs for diverse strains.
Through the process of reassortment, potentially any of 18 HA and
11 NA proteins currently known to reside in influenza A viruses of
nonhuman hosts could be introduced into humans, who may have
little existing immunologic cross protection to emerging viruses. A
global pandemic can result if an influenza A virus with a novel HA or
NA enters a nonimmune human population and acquires the capacity for sustained and efficient transmission between people. Four
major global pandemics have occurred since 1900: in 1918 caused by
an influenza A(H1N1) virus, 1957 caused by an influenza A(H2N2)
virus, 1968 caused by an influenza A(H3N2) virus, and 2009 caused
by an influenza A virus designated A(H1N1)pdm09. The most severe
influenza pandemic in recorded history occurred in 1918, when the
virus was estimated to have killed at least 50 million people. The 1918
pandemic virus was likely the result of direct adaptation of an avian
influenza virus to the human host, rather than from reassortment. The
2009 pandemic virus stemmed from reassortment of genes from swine,
avian, and human viruses (Fig. 305.2). This resulted in the emergence
of a novel influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus that spread quickly from
North America across the globe and replaced the previously circulating
seasonal H1N1 viruses.
Several novel influenza viruses, all originating in animals, have also
caused outbreaks of human infections. Avian influenza A(H5N1),
a virulent avian influenza virus that was first identified in 1997, has
caused more than 880 documented cases in 19 countries, with a mortality rate over 50%. A novel avian influenza A(H5N6) with a case fatality rate of >40%, emerged in China in 2014, causing infection in at least

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 305 u Influenza Viruses

2021

Gene segments, hosts,
and years of introduction
~1998

PB2, PA

PB2, PA

PB1

~1968

Triple
reassortant
~1998

PB2
PB1
PA
HA
NP
NA
M
NS

PB1

PB1

~1918

HA, NP, NS

Classical
swine

~1979

NA, M

Eurasian
swine

HA, NP, NS

NA, M

Fig. 305.2 Host and lineage origins for the gene seg-

2009 A(H1N1)

ments of the 2009 A(H1N1) virus. HA, Hemagglutinin; M,
matrix gene; NA, neuraminidase; NP, nucleoprotein; NS,
nonstructural gene; PA, polymerase acidic; PB1, polymerase basic 1; PB2, polymerase basic 2. Color of gene
segment in circle indicates host. (From Garten RJ, Davis
CT, Russell CA, et al. Antigenic and genetic characteristics of swine-­origin 2009 A(H1N1) influenza viruses circulating in humans. Science. 2009;325[5937]:197–201.)

Table 305.1  Subtypes of Novel Influenza A Viruses and Clinical Syndromes in Human Infections
LPAI VIRUSES

HPAI VIRUSES

VARIANT VIRUSES*

Conjunctivitis

H7N2, H7N3, H7N7, H10N7

H7N3, H7N7

H1N1v, H3N2v

Upper respiratory tract illness

H6N1, H7N2, H7N3, H7N9, H9N2, H10N7

H5N1, H5N6, H7N7

H1N1v, H1N2v, H3N2v

Lower respiratory tract disease,
pneumonia

H7N2, H7N9, H9N2, H10N8

H5N1, H5N6, H7N7, H7N9

H1N1v, H3N2v

Respiratory failure, acute respiratory
distress syndrome

H7N9, H10N8

H5N1, H5N6, H7N7, H7N9

H1N1v, H3N2v

Multiorgan failure

H7N9, H10N8

H5N1, H5N6, H7N7, H7N9

—

Encephalopathy or encephalitis

H7N9

H5N1

—

Fatal outcomes†

H7N9, H9N2, H10N8

H5N1, H5N6, H7N7, H7N9

H1N1v, H3N2v

*Variant viruses of swine origin.
†High mortality in reported cases: about 40% for LPAI H7N9, about 50% for HPAI H5N1, and about 70% for HPAI H5N6.
HPAI, Highly pathogenic avian influenza; LPAI, low-­pathogenic avian influenza.
From Uyeki TM, Katz JM, Jernigan DB. Novel influenza A viruses and pandemic threats. Lancet. 2017;389:2172–2174.

60 people. Another avian influenza, A(H7N9) virus, has caused more
than 1,500 documented cases and is also highly virulent. This virus first
caused an outbreak of human infections in China during the spring of
2013, with annual epidemics in China occurring in subsequent years.
During the first four yearly epidemics, infection was fatal in approximately 40% of documented cases.
In addition, novel influenza A variant viruses have caused human
infections (Table 305.1). These include H3N2v viruses, which caused
372 confirmed human infections in the United States from 2011 to
2016 and were primarily transmitted through swine contact at agricultural fairs. Influenza viruses that normally circulate in swine are
designated variant (“v”) viruses when detected in humans, and H3N2v
and other variant viruses, including H1N1v and H1N2v, continue to be
detected and sporadically infect humans with prolonged exposure to
infected pigs. In contrast to avian influenza A(H5N1), A(H5N6), and
A(H7N9) viruses, variant viruses generally cause mild illness and have
been primarily detected in children. However, none of these viruses
has exhibited sustained, efficient human-­to-­human transmission.

Seasonal Influenza

An estimated 11,000-­45,000 children younger than 18 years of age
are hospitalized annually in the United States as a result of seasonal
influenza-­associated complications, with approximately 6,000-­26,000
hospitalizations in children younger than 5 years of age. Since 2004,
the annual number of reported influenza-­associated pediatric deaths
in the United States has ranged from 37 to 199 during regular influenza seasons (358 were reported to have occurred during the 2009
H1N1 pandemic). Influenza disproportionately affects children with
specific chronic conditions, such as underlying pulmonary, cardiac,
or neurologic and neuromuscular disorders. Very young children,

especially those younger than 2 years of age, and children with chronic
medical conditions are more likely to develop severe influenza-­related
complications, including viral and bacterial pneumonia, hospitalization, respiratory failure, and death. However, although children with
underlying medical conditions are at higher risk of complications,
many healthy children are hospitalized with influenza, and nearly half
of pediatric influenza-­associated deaths are in children that have no
known underlying medical condition.
Influenza also causes a substantial burden of disease in outpatient
settings. It contributes to an estimated 600,000 to 2,500,000 outpatient
medical visits annually in children younger than 5 years of age and
has been identified in 10–25% of outpatient visits among all children
with respiratory symptoms during influenza season. Influenza may
also be underdiagnosed. Many who seek medical care for influenza do
not have laboratory testing performed and do not receive a diagnosis of influenza. Every year, three or four influenza virus types or subtypes typically co-­circulate, including influenza A(H3N2), influenza
A(H1N1), and two types of B viruses. Although one subtype usually
predominates in any given season, it is difficult to predict which will be
predominant. Thus the influenza vaccine varies annually and contains
three or four antigens representing the expected circulating types.

PATHOGENESIS

Influenza viruses infect the respiratory tract epithelium, primarily the
ciliated columnar epithelial cells, by using the HA to attach to sialic acid
residues. After viral entry into cells, virus replication occurs usually
within 4-­6 hours, and new virus particles are assembled and released
to infect neighboring cells. With primary infection, virus replication
continues for 10-­14 days. Influenza virus causes a lytic infection of the
respiratory epithelium with loss of ciliary function, decreased mucus

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2022 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
production, and desquamation of the epithelial layer. These changes
permit secondary bacterial invasion, either directly through the epithelium or, in the case of the middle ear space, through obstruction of the
normal drainage through the eustachian tube.
The exact immune mechanisms involved in termination of primary
infection and protection against reinfection are complex. Induction of
cytokines that inhibit viral replication, such as interferon and tumor
necrosis factor, as well as other host defenses, such as cell-­mediated
immune responses and local and humoral antibody defenses, all likely
play a role. Secretory immunoglobulin A antibodies produced by
the respiratory mucosa are thought to be an effective and immediate
response generated during influenza infection. Serum antibody levels
inhibiting HA activity can usually be detected by the second week after
infection. These antibodies are also generated by vaccines, and high
HA inhibition antibody titers correlate with protection.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The onset of influenza illness is often abrupt, with a predominance of
systemic symptoms, including fever, myalgias, chills, headache, malaise, and anorexia. Coryza, pharyngitis, and dry cough are also usually
present at the onset of illness but may be less prominent than systemic
symptoms. Respiratory manifestations can include isolated upper
respiratory tract illness, including croup, or progression to lower tract
disease, such as bronchiolitis or pneumonia. More than other respiratory viruses, influenza virus typically causes systemic manifestations
such as high temperature, myalgia, malaise, and headache. Less common clinical manifestations can include parotitis and rash.
Abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea may also occur in children;
in some studies, diarrhea was reported to be more often associated
with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 compared with influenza A(H3N2)
or influenza B viruses. Influenza is a less distinct illness in younger
children and infants. The infected young infant or child may be highly
febrile and toxic in appearance, prompting a full diagnostic workup.
The typical duration of the febrile illness is 2-­4 days. Cough may persist
for longer periods, and evidence of small airway dysfunction is often
found weeks later. Owing to the high transmissibility of influenza,
other family members or close contacts of an infected person often
experience a similar illness.

COMPLICATIONS

Otitis media and pneumonia are common complications of influenza in
young children. Acute otitis media may be seen in up to 25% of cases of
documented influenza. Pneumonia accompanying influenza may be a
primary viral process or a secondary bacterial infection (such as with
Staphylococcus aureus) facilitated through damaged respiratory epithelium. Influenza may cause acute myositis or rhabdomyolysis marked by
muscle weakness and pain, particularly in the calf muscles, and myoglobinuria. Other extrapulmonary complications include acute renal
failure, myocarditis, and sepsis. Central nervous system complications,
such as encephalitis, myelitis, and Guillain-­Barré syndrome, can occur
and are seen more commonly in children than adults. Although it has
essentially disappeared in the United States, Reye syndrome can result
with the use of salicylates during influenza infection (see Chapter 409).
Bacterial co-infection may also exacerbate respiratory complications
of influenza and lead to sepsis, bacteremia, toxic shock syndrome, and
other manifestations.
Influenza is particularly severe in some children, including those
with underlying cardiopulmonary disease, including congenital and
acquired valvular disease, cardiomyopathy, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, asthma, cystic fibrosis, and neurologic conditions. Pregnant
women and adolescent females are also at high risk for severe influenza.
Children receiving cancer chemotherapy and children with immunodeficiency also have a higher risk of complications and may shed virus
for longer periods than immunocompetent children.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The clinical laboratory abnormalities associated with influenza are
nonspecific. Chest radiographs may show evidence of atelectasis or
infiltrate.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of influenza depends on epidemiologic, clinical, and
laboratory considerations. In the context of an epidemic, the clinical
diagnosis of influenza in a child who has fever, malaise, and respiratory
symptoms may be made based on clinical discretion; however, clinical presentation is often indistinguishable from infection with other
respiratory viruses, including SARS-­CoV-­2, respiratory syncytial virus,
parainfluenza virus, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus, and even
rhinovirus. Confirmation of influenza virus infection by diagnostic
testing might be helpful in certain circumstances when other viruses
are co-­circulating, but it is not required for clinical decisions to prescribe antiviral medications, and prompt suspicion or diagnosis of
influenza may allow for early antiviral therapy to be initiated and may
reduce inappropriate use of antibiotics.
A number of diagnostic tests may be used for laboratory confirmation of influenza (Table 305.2). Although rapid influenza diagnostic tests based on antigen detection are often employed because of
their ease of use and fast results, they can have suboptimal sensitivity
to detect influenza virus infection, particularly for novel influenza
viruses. Sensitivities of rapid antigen diagnostic tests are generally
50–70% compared to viral culture or reverse-­transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-­PCR). Specificities are higher, approximately 95–100%. Therefore false-­negative results occur more often
than false-­positive results, particularly when the prevalence of influenza is high (i.e., during peak influenza activity in the community).
The interpretation of negative results should consider the clinical
characteristics and the patient’s risk for complications. If there is clinical suspicion for influenza in a patient at high risk for complications
(Table 305.3), early empirical treatment should be given regardless
of a negative rapid antigen diagnostic test result, and another type
of test may be performed for confirmation. RT-­PCR or other rapid
molecular assays are now preferred for influenza diagnosis in both
outpatients and hospitalized patients.

TREATMENT

Antiviral medications are an important adjunct to influenza vaccination. Three classes of antiviral drugs are licensed for treatment of
influenza in children. The neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs), oral oseltamivir and inhaled zanamivir, may be used for treatment of children
from birth and 7 years, respectively (Table 305.4). In December 2012,
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of
oseltamivir for the treatment of influenza in infants as young as 2 wk
of age, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the
American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Infectious Diseases Society
of America recommend its use in infants of any age. A third NAI, peramivir, is given as an intravenous infusion and is approved for treatment
in persons 2 years of age and older.
The second class of drugs is represented by a new orally administered
influenza antiviral called baloxavir marboxil, which was approved by
the FDA in October 2018. Baloxavir is active against both influenza
A and B viruses and is a cap-­dependent endonuclease inhibitor that
interferes with viral RNA transcription and blocks virus replication. It
is approved for treatment of acute uncomplicated influenza in people
12 years and older.
The third class of drugs is the adamantanes, including oral amantadine and oral rimantadine, which are effective only against influenza
A viruses. Genetic variants have conferred widespread adamantane
resistance among circulating influenza A viruses, including seasonal
influenza viruses and many H5N1 and H7N9 avian influenza viruses;
therefore this class of antivirals is not currently recommended for use.
When initiated early in the course of uncomplicated influenza illness, antiviral agents can reduce the duration of symptoms and the
likelihood of complications. Among hospitalized patients, observational studies suggest that early treatment reduces disease severity
and mortality. Although most data regarding potential benefit are for
adults, a few studies support the use of antiviral agents in children.
Antiviral treatment within 2 days of illness onset has been reported to
reduce illness duration, the risk of otitis media, and the likelihood of
hospitalization in children. Clinical benefit is greatest when antiviral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 305 u Influenza Viruses

2023

Table 305.2  Influenza Virus Testing Methods
METHOD

ACCEPTABLE SPECIMENS

TEST TIME

COMMENTS

Rapid influenza diagnostic tests (antigen
detection)

Nasopharyngeal (NP) swab, aspirate
or wash, nasal swab, aspirate, or
wash, throat swab

<15 min

Rapid turnaround; suboptimal
sensitivity

Rapid molecular assay (influenza nucleic acid
amplification)

NP swab, nasal swab

15-­30 min

Rapid turnaround; high sensitivity

Immunofluorescence, direct (DFA) or indirect
(IFA) fluorescent antibody staining (antigen
detection)

NP swab or wash, bronchial wash,
nasal or endotracheal aspirate

1-­4 hr

Relatively rapid turnaround;
requires laboratory expertise
and experience

RT-­PCR (singleplex and multiplex; real-­time
and other RNA-­based) and other molecular
assays (influenza nucleic acid amplification)

NP swab, throat swab, NP
or bronchial wash, nasal or
endotracheal aspirate, sputum

Varies by assay
(generally 1-­8 hr)

Excellent sensitivity, relatively
rapid turnaround compared with
conventional methods

Rapid cell culture (shell vials, cell mixtures;
yields live virus)

NP swab, throat swab, NP
or bronchial wash, nasal or
endotracheal aspirate, sputum

1-­3 day

Culture isolates important for
strain information and antiviral
resistance monitoring

Viral tissue cell culture (conventional; yields
live virus)

NP swab, throat swab, NP
or bronchial wash, nasal or
endotracheal aspirate, sputum

3-­10 day

Not recommended for routine
patient diagnosis

Serologic tests (antibody detection)

Paired (appropriately timed)
acute and convalescent serum
specimens

N/A (not performed
during acute
infection)

Not recommended for routine
patient diagnosis; useful for
research studies

N/A, Not applicable; RT-­PCR, reverse transcription-­polymerase chain reaction.
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Influenza virus testing methods. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/table-­testing-­
methods.htm in Information for Health Professionals (https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/index.htm); and from 2018 IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines.

Table 305.3  Children and Adolescents Who Are at
Higher Risk for Influenza Complications
for Whom Antiviral Treatment is
Recommended*
• Children younger than 2 yr of age†
• Persons with chronic pulmonary (including asthma), cardiovascular
(except hypertension alone), renal, hepatic, hematologic
(including sickle cell disease), and metabolic disorders (including
diabetes mellitus); or neurologic and neurodevelopmental
conditions (including disorders of the brain, spinal cord,
peripheral nerve, and muscle such as cerebral palsy, epilepsy
[seizure disorders], stroke, intellectual disability, moderate to
severe developmental delay, muscular dystrophy, or spinal cord
injury)
• Persons with immunosuppression, including that caused by
medications or by HIV infection
• Adolescents who are pregnant, or postpartum (within 2 wk after
delivery)
• Persons younger than 19 yr of age who are receiving long-­term
aspirin-­or salicylate-­containing medications therapy
• Indigenous/Alaska Natives
• Persons who are extremely obese (body mass index ≥40)
• Residents of long-­term care facilities
• Hospitalized patients at high risk for influenza complications
*Antiviral treatment is recommended for children at high risk with confirmed
or suspected influenza; antivirals are also recommended for children who are
hospitalized or have severe or progressive disease.
†Although all children younger than 5 yr of age are considered at higher risk for
complications from influenza, the highest risk is for those younger than 2 yr of age,
with the highest hospitalization and death rates among infants younger than 6 mo of
age.
Current for 2021–2022 influenza season.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Influenza antiviral
medications: summary for clinicians. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/
summary-­clinicians.htm; and from American Academy of Pediatrics Policy Statement:
Recommendations for Prevention and Control of Influenza in Children, 2021-­2022. For
current details, consult annually updated recommendations at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/
professionals/index.htm.

treatment is administered early, especially within 48 hours of influenza
illness onset.
The CDC recommends treatment as early as possible for (1)
hospitalized patients, (2) patients with severe, complicated, or progressive illness, and (3) patients at high risk for influenza complications (see Table 305.3). Decisions about starting antiviral treatment
should not wait for laboratory confirmation of influenza. Although
early treatment is desired, treatment more than 48 hours from onset
may be beneficial and is recommended for these three categories of
patients.
The recommended treatment course for uncomplicated influenza is
twice daily oral oseltamivir for 5 days, twice daily inhaled zanamivir for
5 days, or a single dose of intravenous peramivir or oral baloxavir. Currently, for hospitalized patients and patients with severe or complicated
illness, treatment with oral or enterically administered oseltamivir is
recommended. The optimal duration and dose are uncertain for severe
or complicated influenza, and longer courses of treatment (e.g., 10 days
of treatment) may be considered.
Clinical judgment considering a patient’s disease severity, age,
underlying medical conditions, likelihood of influenza, and time
since onset of symptoms is important when making antiviral treatment decisions for outpatients at high risk for complications. Antiviral treatment can also be considered for any previously healthy,
symptomatic outpatient not at high risk with confirmed or suspected influenza, if treatment can be initiated within 48 hours of
illness onset.
Some influenza viruses may become resistant during antiviral treatment, an occurrence that has been reported most often for oseltamivir
resistance in influenza A(H1N1) viruses. Following treatment with
baloxavir, emergence of viruses with molecular markers associated
with reduced susceptibility to baloxavir has been observed in clinical
trials. Antiviral resistance and reduced susceptibility can also occasionally occur spontaneously with no known exposure to antiviral drugs.
It is important to review annual recommendations and updates published by CDC before prescribing influenza antiviral medications (see
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/index.htm).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2024 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 305.4  Recommended Dosage and Schedule of Influenza Antiviral Medications for Treatment and Chemoprophylaxis
in Children for the 2021–2022 Influenza Season: United States
MEDICATION

TREATMENT DOSING*

ORAL OSELTAMIVIR†
Adults

CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS DOSING*

75 mg twice daily

75 mg once daily

≤15 kg (≤33 lb)

30 mg twice daily

30 mg once daily

>15-­23 kg (33-­51 lb)

45 mg twice daily

45 mg once daily

>23-­40 kg (>51-­88 lb)

60 mg twice daily

60 mg once daily

>40 kg (>88 lb)

75 mg twice daily

75 mg once daily

Infants 9-­11 mo‡

3 mg/kg per dose twice daily

3 mg/kg per dose once daily

Term infants ages 0-­8 mo‡

3 mg/kg per dose twice daily

3 mg/kg per dose once daily for infants 3-­8 mo
old; not recommended for infants <3 mo old
unless situation judged critical because of
limited safety and efficacy data in this age
group

Preterm infants

See details in footnote§

Not recommended

Adults

10 mg (two 5-­mg inhalations) twice daily

10 mg (two 5-­mg inhalations) once daily

Children (≥7 yr old for treatment; ≥5 yr
old for chemoprophylaxis)

10 mg (two 5-­mg inhalations) twice daily

10 mg (two 5-­mg inhalations) once daily

600 mg intravenous infusion once given over
15-­30 min

Not recommended

Children (2-­12 yr old)

One 12 mg/kg dose, up to 600 mg maximum,
once via intravenous infusion for 15-­30 min

Not recommended

Children (13-­17 yr old)

One 600 mg dose once via intravenous infusion
for 15-­30 min

Not recommended

Children ≥12 mo

INHALED ZANAMIVIR¶

INTRAVENOUS PERAMIVIR
Adults

ORAL BALOXAVIR#
Adults
40 to <80 kg

One 40-­mg dose

>80 kg

One 80-­mg dose

One 80-­mg dose

One 40-­mg dose

2-­11 yr

Not recommended

Not recommended

12-­17 yr, 40 to <80 kg

One 40-­mg dose

One 40-­mg dose

12-­17 yr, >80 kg

One 80-­mg dose

One 80-­mg dose

Children

*Antiviral treatment duration for uncomplicated influenza is 5 days for oral oseltamivir or inhaled zanamivir, and a single dose for intravenous peramivir or oral baloxavir.
Recommended postexposure chemoprophylaxis with oseltamivir or zanamivir in a nonoutbreak setting is 7 days after last known exposure.
†Oseltamivir is administered orally without regard to meals, although administration with meals may improve gastrointestinal tolerability. Oseltamivir is available as Tamiflu or as a
generic formulation as capsules and as a powder for oral suspension that is reconstituted to provide a final concentration of 6 mg/mL.
‡Approved by the FDA for children as young as 2 wk of age. Given preliminary pharmacokinetic data and limited safety data, oseltamivir can be used to treat influenza in both
term and preterm infants from birth because benefits of therapy are likely to outweigh possible risks of treatment. CDC and U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved
dosing is 3 mg/kg per dose twice daily for children age 9-­11 mo; the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends 3.5 mg/kg per dose twice daily. The dose of 3 mg/kg provides
oseltamivir exposure in children similar to that achieved by the approved dose of 75 mg orally twice daily for adults, as shown in two studies of oseltamivir pharmacokinetics in
children. The AAP has recommended an oseltamivir treatment dose of 3.5 mg/kg orally twice daily for infants 9-­11 mo, on the basis of data that indicated that a higher dose of 3.5
mg/kg was needed to achieve the protocol-­defined targeted exposure for this cohort as defined in the CASG 114 study. It is unknown whether this higher dose will improve efficacy
or prevent the development of antiviral resistance. However, there is no evidence that the 3.5-­mg/kg dose is harmful or causes more adverse events to infants in this age group.
§Oseltamivir dosing for preterm infants. The weight-­based dosing recommendation for preterm infants is lower than for term infants. Preterm infants may have lower clearance of
oseltamivir because of immature renal function, and doses recommended for term infants may lead to high drug concentrations in this age group. Limited data from the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Collaborative Antiviral Study Group provide the basis for dosing preterm infants by using their postmenstrual age (gestational age plus
chronological age): 1 mg/kg per dose orally twice daily for those <38 wk postmenstrual age; 1.5 mg/kg per dose orally twice daily for those 38-­40 wk postmenstrual age; and 3 mg/
kg per dose orally twice daily for those >40 wk postmenstrual age. For extremely preterm infants (<28 wk), please consult a pediatric infectious diseases physician.
¶Zanamivir is administered by inhalation by using a proprietary Diskhaler device distributed together with the medication. Zanamivir is a dry powder, not an aerosol, and should not
be administered by using nebulizers, ventilators, or other devices typically used for administering medications in aerosolized solutions. Zanamivir is not recommended for people
with chronic respiratory diseases, such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which increase the risk of bronchospasm.
#Oral baloxavir marboxil is approved by the FDA for treatment of acute uncomplicated influenza within 2 days of illness onset in people 12 yr and older. The safety and efficacy of
baloxavir for the treatment of influenza have been established in pediatric patients 12 yr and older weighing at least 40 kg. Safety and efficacy in patients <12 yr of age or weighing
<40 kg have not been established. Baloxavir efficacy is based on clinical trials in outpatients 12 to 64 yr of age; people with underlying medical conditions and adults >65 yr were
not included in the initial published clinical trials (Hayden F et al; Clin Infect Dis 2018). There are no available data for baloxavir treatment of hospitalized patients with influenza.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Influenza antiviral medications: summary for clinicians. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-­
clinicians.htm. For current details, consult annually updated recommendations at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/index.htm; 2018 IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines; and from
Kimberlin DW, Acosta EP, Prichard MN, et al. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Collaborative Antiviral Study Group. Oseltamivir pharmacokinetics, dosing, and
resistance among children aged <2 yr with influenza. J Infect Dis. 2013;207(5):709–720.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 305 u Influenza Viruses
SUPPORTIVE CARE

Adequate fluid intake and rest are important in the management of
influenza. Bacterial superinfections are relatively common and should
be appropriately treated with antibiotic therapy. Bacterial superinfection should be suspected with recrudescence of fever, prolonged fever,
or deterioration in clinical status. With uncomplicated influenza, people
should usually start to feel better after the first 48-­72 hours of symptoms.

2025

Did the child receive t2 doses of
trivalent or quadrivalent influenza vaccine
before July 1, 2021?
(Doses need not have been received during same or
consecutive seasons)

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for recovery from uncomplicated influenza is generally
excellent, although full return to normal level of activity and freedom
from cough may require weeks rather than days. Fatigue may also persist for weeks. However, severe influenza disease can be associated with
hospitalizations and death, even among previously healthy children.

PREVENTION

Influenza vaccination is the best means of preventing influenza illness. In studies of children who are fully vaccinated, influenza vaccine is 40–60% effective in reducing the risk of laboratory-­confirmed
influenza illness. Vaccine effectiveness can vary from year to year and
among different age and risk groups. Recommendations for use of the
influenza vaccine have broadened as the impact of influenza is appreciated in such groups as pregnant women and young infants. Starting in
the 2008–2009 influenza season, the United States Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommended that all children
from 6 months to 18 years of age be vaccinated against influenza unless
they have a specific contraindication to receiving the vaccine. Since the
2010–2011 season, annual flu vaccination is recommended for everyone 6 months and older, with rare exception. In 2012, the Department
of Health in the United Kingdom extended their influenza vaccination
program to include all children between the ages of 2 and 17 years. To
protect infants younger than 6 months who are too young to receive a
vaccine, pregnant women, household contacts, and out-­of-­home caregivers are groups for whom additional vaccination efforts should be
made. Chemoprophylaxis with antiviral medications is a secondary
means of prevention and is not a substitute for vaccination.

Vaccines

There are two main categories of seasonal influenza vaccines available
for children: inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) and live-­attenuated
influenza vaccine (LAIV). Previously referred to as the trivalent
inactivated vaccine, IIV is given intramuscularly; it uses killed virus
components. The LAIV vaccine uses weakened influenza virus and is
administered as an intranasal spray. Neither IIV nor LAIV can cause
influenza. Although in 2014–2015 ACIP and CDC recommended the
use of the LAIV nasal spray vaccine for healthy children 2 through 8
years of age, this preferential recommendation was removed for the
2015–2016 season, and for the 2016–2017 and 2017–2018 seasons,
ACIP and CDC made the interim recommendation that LAIV should
not be used. This decision was based on concerns regarding low effectiveness against influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 in the United States noted
during the 2013–2014 and 2015–2016 seasons. After review of additional data, LAIV containing an updated influenza A(H1N1)pdm09-­
like vaccine virus, was again recommended by CDC and ACIP as an
option for vaccination for the 2018–2019 season. Since the 2018–2019
season, ACIP and CDC have recommend that LAIV4 may be used.
Special vaccination instructions for children 6 months to 8 years of
age should be followed: children in this age group who have not previously received a total of at least two previous doses of trivalent or quadrivalent vaccine require two doses (at least 4 weeks apart) of the current
season’s influenza vaccine to optimize immune response (Fig. 305.3).
Influenza vaccines have an excellent safety profile, with the most common side effects being soreness, redness, tenderness, or swelling from
the injection, and nasal congestion after the nasal spray. Seasonal influenza vaccines may be co-­administered with other vaccines, including
SARS-­CoV-­2 vaccines.
Seasonal influenza vaccines become available in the late summer
and early fall each year. The formulation reflects the strains of influenza viruses that are expected to circulate in the coming influenza season. Beginning in the 2013–2014 season, IIVs were available in both

Yes

No or unknown

1 dose of
2021–2022
influenza vaccine

2 doses of
2021–2022 influenza vaccine
(administered
t4 weeks apart)

Fig. 305.3 Influenza vaccine dosing algorithm for children age 6 mo

through 8 yr*—Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, United
States, 2021–2022 influenza season. *For children age 8 years who require two doses of vaccine, both dosages should be administered even
if the child turns age 9 yr between receipt of dose 1 and dose 2. (From
Grohskopf LA, Alyanak E, Ferdinands JM, et al. Prevention and control
of seasonal influenza with vaccines: recommendations of the advisory
committee on immunization practices—United States, 2021-­22 Influenza Season. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2021;70[No. RR-­5]:1–28.)

trivalent and quadrivalent formulations. The trivalent vaccine (IIV3)
contains two influenza A strains and one influenza B strain; the quadrivalent vaccine (IIV4) contains a second influenza B strain of an antigenically distinct lineage. In addition to IIV and LAIV, a third vaccine
category, recombinant HA influenza vaccine, became available in the
2013–2014 season. Since the 2020–2021 influenza season, all influenza
vaccines used in the United States are quadrivalent.
Ideally, vaccination should be given before the onset of influenza
circulation in the community, so that there is time for antibodies to
reach protective levels. Healthcare providers should offer vaccination
by the end of October, if possible. The ACIP publishes guidelines for
vaccine use each year when the vaccines are formulated and released;
these guidelines should be referred to each season. The ACIP guidelines are widely publicized but appear initially in the Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report published by CDC (https://www.cdc.gov/flu
/index.htm).

Chemoprophylaxis

Routine use of antiviral medications for chemoprophylaxis is not recommended. Examples for which the use of chemoprophylaxis may be
considered to prevent influenza after exposure to an infectious person
include (1) unvaccinated persons at high risk of influenza complications, (2) persons for whom vaccine is contraindicated or expected
to have low effectiveness, and (3) residents/patients in care facilities
during institutional influenza outbreaks. Oral oseltamivir or inhaled
zanamivir may be used for chemoprophylaxis of influenza; baloxavir is
approved for postexposure prophylaxis in persons 12 years of age and
older. Peramivir is not recommended for chemoprophylaxis because
of a lack of data, and adamantanes are not currently recommended
because of widespread adamantane resistance. Table 305.4 shows the
recommendations for dosage and duration of treatment and chemoprophylaxis for the 2021–2022 influenza season, but updated recommendations from the ACIP and CDC should be consulted every season
(https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/index.htm).
In general, postexposure chemoprophylaxis for persons at high risk
of influenza complications (see Table 305.3) should be started within
48 hours of exposure to an infectious person and should be continued
for 7 days after the last known exposure. An alternative to chemoprophylaxis for some persons after a suspected exposure is close monitoring and early initiation of antiviral treatment if symptoms develop.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2026 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
For control of influenza outbreaks among high-­risk persons living
in institutional settings, such as long-­term care facilities, antiviral chemoprophylaxis is recommended for all vaccinated and unvaccinated
residents and for unvaccinated healthcare providers. In these circumstances, CDC and the Infectious Diseases Society of America recommend antiviral chemoprophylaxis for a minimum of 2 weeks and up
to 1 week after the last known case is identified, whichever is longer.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

of respiratory illness in hospital wards, clinics, neonatal nurseries, and
other institutional settings. The incubation period from exposure to
symptom onset may range from 2 to 6 days. Children are likely to excrete
virus from the oropharynx for 2-­3 weeks, but shedding can be more prolonged, especially in immunocompromised children, and may persist for
months. Primary infection does not confer permanent immunity, and
reinfections are common throughout life. Reinfections are usually mild
and self-­limited but can cause serious lower respiratory tract illness, particularly in children with compromised immune systems.

PATHOGENESIS

Chapter 306

Parainfluenza Viruses
Fiona P. Havers and Angela J.P. Campbell
Human parainfluenza viruses (HPIVs) are common causes of acute
respiratory illness in infants and children and are important causes of
lower respiratory tract disease in young children and immunocompromised persons. These viruses cause a spectrum of upper and lower
respiratory tract illnesses but are particularly associated with croup
(laryngotracheitis or laryngotracheobronchitis), bronchiolitis, and
pneumonia.

ETIOLOGY

HPIVs are members of the Paramyxoviridae family. Four HPIVs
cause illness in humans, classified as types 1-­4, with diverse manifestations of infection. Type 4 is divided into two antigenic subtypes: 4a
and 4b. HPIVs have a nonsegmented, single-­stranded RNA genome
with a lipid-­containing envelope derived from budding through the
host cell membrane. The major antigenic moieties are the hemagglutinin neuraminidase (HN) and fusion (F) surface glycoproteins.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

By 5 years of age, most children have experienced primary infection
with HPIV types 1, 2, and 3. HPIV-­3 infections generally occur earliest,
with half of infants infected by age 1 year and over 90% by age 5 years.
HPIV-­1 and HPIV-­2 are more common after infancy, with approximately 75% infected by age 5 years. With increased use of multiplex
molecular testing and more frequent addition of HPIV-­4 as a panel target, HPIV-­4 is more frequently recognized and appears to occur earlier
in life than HPIV-­1 and -­2. In the United States and temperate climates,
HPIV-­1 has typically been reported to have biennial epidemics in the
fall in odd-­numbered years, whereas HPIV-­2 has biennial outbreaks
in the fall of even-­numbered years, with peaks that are not as high as
HPIV-­1 or HPIV-­3 (Fig. 306.1). HPIV-­3 can be endemic throughout
the year but typically peaks yearly in late spring or early summer. In
years with less HPIV-­1 activity, the HPIV-­3 season has been observed
to extend longer or to have a second peak in the fall (see Fig. 306.1).
The epidemiology of HPIV-­4 was historically less well defined, but with
an increase in molecular detection, it has been found to have yearly
peaks starting in the fall and peaking in winter (see Fig. 306.1).
Similar to what has been observed for other non–SARS-­CoV-­2
respiratory viruses, during the COVID-­19 pandemic in 2020 and
early 2021, HPIVs circulated at levels lower than prior years. However,
HPIVs began increasing in the United States in spring of 2021 and,
for HPIV types 1, 3, and 4, circulation patterns in 2022 and through
fall 2023 were similar to pre-pandemic seasons; HPIV-2 continued to
circulate at lower levels during that period. National HPIV trends are
created from weekly laboratory test result data that are reported on a
voluntary basis and are available at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) National Respiratory and Enteric Virus Surveillance
System (NREVSS) website (https://www.cdc.gov/surveillance/nrevss).
HPIVs are spread primarily from the respiratory tract of an infected
person by inhalation of large respiratory droplets or contact with infected
nasopharyngeal secretions. HPIVs are notable for causing outbreaks

HPIVs replicate in the respiratory epithelium. The propensity to cause
illness in the upper large airways is presumably related to preferential
replication in the larynx, trachea, and bronchi in comparison with
other viruses. Some HPIVs induce cell-­to-­cell fusion. During the budding process, cell membrane integrity is lost, and viruses can induce
cell death through the process of apoptosis. In children, the most severe
illness generally coincides with the time of maximal viral shedding.
However, disease severity is likely related to the host immune response
to infection as much as to direct cytopathic effects of the virus. Virus-­
specific immunoglobulin A antibody levels and serum antibodies to
the surface HN and F glycoproteins are able to neutralize HPIV, and
both likely contribute to host immunity. Cell-­mediated cytotoxicity is
also important for controlling and terminating HPIV infection.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common type of illness caused by HPIV infection consists
of some combination of low-­grade fever, rhinorrhea, cough, pharyngitis, and hoarseness and may be associated with vomiting or diarrhea. Rarely, HPIV infection is associated with parotitis. HPIVs have
also been associated with a variety of skin manifestations, including
typical maculopapular viral exanthems, erythema multiforme, and
papular acrodermatitis, or Gianotti-­
Crosti syndrome (see Chapter
708). Although often mild, more serious HPIV illness may result in
hospitalization, with common discharge diagnoses of bronchiolitis,
fever/possible sepsis, and apnea among younger children and croup,
pneumonia, and asthma among older children (Fig. 306.2). HPIVs
account for 50% of hospitalizations for croup and at least 15% of cases
of bronchiolitis and pneumonia. HPIV-­1 and HPIV-­2 cause more cases
of croup, whereas HPIV-­3 is more likely to infect the small air passages
of the lower respiratory tract and cause pneumonia, bronchiolitis, or
bronchitis. HPIV-­4 causes a similar range of illness as the other types,
and with advancements in molecular diagnosis, there is evidence that
HPIV-­4 may be comparable to HPIV-­3 and frequently associated with
acute lower respiratory infection (ALRI).
In fact, any HPIV can cause lower respiratory tract disease, particularly
during primary infection or in patients with compromised immune systems. In children and adult patients with hematologic malignancies and
undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, lymphopenia has
repeatedly been shown to be an independent risk factor for progression
from upper to lower respiratory tract disease. Recently, the first global
burden estimates of HPIV-­associated and HPIV-­attributable ALRI were
generated, with approximately 13% of ALRI cases, 4–14% of ALRI hospital admissions, and 4% of childhood ALRI mortality attributable to HPIV.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of HPIV infection in children is often based solely on clinical and epidemiologic criteria. Croup is a clinical diagnosis and must be
distinguished from other diagnoses, including foreign body aspiration,
epiglottitis, retropharyngeal abscess, angioedema, and subglottic stenosis or hemangioma. Although the radiographic “steeple sign,” consisting
of progressive narrowing of the subglottic region of the trachea, is characteristic of croup, differential considerations include acute epiglottitis,
thermal injury, angioedema, and bacterial tracheitis. Manifestation of
HPIV lower respiratory tract disease may be similar to that of a number
of other respiratory viral infections; therefore virus identification should
be sought by the most sensitive diagnostic means available for certain
severe illnesses, such as pneumonia in immunocompromised children.
Sensitive, specific, and rapid molecular assays such as multiplex
polymerase chain reaction assays have become more widely available

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 306 u Parainfluenza Viruses

2027

1200
1100
1000
900

Detections

800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100

19

19

/2
0
/0
9
07

01

/0
9

/2
0

18
/2
0

18
07

/0
9

/2
0

17
/0
9
01

/0
9

/2
0

17
07

/2
0

16
01

/0
9

/2
0

16
/0
9
07

01

/0
9

/2
0

15
/2
0

15
07

/0
9

/2
0

14
/0
9
01

07

/0
9

/2
0

14
/2
0

13
01

/0
9

/2
0

13
/0
9
07

01

/0
9

/2
0

12
/2
0

12
07

/0
9

/2
0
/0
9
01

07

/0
9

/2
0

11

0

Date
HPIV-1

HPIV-2

HPIV-3

HPIV-4

Total detections

Fig. 306.1 Human parainfluenza virus (HPIV) circulation, National Enteric and Respiratory Virus Surveillance System, United States Census Regions, 2011–2019. (From DeGroote NP, Haynes AK, Taylor C, et al. Human parainfluenza virus circulation, United States, 2011–2019. J Clin Virol.
2020;124:104261. Fig. 1.)

6 to 11 (n=33)

12 to 23 (n=57)

24 to 59 (n=41)

50
40
30
20
10

R
I

on
m
eu

e

Pn

ve

r/P

os

Br

bl
si
HPIV-2 (n=23)

U

ia

is
ps

C

se

ro

lit
io
ch
on

As

up

is

a
m
th

ne

a

HPIV-1 (n=73)

Fe

HPIV-3 (n=95)

50
40
30
20
10

I
R
U

eu
m

on

ia

si
s
si
bl
e

Fe
ve

r/P
os

Pn

se
p

ro
C

io
lit
on
ch
Br

up

is

a
m
As
th

a

0

Ap
ne

Percent with specified discharge
diagnoses, by HPIV type

A

B

and greatly increase sensitivity of HPIV detection. For immunocompromised patients, these highly sensitive platforms provide the critical
ability to make a prompt diagnosis by detecting a wide range of viral
pathogens, including HPIVs, thus allowing for early implementation of
infection prevention measures and potential treatment. Other laboratory diagnosis methods are available, such as isolation in tissue culture
and direct immunofluorescent staining for identification of virus antigens in respiratory secretions, but these have been used less frequently
given the increasing availability of molecular assays.

TREATMENT

0

Ap

Percent with specified discharge
diagnoses, by age group (mo)

0 to 5 (n=58)

Fig. 306.2 Selected discharge diagnoses of hospitalized children with

parainfluenza (HPIV) infection, by age in months (A) and virus type (B).
(Data from Weinberg GA, Hall CB, Iwane MK, et al. Parainfluenza virus
infection of young children: estimates of the population-­based burden
of hospitalization. J Pediatr. 2009;154:694–699, Table II)

There are no specific antiviral medications approved for the treatment
of HPIV infections. For croup, the possibility of rapid respiratory compromise should influence the level of care and treatment given (see
Chapter 433). The severity assessment of croup generally incorporates
a number of clinical features, which include the presence and degree of
chest wall retractions, whether stridor is present at rest, and evaluation
of the child’s mental status (e.g., for agitation, anxiety, lethargy).
Humidified air has not been shown to be significantly effective in
reducing symptom severity. Glucocorticoids improve symptoms at
2 hours after treatment, lessen the need for other medications, and
shorten hospital stays. In general, because of its safety, efficacy, and
cost-­effectiveness, a single dose of oral dexamethasone (0.15 to 0.6
mg/kg) is the primary treatment for mild croup in the office or
emergency room setting. Oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg) is an acceptable alternative in this setting, particularly if dexamethasone is not
available; however, in a meta-­analysis, dexamethasone significantly
reduced the rate of return visits and/or (re)admissions.
For obstructive airway symptoms associated with moderate to
severe croup, corticosteroid therapy is recommended: oral dexamethasone (0.6 mg/kg) should be given if oral intake is tolerated.
A single dose of intramuscular dexamethasone or budesonide (2
mg [2 mL solution] via nebulizer) may provide an alternative to
oral dexamethasone for children with severe respiratory distress
or vomiting. Alternatively, intravenous (IV) dexamethasone can be
administered if IV access has been established. Nebulized epinephrine (either racemic epinephrine 2.25% solution, 0.05 mL/kg/dose
[up to maximum of 0.5 mL/dose] diluted to 3 mL with normal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2028 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
saline, or l-­epinephrine using parenteral 1 mg/ml [1:1000] solution, 0.5 mL/kg/dose [up to maximum 5 mL/dose]) is also recommended and may provide temporary symptomatic improvement.
Children should be observed for at least 2 hours after receiving epinephrine treatment for return of obstructive symptoms. Repeated
treatments may be provided, depending on the duration of symptoms.
The dexamethasone dose may be repeated, but this should not be
necessary on a routine basis, and there are no guidelines to compare
outcomes of single-­and multiple-­dose treatment schedules. Moderate to severe symptoms that persist for more than a few days should
prompt investigation for other causes of airway obstruction. Oxygen
should be administered for hypoxia, and supportive care with analgesics and antipyretics is reasonable for fever and discomfort associated
with HPIV infections. The indications for antibiotics are limited to
well-­documented secondary bacterial infections of the middle ear(s)
or lower respiratory tract.
Ribavirin has some antiviral activity against HPIVs in vitro and in
animal models. Inhaled ribavirin has been given to severely immunocompromised children with HPIV pneumonia; however, the majority
of data have not shown improved outcomes, and randomized controlled
studies are lacking. Some institutions use intravenous immunoglobulin for HPIV pneumonia in children with hematologic malignancies
or who have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; the
impact of this treatment strategy on clinical outcomes is also limited
by lack of controlled studies. Use of DAS181, a novel sialidase fusion
protein inhibitor, has shown clinical potential in a phase 2 clinical
trial when used for treatment of HPIV lower respiratory tract disease
among solid organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients,
and a phase 3 trial is ongoing. Other potential strategies for drug development include hemagglutinin-­neuraminidase inhibitors, transcription inhibitors, and synthetic small interfering RNAs.

COMPLICATIONS

Eustachian tube obstruction can lead to secondary bacterial invasion of
the middle ear space and acute otitis media in 30–50% of HPIV infections. Similarly, obstruction of the paranasal sinuses can lead to sinusitis. The destruction of cells in the upper airways can lead to secondary
bacterial invasion and resultant bacterial tracheitis, and antecedent
HPIV infection of lower airways may predispose to bacterial pneumonia. Nonrespiratory complications of HPIV are rare but include aseptic
meningitis, encephalitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, rhabdomyolysis, myocarditis, and pericarditis.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for full recovery from HPIV infection in the immunocompetent child is generally excellent, with no long-­term pulmonary
sequelae. Deaths may rarely occur, particularly in immunocompromised children with lower respiratory tract infection.

PREVENTION

Vaccine development has focused largely on live-­attenuated intranasal
HPIV-­3 vaccines. Candidates include a recombinant human HPIV-­3
virus (rcp45) derived from complementary DNA, as well as a complementary DNA–derived chimeric bovine/human HPIV-­3 virus; these
candidates are well tolerated and immunogenic in infants and young
children. Constructs using chimeric bovine/human HPIV-­3 virus in
addition to the F or both F and G proteins of respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) have been investigated. A combined messenger RNA (mRNA)
vaccine against HPIV-­3 and human metapneumovirus has completed
phase 1 clinical trials. Live attenuated candidate HPIV-­1 and HPIV-­2
vaccines have also undergone phase 1 clinical studies (www.clinicaltria
ls.gov). The measure of protection afforded by vaccines will be difficult
to assess, because symptomatic reinfection occurs and the frequency
of serious infection in the general population is low. Nonetheless, it
is clear that prevention of acute respiratory illness caused by HPIVs,
particularly lower respiratory tract infections among infants and young
children, is a worthwhile goal.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 307

Respiratory Syncytial
Virus
James E. Crowe Jr.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the major cause of bronchiolitis (see
Chapter 439) and viral pneumonia in children younger than 1 year of age
and is the most important respiratory tract pathogen of early childhood.

ETIOLOGY

RSV is an enveloped RNA virus with a single-­stranded negative-­sense
genome that replicates entirely in the cytoplasm of infected cells and
matures by budding from the apical surface of the cell membrane.
Because this virus has a nonsegmented genome, it cannot undergo
antigenic shift by reassortment like the influenza viruses do. The virus
belongs to the family Pneumoviridae, which comprises large enveloped,
negative-­sense RNA viruses. This taxon was formerly a subfamily within
the Paramyxoviridae but was reclassified in 2016 as a family with two
genera, Orthopneumovirus (which includes RSV) and Metapneumovirus (which includes human metapneumovirus; see Chapter 308). There
are two antigenic subgroups of RSV (subgroups A and B), distinguished
based primarily on sequence and antigenic variation in one of the two
surface proteins, the G glycoprotein that is responsible for attachment to
host cells. Sequence analysis of cDNAs of the full G glycoprotein ectodomain region allows clustering of sequence patterns and identification of
molecular markers that can be used to assign genotypes, subgenotypes,
and lineages. There is no unified classification scheme for genotypes, so
reports differ in the number of genotypes in circulation. The observed
genotypic variation, which also can alter antigenic properties at the protein level, is caused by point mutations from infidelity of the viral RNA
polymerase and may contribute to some degree to the frequency with
which RSV reinfects children and adults. However, adult human challenge experiments have shown that the same RSV strain can reinfect in
the upper respiratory tract repetitively, suggesting that mucosal immunity in that site is incomplete or short-­lived.
RSV replicates in a wide variety of cell line monolayer cultures in the
laboratory. In HeLa and HEp-­2 cell monolayers, the virus causes cell-­
to-­cell fusion that produces characteristic cytopathology called syncytia
(multinucleate enlarged cells), from which the virus derives its name.
Identification of syncytia in diagnostic cultures of respiratory secretions
is helpful in identifying RSV, but it is not clear whether syncytium formation occurs to any significant degree in the airway epithelium in patients.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

RSV is distributed worldwide and appears in yearly epidemics. In temperate climates, these epidemics occur each winter over a 4-­to 5-­month
period. During the remainder of the year, infections are sporadic and
much less common. In the Northern hemisphere, epidemics usually
peak in January, February, or March, but peaks have been recognized
as early as December and as late as June. Some areas in the United
States, such as Florida, report a moderate incidence year-­round. In the
Southern hemisphere, outbreaks also occur during the winter months
in that hemisphere. RSV outbreaks often overlap with outbreaks of
influenza virus or human metapneumovirus but are generally more
consistent from year to year and result in more disease overall, especially among infants younger than 6 months of age. In the tropics, the
epidemic pattern is less clear. The pattern of widespread annual outbreaks and the high incidence of infection during the first 3-­4 months
of life are unique among human viruses. The conventional seasonality
of RSV outbreaks was altered in 2020–2021 by events associated with
the COVID-­19 pandemic. Delayed and out-­of-­season RSV epidemics
occurred during the COVID-­19 pandemic when reopening activities

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 307 u Respiratory Syncytial Virus
occurred after a long period of reduced transmission due to nonpharmaceutical interventions such as masking, distancing, and daycare and
school closure reduced transmission.
Transplacentally acquired anti-­RSV maternal immunoglobulin G
(IgG) serum antibodies, if present in high concentration, appear to
provide partial protection for the neonate. The age of peak incidence
of severe lower respiratory tract disease and hospitalization is about
6 weeks. Maternal IgGs may account for the lower severity and incidence of RSV infections during the first 4-­6 weeks of life, except among
infants born prematurely, who receive less maternal immunoglobulin. Breastfeeding provides some protection against severe disease, an
effect that may pertain only to female and not male infants. RSV is one
of the most contagious viruses that affect humans. Infection is nearly
universal among children by their second birthday. Reinfection occurs
at a rate of at least 10–20% per epidemic throughout childhood, with a
lower frequency among adults. In situations of high exposure, such as
daycare centers, attack rates are nearly 100% among previously uninfected infants and 60–80% for second and subsequent infections.
Reinfection may occur as early as a few weeks after recovery but
usually takes place during subsequent annual outbreaks. Antigenic
variation is not required for reinfection, as shown by the fact that a
proportion of adults inoculated repeatedly with the same experimental
preparation of wild-­type virus could be reinfected multiple times. The
immune response of infants is poor in quality, magnitude, and durability. The severity of illness during reinfection in childhood is usually
lower than that in first infection and appears to be a function of partial
acquired immunity, more robust airway physiology, and increased age.
Asymptomatic RSV infection is unusual in young children. Most
infants experience coryza and pharyngitis, often with fever and frequently with otitis media caused by virus in the middle ear or bacterial superinfection following eustachian tube dysfunction. The lower
respiratory tract is involved to a varying degree, with bronchiolitis and
bronchopneumonia in about a third of children. The hospitalization
rate for RSV infection in otherwise healthy infants is typically 0.5–4%,
depending on region, sex, socioeconomic status, exposure to cigarette
smoke, gestational age, and family history of atopy. The admitting
diagnosis is usually bronchiolitis with hypoxia, although this condition is often indistinguishable from RSV pneumonia in infants, and,
indeed, the two processes frequently coexist. All RSV diseases of the
lower respiratory tract (excluding croup) have their highest incidence
at 6 weeks to 7 months of age and decrease in frequency thereafter. The
syndrome of bronchiolitis is much less common after the first birthday.
The terminology used for the diagnosis of virus-­associated wheezing
illnesses in toddlers can be confusing, because these illnesses are variably termed wheezing-­associated respiratory infection, wheezy bronchitis, exacerbation of reactive airways disease, or asthma attack. Because
many toddlers wheeze during RSV infection but do not go on to have
lifelong asthma, it is best to use the diagnostic term asthma only later
in life. It is still uncertain if RSV-­associated wheezing illness in infancy
causes asthma in later life. On the whole, prevention of severe RSV illness in high-­risk infants using RSV monoclonal antibody prophylaxis
does not seem to reduce the incidence of asthma in those populations
significantly. Whether a vaccine will have such an effect in the future is
still to be determined.
Acute viral pneumonia is a recurring problem throughout childhood, although RSV becomes less prominent as the etiologic agent
after the first year. RSV plays a causative role in an estimated 40–75%
of cases of hospitalized bronchiolitis, 15–40% of cases of childhood
pneumonia, and 6–15% of cases of croup. Bronchiolitis and pneumonia resulting from RSV are more common in males than in females by
a ratio of approximately 1.5:1. Other risk factors with a similar impact
in the United States include one or more siblings in the home, White
race, rural residence, maternal smoking, and maternal education <12
years. The medical factors in infants associated with the highest risk are
chronic lung disease of prematurity, congenital heart disease, immunodeficiency, and prematurity. Still, most infants admitted to the hospital
because of RSV infection do not have strong, easily identifiable risk factors. Therefore any strategy for prophylaxis focused only on individuals with strong risk factors probably could prevent only approximately

2029

10% of hospitalizations, even if the prophylaxis was 100% effective in
treated high-­risk individuals.
The incubation period from exposure to first symptoms is approximately 3-­5 days. The virus is excreted for variable periods, probably
depending on the severity of illness and immunologic status. Most
infants with lower respiratory tract illness shed infectious viruses for
1-­2 weeks after hospital admission. Excretion for 3 weeks and even
longer has been documented. Spread of infection occurs when large
infected droplets, either airborne or conveyed on hands or other fomites, are inoculated in the nasopharynx of a susceptible subject. RSV is
probably introduced into most families by young schoolchildren experiencing reinfection. Typically, in the space of a few days, 25–50% of
older siblings and one or both parents acquire upper respiratory tract
infections, but infants become more severely ill with fever, otitis media,
or lower respiratory tract disease.
Nosocomial infection during RSV epidemics is an important concern. Virus is usually spread from child to child on the hands of caregivers or other fomites. Adults experiencing reinfection also have been
implicated in the spread of the virus. Contact precautions are sufficient
to prevent spread when compliance is meticulous, because the virus
is not spread by small particle aerosol to an appreciable degree, and a
distance of about 6 ft is likely sufficient to avoid aerosol transmission.
During the COVID-­19 pandemic, widespread social measures, including masking and distancing, appeared to prevent transmission of RSV
on a world-­wide basis. However, in normal circumstances, adherence
to isolation procedures by caregivers often is not complete.

PATHOGENESIS

Bronchiolitis is caused by obstruction and collapse of the small airways
during expiration. Infants are particularly apt to experience small airway obstruction because of the small size of their normal bronchioles;
airway resistance is proportional to 1/radius4. There has been relatively
little pathologic examination of RSV disease in the lower airways of
otherwise healthy subjects. Airway narrowing likely is caused by
virus-­induced necrosis of the bronchiolar epithelium, hypersecretion
of mucus, and round-­cell infiltration and edema of the surrounding
submucosa. These changes result in the formation of mucus plugs
obstructing bronchioles, with consequent hyperinflation or collapse of
the distal lung tissue. In interstitial pneumonia, the infiltration is more
generalized, and epithelial shedding may extend to both the bronchi
and the alveoli. In older subjects, smooth muscle hyperreactivity may
contribute to airway narrowing, but the airways of young infants typically do not exhibit a high degree of reversible smooth muscle hyperreactivity during RSV infection.
Several facts suggest that elements of the host response may cause
inflammation and contribute to tissue damage. The immune response
required to eliminate virus-­infected cells (mostly containing cytolytic
T cells) is a double-­edged sword, reducing the cells producing virus but
also causing host cell death in the process. Many soluble factors, such
as cytokines, chemokines, and leukotrienes, are released in the process,
and skewing of the patterns of these responses may predispose some
individuals to more severe disease. There is also evidence that genetic
factors may predispose to more severe bronchiolitis.
Some studies have identified the presence of both RSV and human
metapneumovirus viral RNA in airway secretions in a significant proportion of infants requiring assisted ventilation and intensive care.
It may be that co-­infection is associated with more severe disease.
Positive results of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis must be
interpreted carefully because this positivity can remain for prolonged
periods after infection, even when infectious virus can no longer be
detected.
It is not clear how often superimposed bacterial infection plays a
pathogenic role in RSV lower respiratory tract disease. RSV bronchiolitis in infants is probably exclusively a viral disease, although there is
evidence that bacterial pneumonia can be triggered by respiratory viral
infection, including with RSV. A large clinical study of pneumococcal vaccine showed that childhood vaccination reduced the incidence
of viral pneumonia by approximately 30%, suggesting viral-­bacterial
interactions that we currently do not fully understand.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2030 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Typically, the first sign of infection in infants with RSV is rhinorrhea. Cough may appear simultaneously but more often does
so after an interval of 1-­3 days, at which time there may also be
sneezing and a low-­grade fever. Soon after the cough develops, the
child who experiences bronchiolitis begins to wheeze audibly. If the
disease is mild, the symptoms may not progress beyond this stage.
Auscultation often reveals diffuse fine inspiratory crackles and
expiratory wheezes. Rhinorrhea usually persists throughout the illness, with intermittent fever. Chest radiograph findings at this stage
are frequently normal.
If the illness progresses, cough and wheezing worsen and air hunger ensues, with an increased respiratory rate, intercostal and subcostal
retractions, hyperexpansion of the chest, restlessness, and peripheral
cyanosis. Signs of severe, life-­threatening illness are central cyanosis,
tachypnea of >70 breaths/min, listlessness, and apneic spells. At this
stage, the chest may be significantly hyperexpanded and almost silent
to auscultation because of poor air movement.
Chest radiographs of infants hospitalized with RSV bronchiolitis
have normal findings in approximately 30% of cases, with the other
70% showing hyperexpansion of the chest, peribronchial thickening,
and interstitial infiltrates. Segmental or lobar consolidation is unusual,
and pleural effusion is rare.
In some infants, the course of the illness may resemble that of pneumonia, the prodromal rhinorrhea and cough being followed by dyspnea, poor feeding, and listlessness. Although the clinical diagnosis
is pneumonia, wheezing is often present intermittently, and the chest
radiographs may show air trapping.
Fever is an inconsistent sign in RSV infection. In young infants,
particularly those who were born prematurely, periodic breathing and
apneic spells have been distressingly frequent signs, even with relatively mild bronchiolitis. Apnea is not necessarily caused by respiratory
exhaustion but rather appears to be a consequence of alterations in the
central control of breathing.
RSV infections in profoundly immunocompromised hosts or those
with chronic lung disease or pulmonary hypertension may be severe at
any age of life. The mortality rates associated with RSV pneumonia in
the first few weeks after hematopoietic stem cell or solid-­organ transplantation in both children and adults are high. RSV infection does
not appear to be more severe in HIV-­infected patients with reasonable
control of HIV disease, although these patients may shed virus in respiratory secretions for prolonged periods.
Secondary (associated) bacterial infections are uncommon in most
previously healthy patients with RSV bronchiolitis. However, otitis
media may be present because of either RSV or bacterial middle ear
infection.

DIAGNOSIS

Bronchiolitis is a clinical diagnosis. RSV can be suspected with varying degrees of certainty based on the season of the year and the presence of the virus in the community. Other epidemiologic features that
may be helpful are the presence of common colds in older household
contacts and the age of the child. The other respiratory viruses that
attack infants frequently during the first few months of life are human
metapneumovirus, influenza viruses, parainfluenza virus type 3, rhinoviruses, enteroviruses, and coronaviruses.
Routine laboratory tests are of minimal diagnostic use in most
cases of bronchiolitis or pneumonia caused by RSV. The white blood
cell count is normal or elevated, and the differential cell count may
be normal with either a neutrophilic or mononuclear predominance.
Hypoxemia as measured by pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas analysis is frequent and tends to be more marked than anticipated from the
clinical findings. A normal or elevated blood carbon dioxide value in
a patient with a markedly elevated respiratory rate is a sign of respiratory failure.
The most important diagnostic concern is to differentiate viral infection from bacterial or chlamydial infection. When bronchiolitis is not
accompanied by infiltrates on chest radiographs, there is little likelihood
of a bacterial component. In infants 1-­4 months of age, interstitial pneumonitis may be caused by Chlamydia trachomatis (see Chapter 272).

With C. trachomatis pneumonia, there may be a history of conjunctivitis,
and the illness tends to be of subacute onset. Coughing and inspiratory
crackles may be prominent; wheezing is not. Fever is usually absent.
Lobar consolidation without other signs or with pleural effusion
should be considered of bacterial etiology until proved otherwise.
Other signs suggesting bacterial pneumonia are neutrophilia, neutropenia in the presence of severe disease, ileus or other abdominal signs,
high temperature, and circulatory collapse. In such instances, antibiotics should be initiated.
The definitive diagnosis of RSV infection is based on the detection in
respiratory secretions of live virus by cell culture. Molecular diagnostic
tests are more available, however. The presence of viral RNA (detected
by a molecular diagnostic test using reverse transcription PCR) or viral
antigens (detected by a rapid diagnostic test, usually a membrane blotting
test incorporating antibody detection of viral proteins) is strongly supportive in the right clinical setting. The antigen test is less sensitive than
virus culture, whereas reverse transcription PCR analysis is more sensitive
than culture. An aspirate of mucus or a nasopharyngeal wash from the
child’s posterior nasal cavity is the optimal specimen. Nasopharyngeal or
throat swabs are less preferable but are acceptable. A tracheal aspirate is
unnecessary, but endotracheal tube lavage fluid from patients intubated for
mechanical ventilation can be tested. The specimen should be placed on
ice, taken directly to the laboratory, and processed immediately for culture,
antigen detection, or PCR analysis. RSV is thermolabile, so it degrades
over relatively short periods of time unless it is frozen at a low temperature
such as −80°C (−112°F) in freezers used in research settings.

TREATMENT

The treatment of uncomplicated cases of bronchiolitis is symptomatic.
Many infants are slightly to moderately dehydrated, and therefore fluids should be carefully administered in amounts somewhat greater than
those for maintenance. Often, intravenous or tube feeding is helpful
when sucking is difficult because of tachypnea. Humidified oxygen and
suctioning usually are indicated for hospitalized infants who are hypoxic.
High-­flow nasal cannula (HFNC) therapy is used for respiratory distress
either before or after admission to an intensive care unit. HFNC is often
started based on the subjective assessment of work of breathing; despite
HFNC use, it remains uncertain if the outcome of RSV bronchiolitis has
been improved with HFNC. Nasal continuous positive airway pressure
is used in the intensive care unit for infants who have increased work
of breathing, and mechanical ventilation is used for respiratory failure.
There is disagreement among experts regarding the usefulness of
aerosolized saline or hypertonic saline, epinephrine, or β2-­agonists in
RSV bronchiolitis. Most patients do not receive lasting benefit from
prolonged therapy, which is associated with a relatively high frequency
of side effects. Corticosteroid therapy is not indicated except in older
children with an established diagnosis of asthma, because its use is
associated with prolonged virus shedding and is of no proven clinical benefit. The 2014 American Academy of Pediatrics bronchiolitis
clinical practice guideline suggests limitations on the use of α-­ and β-­
adrenergic agents and corticosteroids.
In nearly all instances of bronchiolitis, antibiotics are not useful, and
their inappropriate use contributes to the development of antibiotic
resistance. Interstitial pneumonia in infants 1-­4 months old may be
caused by C. trachomatis, and macrolide therapy may be indicated for
that infection if identified by specific testing.

PROGNOSIS

The mortality rate of hospitalized infants with RSV infection of the
lower respiratory tract is very low in the developed world. Almost all
deaths occur among young, premature infants or infants with underlying disease of the neuromuscular, pulmonary, cardiovascular, or
immunologic system. However, it is estimated that more than 160,000
children worldwide in resource-­poor settings die each year from RSV.
In addition, thousands of elderly patients die of RSV infection each
year in the United States.
There is recurrent wheezing in 30–50% of children who have severe
RSV bronchiolitis in infancy, and many older children who are diagnosed with asthma have a history of severe bronchiolitis in infancy. The
likelihood of the recurrence of wheezing is increased in the presence

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 307 u Respiratory Syncytial Virus
of an allergic diathesis (e.g., eczema, hay fever, or a family history of
asthma). With a clinical presentation of bronchiolitis in a patient older
than 1 year of age, there is an increasing probability that, although the
episode may be virus-­induced, the event is likely the first of multiple
wheezing attacks that will later be diagnosed as hyperreactive airways
disease or asthma. Asthma is difficult to diagnose in the first year of
life. It is not fully clear at this time whether early, severe RSV wheezing disease causes some cases of asthma or whether persons destined
to have asthma present with symptoms first when provoked by RSV
infection during infancy. Results from a long-­term follow-­up study of
infants who received palivizumab prophylaxis suggested that the prevention of severe RSV infection may reduce the incidence of reactive
airways disease later in life.

PREVENTION
Prevention of Nosocomial Spread

In the hospital, the most important preventive measures are aimed at
blocking nosocomial spread. During RSV season, high-risk infants
should be separated from all infants with respiratory symptoms. Gowns,
gloves, and careful handwashing (contact isolation) should be used for
the care of all infants with suspected or established RSV infection. A
high level of compliance with contact isolation is essential. Viral laboratory tests are adequate for diagnosis in the setting of acute disease when
levels of virus are high, but they are not designed to detect low levels of
virus. Therefore, contact precaution isolation should be observed for the
duration of hospitalization for most patients admitted for acute disease.
Rapid antigen tests should not be used to determine whether a patient
still requires isolation, because low concentrations of virus may be present in respiratory secretions that are infectious for humans but below
the lower limit of detection for such assays. Ideally, patients with RSV or
metapneumovirus infections are housed separately because co-infection
with the two viruses may be associated with more severe disease.

Protection of Infants Against Infection or Severe
Disease

Antibodies that neutralize RSV are the principal mechanism of protection against infection or reinfection. Antibodies are induced by
natural infection but can also be provided to infants prior to a first
infection in several ways. First, all mothers pass along their own naturally occurring IgG antibodies across the placenta beginning at about
28-32 weeks’ gestation. Second, breastfeeding may transfer maternal
antibodies (including IgA antibodies) to infant mucosal surfaces, providing benefit in some infants. Third, antibodies manufactured as biologic drugs can be administered directly to infants after birth. Fourth,
maternal immunization with an approved RSV vaccine can increase
the level of antibodies in the mother’s serum and thus also the level of
antibodies transferred across the placenta. The Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP) in the United States recommends
that either antibody administration to the infant or maternal vaccination during pregnancy should be used to prevent RSV-associated lower
respiratory tract illness among all infants, but both exogenous antibodies and maternal vaccination are not needed for most infants.

Passive Immunoprophylaxis

A neutralizing humanized murine monoclonal antibody against RSV
given IM once a month (palivizumab) has been approved for protecting high-risk children against serious complications from RSV disease.
A next-generation monoclonal antibody (nirsevimab, Beyfortus, Sanofi
and AstraZeneca) was subsequently approved for the prevention of
lower respiratory tract infection caused by RSV in the European Union,
United Kingdom, United States, and Canada. Nirsevimab is an RSV
fusion-protein-specific monoclonal antibody with an extended half-life
because of engineered changes in the antibody Fc region. Since the antibody is long-acting (with a half-life of about 3 months instead of 3 weeks
as for conventional IgG), only a single dose is necessary to protect term,
preterm, and high-risk infants for an entire RSV season. In the United
States, nirsevimab is indicated for the prevention of RSV lower respiratory tract disease in neonates and infants <8 months born during or
entering their first RSV season and in children 8–19 months of age at
increased risk for severe RSV disease entering their second RSV season.

2031

Nirsevimab is dispensed in prefill syringes of either 50 or 100 mg;
the dose is 50 mg IM for infants < 5 kg, and 100 mg IM for infants < 8
months old and ≥ 5 kg. The first dose for infants <8 months of age may
be given in the first week of life. For infants 8-19 months of age entering
their second RSV season and at increased risk for severe RSV infection,
the dose is 200 mg.
Because of a projected shortage of the 100 mg dose, it is recommended that only infants ≥ 5kg who are at high risk for severe RSV
infection receive the 100 mg dose. High risk patients are defined as:
• Infants < 6 months
• American Indian and Alaska Natives < 8 months
• Infants age 6 to < 8 months with prematurity (< 29 weeks), chronic
lung disease of prematurity, hemodynamically significant congenital
heart disease, severe immunocompromise, cystic fibrosis, neuromuscular disease, or congenital pulmonary abnormalities that impair the ability to clear secretions
Palivizumab should be administered only to high risk infants (8-19
months old) and to eligible infants <8 months old if nirsevimab is not
available.
Administration of palivizumab (15 mg/kg intramuscularly once
a month) is recommended for protecting high-risk children against
serious complications from RSV disease. Palivizumab is administered
from the beginning to the end of the RSV season. Palivizumab prophylaxis may be considered for the following infants and children:
• Infants born before 29 wk of gestation in the first year of life
• Infants born before 32 wk of gestation, who have chronic lung disease of prematurity (required > 21% Fio2 [fraction of inspired oxygen] for ≥ 28 days after birth), in the first year of life and in the
second RSV season if continued medical support (oxygen, diuretics,
steroids) is needed
• Infants younger than 1 yr of age with hemodynamically significant
acyanotic congenital heart disease or those with moderate to severe
pulmonary hypertension and those patients following cardiac transplantation (children < 2 yr of age)
• Children 24 mo of age or younger with profound immunocompromising conditions during RSV season
• Infants in the first year of life who have either congenital abnormalities of the airway or neuromuscular disease that compromises the
handling of respiratory secretions

Vaccine

There are two licensed subunit protein vaccines against RSV for older
adults (Abrysvo, Pfizer; Arexvy, GSK) based on a prefusion conformation of the RSV fusion (F) protein (RSVpreF). The bivalent RSVpreF
Abrysvo vaccine has subunit proteins for both the type A and type
B RSV antigenic subgroups, while the Arexvy vaccine contains only
subgroup A antigen combined with an adjuvant. Neither vaccine is
approved for use in infants or children, but Abrysvo is used in pregnant mothers 32-36 weeks pregnant during RSV season with the goal
to protect infants. The mechanism of protection is that the resulting
increased serum level of RSV-neutralizing antibodies in the mother
can enhance immunity in neonates following transplacental transfer of
those maternal RSV antibodies to the fetus. In efficacy trials, this vaccination reduced the incidence of medically attended RSV lower respiratory tract infections and hospitalization within 90 days after birth. The
Abrysvo vaccine is recommended during September through January
for most of the United States. since RSV typically peaks in fall and winter. The seasonality of RSV season varies depending on location, and
thus state, local, or territorial health departments may recommend different timing for administration in diverse areas. The risk of severe RSV
is even greater in infants born at <32 weeks’ gestation. When Abrysvo
was compared to placebo in clinical trials, infants born to pregnant
individuals experienced low birth weight (5.1% Abrysvo compared to
4.4% placebo, a difference that was not statistically significant). The
European Medicines Agency chose to approve maternal immunization
with Abrysvo between weeks 24 and 36 of gestation, while the US FDA
chose to approve the vaccine between weeks 32 and 36 of gestation
while awaiting additional safety information from ongoing studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2032 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 308

Human Metapneumovirus
James E. Crowe Jr.
ETIOLOGY

Human metapneumovirus (HMPV) is a respiratory virus that is one
of the most common causes of serious lower respiratory tract illness in
children throughout the world.

ETIOLOGY

HMPV is an enveloped, single-­
stranded, nonsegmented, negative-­
sense RNA genome of the family Pneumoviridae, which comprises
large enveloped negative-­sense RNA viruses. This taxon was formerly
a subfamily within the Paramyxoviridae but was reclassified in 2016 as
a family with two genera: Metapneumovirus (which includes HMPV)
and Orthopneumovirus (which includes respiratory syncytial virus
[RSV]; see Chapter 307). HMPV and the avian pneumoviruses are
highly related and are separated into the separate genus Metapneumovirus because the gene order in the nonsegmented genome is slightly
altered and because avian pneumoviruses/HMPVs lack the genes for
two nonstructural proteins, NS1 and NS2, which are encoded at the
3′ end of RSV genomes. These proteins are thought to counteract host
type I interferons. The absence of NS1/NS2 in the metapneumoviruses
(compared with RSV) may contribute to an overall slightly reduced
pathogenicity relative to wild-­type RSV strains.
The HMPV genome encodes nine proteins in the order
3′-­N-­P-­M-­F-­M2-­(orf1 and 2)-­SH-­G-­L-­5′. The genome also contains
noncoding 3′ leader, 5′ trailer, and intergenic regions, consistent with
the organization of most paramyxoviruses, with a viral promoter contained in the 3′ end of the genome. The F (fusion), G (glycosylated),
and SH (short hydrophobic) proteins are integral membrane proteins
on the surfaces of infected cells and virion particles. The F protein is a
classic type I integral membrane viral fusion protein that contains two
heptad repeats in the extracellular domain that facilitate membrane
fusion. There is a predicted protein cleavage site near a hydrophobic
fusion peptide that likely is cleaved by an extracellular protease, activating the F protein for fusion. The predicted attachment (G) protein
of HMPV exhibits the basic features of a glycosylated type II mucin-­
like protein. The HMPV G protein differs from the RSV G protein that
inhibits innate immune responses in that the HMPV G lacks a cysteine
noose structure. The internal proteins of the virus appear similar in
function to those of other paramyxoviruses.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

HMPV outbreaks occur in annual epidemics during late winter and
early spring in temperate climates, often overlapping with the second
half of the annual RSV epidemic (Fig. 308.1). Sporadic infections occur
year-­round. A near-­total decline of HMPV infections occurred in the
2020–2021 winter associated with COVID-­19 public health measures,
followed by a delayed or interseasonal outbreak in 2021. The usual period
of viral shedding is likely to be many days or even several weeks after
primary infection in infants. The incubation period is approximately 3-­5
days. Humans are the only source of the virus; there is no known animal or environmental reservoir. Transmission occurs by close or direct
contact with contaminated secretions involving large-­particle aerosols,
droplets, or contaminated surfaces. Nosocomial infections have been
reported, and contact isolation with excellent handwashing for healthcare providers is critical in medical settings. This virus also affects the
elderly, immunocompromised patients, and patients with reactive airways disease more severely than otherwise healthy individuals.

PATHOLOGY

Infection is usually limited to the superficial layer of airway epithelial
cells and is associated with a local inflammatory infiltrate consisting
of lymphocytes and macrophages. Immunocompromised individuals

have evidence of both acute and organizing injuries during prolonged
infection.

PATHOGENESIS

Infection occurs via inoculation of the upper respiratory tract. Infection can spread rapidly to the lower respiratory tract, but it is not
clear whether the dissemination is mediated by cell-­to-­cell spread or
by aspiration of infected materials from the upper tract. Severe lower
respiratory tract illness, especially wheezing, occurs mainly during
the first year of life, at a time when the airways are of a very small
diameter and thus a high resistance. Maternal serum-­neutralizing antibodies that cross the placenta may afford a relative protection against
severe disease for several weeks or months after birth. Once infection
is established, it is likely that cytotoxic T cells recognize and eliminate
virus-­infected cells, thus terminating the infection but also causing
some cytopathology. The virus appears to have specific mechanisms
for inhibiting T-­cell responses during acute infection. Individuals with
an underlying predisposition for reactive airways disease (including
adults) are susceptible to severe wheezing during reinfection later in
life, suggesting that HMPV may cause smooth muscle hyperactivity,
inflammation, or increased mucus production in such individuals.
Infection in otherwise healthy individuals resolves without apparent
long-­term consequences in most cases. HMPV infection is associated
with exacerbations of asthma later in life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

HMPV is associated with the common cold (complicated by otitis
media in approximately 30% of cases) and with lower respiratory tract
illnesses such as bronchiolitis, pneumonia, croup, and exacerbation of
reactive airways disease. The profile of signs and symptoms caused by
HMPV is similar to that caused by RSV (Table 308.1). Approximately
5–10% of outpatient lower respiratory tract illnesses in otherwise
healthy young children are associated with HMPV infection, which is
second in incidence only to RSV. Children with RSV or HMPV infection require supplemental oxygen and medical intensive care at similar
frequencies.
About half of the cases of HMPV lower respiratory tract illness in
children occur in the first 6 months of life, suggesting that young age is
a major risk factor for severe disease. Both young adults and the elderly
can have HMPV infection that requires medical care, including hospitalization, but severe disease occurs at much lower frequencies in adults
than in young children. Severe disease in pediatric and older subjects
is most common in immunocompromised patients or those with complications of preterm birth, congenital heart disease, and neuromuscular disease and can be fatal. A significant number of both adult and
pediatric patients with asthma exacerbations have HMPV infection;
it is not clear whether the virus causes long-­term wheezing. RSV and
HMPV co-­infections have been reported; co-­infections may be more
severe than infection with a single virus, resulting in pediatric intensive
care unit admissions. It is difficult to define true co-­infections because
these viral RNA genomes can be detected by a reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in respiratory secretions for at least
several weeks after illness, even when virus shedding has terminated.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The virus can be visualized only with electron microscopy. The virus
grows in primary monkey kidney cells or LLC-­MK2 cell-­line or Vero
cell-­
line monolayer cultures in reference or research laboratories,
but efficient isolation of the virus requires an experienced laboratory technician. Conventional bright-­field microscopy of infected cell
monolayer cultures often reveals a cytopathic effect only after multiple
passages in the cell culture. The characteristics of the cytopathic effect
are not sufficiently distinct to allow identification of the virus on this
basis alone, even by a trained observer. The most sensitive test for identification of HMPV in clinical samples is reverse transcriptase PCR,
usually performed with primers directed to conserved viral genes.
Detection by this modality is also available in some multiplex PCR
tests for panels of respiratory viruses. Real-­time reverse transcriptase
PCR tests offer enhanced sensitivity and specificity, including assays
designed to detect viruses from the four known genetic lineages. Direct

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 308 u Human Metapneumovirus 2033
antibody titer to HMPV from the acute to convalescent time point can
be used in research settings to confirm infection.

60.0

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

50.0

In temperate areas, the diagnosis should be suspected during the late
winter in infants or young children with wheezing or pneumonia and
a negative RSV diagnostic test result. The diseases caused by RSV and
HMPV cannot be distinguished clinically. Many other common respiratory viruses, such as parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, adenoviruses, rhinoviruses, enteroviruses, and coronaviruses, can cause
similar disease in young children. Some of these viruses can be identified by PCR genetic testing or conventional cell culture means. Chest
radiographs are not very specific, mostly showing parahilar opacities,
hyperinflation, atelectasis, and, occasionally, consolidation but not
pleural effusion or pneumothorax.

% of each virus

40.0

30.0

20.0

COMPLICATIONS

Bacterial superinfection of the lower airways is unusual but does occur.
The local complication of otitis media is common, likely a result of
eustachian tube dysfunction caused by the virus.

10.0

TREATMENT

0.0

02

02

02

1

02
er
02
ob
ct ber
O
em
pt
Se t 02
s
gu
Au
02
ly
Ju 2
0
ne
02
Ju

ril

ay

M

Ap

ry

02

ua

ch

y

ar

1

r0

r0

be

ar

M

br

Fe

nu

Ja

be

em

em

ec

ov

D

N

HMPV (n68)
RSV (n101)
FluA (n77)
Parainfluenza (n36)
Adenovirus (n11)

Fig. 308.1 Temporal distribution of respiratory viruses among chil-

dren hospitalized with lower respiratory tract infections from November
2001 through October 2002. Data are displayed as the proportion of
each virus detected monthly. FluA, influenza A; HMPV, human metapneumovirus; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus. (From Wolf DG, Greenberg
D, Kalkstein D, et al. Comparison of human metapneumovirus, respiratory syncytial virus and influenza A virus lower respiratory tract infections
in hospitalized young children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2006;25:320–324.)

There is no specific treatment currently for HMPV infection. A single
small-­molecule drug inhibitor for HMPV is in clinical trials as of early
2022. Management consists of supportive care like that used for RSV
(see Chapter 307). The rate of bacterial lung infection or bacteremia
associated with HMPV infection is not fully defined but is suspected to
be low. Antibiotics are usually not indicated in the treatment of infants
hospitalized for HMPV bronchiolitis or pneumonia.

Supportive Care

Treatment is supportive and includes careful attention to hydration;
monitoring of respiratory status by physical examination and measurement of oxygen saturation; the use of supplemental oxygen, high-­flow
nasal cannula therapy, and nasal continuous positive airway pressure in
an intensive care unit for increased work of breathing; and, in the case
of respiratory failure, mechanical ventilation.

PROGNOSIS
Table 308.1  Clinical Manifestations of Human
Metapneumovirus in Children
COMMON (>50%)
Fever >38°C (100.4°F)
Cough
Rhinitis, coryza
Wheezing
Tachypnea, retractions
Hypoxia (O2 saturation <94%)
Chest radiograph demonstration of infiltrates or hyperinflation
LESS COMMON
Otitis media
Pharyngitis
Rales
RARE
Conjunctivitis
Hoarseness
Encephalitis
Fatal respiratory failure in immunocompromised children

antigen tests for identification of HMPV antigens in nasopharyngeal
secretions are available but are less efficient than nucleic acid–based
detection. Some laboratories have success with the use of immunofluorescence staining with monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies to
detect HMPV in nasopharyngeal secretions and shell vial cultures or
in monolayer cultures in which virus has been cultivated, with reported
sensitivities varying from about 65% to 90%. A fourfold rise in serum

Most infants and children recover from acute HMPV infection without
apparent long-­term consequences. Many experts believe an association
exists between severe HMPV infections in infancy and the risk for recurrent
wheezing or the development of asthma; however, it is not clear whether
the virus causes these conditions or precipitates their first manifestations.

PREVENTION

The only method of prevention of HMPV infection is reduction of
exposure. Contact precautions are recommended for the duration of
HMPV-­associated illness among hospitalized infants and young children. The near-­total absence of HMPV infections during the first year
of the COVID-­19 pandemic suggests that nonpharmacologic interventions (such as masking and distancing) are effective when compliance
is high. Patients known to have HMPV infection should be housed in
single rooms or with a cohort of HMPV-­infected patients. When feasible, it is wise to care for patients with RSV infection in a separate cohort
from HMPV-­infected patients to prevent co-­infection, which may be
associated with more severe disease. Preventive measures include limiting exposure to contagious settings during annual epidemics (such as
daycare centers) as much as possible and an emphasis on hand hygiene
in all settings, including the home, especially during periods when the
contacts of high-­risk children have respiratory infections. However,
providers should keep in mind that infection is universal in the first
several years of life. Therefore reduction of exposure makes the most
sense during the first 6 months of life, when infants are at the highest
risk for severe disease. Experimental HMPV vaccine candidates using
live attenuated viruses or a messenger RNA (mRNA)–encoded HMPV
fusion protein gene are under study.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2034 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 309

Adenoviruses
Terri L. Stillwell and Jason B. Weinberg
Human adenoviruses (HAdVs) are a common cause of human disease. Conjunctivitis is a familiar illness associated with the HAdVs, but
these viruses also cause upper and lower respiratory disease, pharyngitis, gastroenteritis, and hemorrhagic cystitis. HAdVs can cause severe
disease in immunocompromised hosts. Outbreaks of HAdV infection
occur in communities and closed populations, notably the military. No
currently approved antiviral drugs are highly effective against HAdVs.
Vaccines are available for HAdV types 4 and 7 but are used only in
military populations.

ETIOLOGY

Adenoviruses are nonenveloped viruses with an icosahedral protein
capsid. The double-­stranded DNA viral genome is contained within the
particle complexed with several viral proteins. Antigenic variability in
surface proteins of the virion and genomic sequencing define over 100
types, grouped into seven species. HAdV species differ in their tissue
tropism and target organs, causing distinct clinical infections (Table
309.1). HAdVs can be shed from the gastrointestinal and respiratory
tracts for prolonged periods and can establish persistent infection in
mucosal lymphoid tissue.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

HAdVs circulate worldwide and cause endemic infections year-­round
in immunocompetent hosts. Asymptomatic infections are also common. Epidemics of conjunctivitis (often severe), pharyngitis, and
respiratory disease can occur, especially in schools, congregate living
arrangements, and military settings. Outbreaks of febrile respiratory
illness caused by HAdV-­4 and HAdV-­7 are major sources of morbidity
in military barracks, with attack rates ranging from 25% to over 90%.
HAdV spread occurs by respiratory and fecal-­oral routes. An important factor in HAdV transmission, especially in epidemics, is the ability
of the nonenveloped particle to survive on inanimate objects in the
environment. Nosocomial outbreaks have been reported.

PATHOGENESIS

HAdVs bind to cell surface receptors and trigger internalization by
endocytosis. Acidification of the endosome induces conformational
changes in the capsid, leading to eventual translocation of the genome
to the cell nucleus. Viral messenger RNA transcription and genomic
replication occur in the nucleus. Progeny virion particles assemble
in the nucleus. Lysis of the cell releases new infectious particles and
causes damage to epithelial mucosa, sloughing of cell debris, and
inflammation. Host responses to HAdV infection include the recruitment of neutrophils, macrophages, and natural killer cells to the site
of infection and the elaboration by those cells of numerous cytokines
and chemokines. This host immune response is likely to contribute to
the symptoms of HAdV infection, but the strict species specificity of
the adenoviruses has hindered detailed studies of HAdV pathogenesis
in animal models. Studies using HAdV in Syrian hamsters, which are
permissive for HAdV replication, and in a humanized mouse model
have provided some insight. Mouse adenoviruses have also been used
to study adenovirus pathogenesis using a murine model.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

HAdVs cause a variety of common clinical syndromes in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. These syndromes are
difficult to reliably distinguish from similar illnesses caused by other
pathogens, such as respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, human rhinovirus, rotavirus, group A Streptococcus, and other
common viral and bacterial pathogens.

Acute Respiratory Disease

Respiratory tract infections are common manifestations of HAdV
infections in children and adults. HAdVs cause an estimated 5–10%
of all childhood respiratory diseases. Primary infections in infants may
manifest as bronchiolitis or pneumonia. HAdV pneumonia may present with features more typical of bacterial disease (lobar infiltrates,
high fever, parapneumonic effusions). HAdV-­14 has emerged as a significant cause of severe acute respiratory disease in military and civilian populations, in some cases leading to hospitalization and death.
Pharyngitis caused by HAdV infection typically includes symptoms of
coryza, sore throat, and fever. The virus can be identified in 15–20% of
children with isolated pharyngitis, mostly in preschool children and
infants.

Ocular Infections

The common follicular conjunctivitis caused by HAdV infection is self-­
limiting and requires no specific treatment. A more severe form called
epidemic keratoconjunctivitis involves the cornea and conjunctiva.
Pharyngoconjunctival fever is a distinct syndrome that includes a
high temperature, pharyngitis, nonpurulent conjunctivitis, and preauricular and cervical lymphadenopathy.

Gastrointestinal Infections

HAdV can be detected in the stools of 5–10% of children with acute
diarrhea. Most cases of acute diarrhea are self-­limiting, although severe
disease can occur. Enteric infection with HAdV is often asymptomatic,
and shedding of virus after acute infection can be prolonged, so the
causative role in these episodes is frequently uncertain. HAdV infection may also cause mesenteric adenitis.

Hemorrhagic Cystitis

Hemorrhagic cystitis consists of a sudden onset of hematuria, dysuria,
frequency, and urgency with negative urine bacterial culture results.
Urinalysis may show sterile pyuria in addition to hematuria. This illness occurs more frequently in young males and typically resolves on
its own in 1-­2 weeks.

Other Complications

Less frequently, HAdVs are associated with myocarditis, hepatitis, or
meningoencephalitis in immunocompetent individuals.

Adenoviruses in Immunocompromised Patients

Immunocompromised persons, particularly recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplants (HSCTs) and solid organ transplants, are at
high risk for severe and fatal disease caused by HAdV. These patients
may experience primary HAdV infection, but reactivation of persistent
virus in a transplant recipient or transmission of virus from a donor
organ may also occur. Organ failure as a consequence of pneumonia,
hepatitis, gastroenteritis, and/or disseminated infection can occur in
these immunocompromised patients. HAdV infection in HSCT recipients commonly manifests as pulmonary or disseminated disease and
is most likely to occur in the first 100 days after transplantation. Hemorrhagic cystitis caused by HAdV can be severe in HSCT recipients.
Infections caused by HAdV in solid organ transplant recipients usually involve the transplanted organ. Immunocompromised children
are at greater risk than immunocompromised adults for complicated
HAdV infection, presumably because of a lack of preexisting immunity. Additional risk factors include T-­cell–depleted grafts, high-­level
immunosuppression, and the presence of graft-­versus-­host disease.
Some experts advocate a preemptive screening approach to detect and
treat HAdV infection early in immunocompromised patients, with the
intent to prevent dissemination and severe illness in this vulnerable
population, though no highly effective antiviral therapy exists.

DIAGNOSIS

HAdV may be suspected as the etiology of an illness on the basis of
epidemiologic or clinical features, but neither of these categories is specific enough to firmly establish the diagnosis. The frequency of asymptomatic shedding of HAdV makes assigning causality to this pathogen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 310 u Rhinoviruses

2035

Table 309.1  Examples of Human Adenovirus Types and Common Manifestations of Disease
SPECIES

TYPE

COMMON DISEASE ASSOCIATIONS

A

12, 18, 31, 61

Gastroenteritis

B

3, 7, 11, 14, 16, 21, 34, 35, 50, 55, 66

Pharyngitis, pharyngoconjunctival fever, acute respiratory disease,
pneumonia, hemorrhagic cystitis

C

1, 2, 5, 6, 57

Pharyngitis

D

8-­10, 13, 15, 17, 19, 20, 22-­30, 32, 33, 36-­39, 42-­49,
51, 53, 54, 56, 58-­60, 63-­67, 69, 70-­75

Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis

E

4

Acute respiratory disease

F

40, 41

Gastroenteritis

G

52

Gastroenteritis

difficult. Although most HAdV serotypes grow well in culture, culture-­
based identification requires several days and thus is not helpful for
early identification, and most clinical microbiology laboratories no
longer perform viral cultures on a routine basis. Cells from respiratory or ocular specimens can be tested using immunofluorescent staining with antibodies to detect HAdV protein. Commercially available
enzyme-­linked immunoassays can be used to rapidly detect HAdV in
patient specimens, usually in stool. Multiplex molecular assays capable
of identifying HAdV, in addition to other pathogens, are increasingly
available and useful for rapid diagnosis. Specific diagnosis of HAdV
infections are most clinically useful in immunocompromised hosts.
In these patients, measurement of the HAdV genome copy number
(viral load) using quantitative real-­time polymerase chain reaction can
facilitate diagnosis, and repeated measurements can aid in assessing
a patient’s response to treatment. Serology is generally useful only in
epidemiologic investigations.

PREVENTION

Environmental and fomite transmission of HAdV occurs readily;
therefore simple measures such as handwashing and cleaning are likely
to reduce spread. Live-­attenuated HAdV-­4 and HAdV-­7 vaccines were
used effectively in the U.S. military from the 1970s until 1999. Cessation of their use led to widespread outbreaks in barracks, and those
vaccines were subsequently reintroduced into military use. However,
no HAdV-­specific vaccines are available for routine use. HAdVs are
highly immunogenic and have been used as gene therapy vectors
and vaccine vectors for other pathogens, including malaria, HIV, and
SARS-­CoV-­2.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

COMPLICATIONS

HAdV pneumonia can lead to respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, especially in immunocompromised patients. Secondary
bacterial pneumonia does not appear to be as common after HAdV
infection as it is after influenza infection, but data that address this
issue are limited. Severe HAdV pneumonia has been linked to chronic
lung disease and bronchiolitis obliterans in a minority of cases. Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis is a vision-­
threatening form of HAdV
infection. Nearly any form of HAdV infection can be fatal in an HSCT
or solid organ transplant recipient. Refractory severe anemia requiring
repeated blood transfusions can develop in HSCT recipients with hemorrhagic cystitis. Mortality rates of up to 60–80% have been reported in
transplant recipients with disseminated HAdV or HAdV pneumonia.

TREATMENT

Supportive care is the mainstay of treatment for HAdV infections.
Patients with severe HAdV conjunctivitis should be referred for ophthalmologic consultation. The nucleoside analog cidofovir has in vitro
activity against most HAdV serotypes. Cidofovir is used topically to
treat epidemic keratoconjunctivitis, often in conjunction with topical
steroids or other immunosuppressive agents to limit the inflammatory
component of the disease process. Cidofovir may be used intravenously
for HAdV infections in immunocompromised patients. Cidofovir is
highly nephrotoxic, but prehydration, concomitant administration of
probenecid, and weekly dosing may reduce nephrotoxicity. Clinical
studies suggest some benefit from cidofovir, but there are no prospective randomized controlled trials of cidofovir for HAdV infection. In
addition, no formal guidelines or recommendations for treatment exist.
The cidofovir derivative brincidofovir is better tolerated than cidofovir
and has been evaluated as treatment of HAdV disease in immunocompromised patients, but it is not currently available for clinical use.
Adoptive immunotherapy involving the infusion of HAdV-­specific T
cells may also provide some benefit for immunocompromised patients
with life-­threatening HAdV infections.

Chapter 310

Rhinoviruses
Katherine M. Richardson and
Jennifer E. Schuster
Human rhinoviruses (HRVs) are the most frequent cause of the common cold in both adults and children. Although HRVs were once
thought to cause only the common cold, it is now known that they are
also associated with lower respiratory infections in adults and children.
Many HRVs do not grow in culture. Recent studies using molecular
diagnostic tools such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have
revealed that HRVs are leading causes of both mild and serious respiratory illnesses in children.

ETIOLOGY

HRVs are members of the Picornaviridae family (“pico” = small; “rna”
= RNA genome). Traditional methods of virus typing using immune
antiserum have identified approximately 100 serotypes, classified
into HRVA, HRVB, and, recently, HRVC species based on the genetic
sequence similarity. HRVCs can be detected by reverse transcriptase
PCR but have been cultured only using highly specialized methods.
Virus gene sequence analysis demonstrates that HRVCs are a genetically distinct and diverse species. The increased proportions of HRV
reported in recent PCR-­based studies are likely the result of detection
of these previously unknown HRVC viruses in addition to improved
detection of known HRVA and HRVB strains.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2036 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
EPIDEMIOLOGY

Rhinoviruses are distributed worldwide. There is no consistent correlation between serotypes and epidemiologic or clinical characteristics.
Several studies suggest that HRVCs may be more strongly associated
with lower respiratory infection and asthma, and HRVC has been
associated with children admitted to intensive care units with asthma
exacerbations, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia. However, more studies
are needed to determine severity compared with other HRVs. Multiple
types circulate in a community simultaneously, and HRV strains may
be isolated during consecutive epidemic seasons, suggesting persistence in a community over an extended period. In temperate climates,
the incidence of HRV infection peaks in the fall, with another peak in
the spring, but HRV infections occur year-­round. HRVC appears to
circulate with seasonal variation, exchanging dominance with HRVA.
HRVs are the major infectious trigger for asthma among young children, and numerous studies have described a sharp increase in asthma
attacks in this age-­group when school opens in the fall. The peak HRV
incidence in the tropics occurs during the rainy season, from June to
October.
HRVs are present in high concentrations in nasal secretions and
can be detected in the lower airways. HRV particles are nonenveloped
and quite hardy, persisting for hours to days in secretions on hands
or other surfaces such as telephones, light switches, doorknobs, and
stethoscopes. Sneezing and coughing are inefficient methods of transfer. Transmission occurs when infected secretions carried on contaminated fingers are rubbed onto the nasal or conjunctival mucosa. HRVs
are present in aerosols produced by talking, coughing, and sneezing.
Children are the most important reservoir of these viruses.

PATHOGENESIS

The majority of HRVs infect respiratory epithelial cells via intercellular adhesion molecule-­1, but some HRV strains utilize the low-­density
lipoprotein receptor. The receptor for HRVC is cadherin-­related family member 3 (CDHR3); however, distinct genetic alleles encoding this
protein confer different susceptibility to HRVC infection. Infection
begins in the nasopharynx and spreads to the nasal mucosa and, in
some cases, to bronchial epithelial cells in the lower airways. There is
no direct cellular damage from the virus, and it is thought that many
of the pathogenic effects are produced by the host immune response.
Infected epithelial cells release a number of cytokines and chemokines,
which induce an influx of neutrophils to the upper airway. Both innate
and adaptive immune mechanisms are important in HRV pathogenesis and clearance. HRV-­specific nasal immunoglobulin (Ig) A can be
detected on day 3 after infection, followed by the production of serum
IgM and IgG after 7-­8 days. Neutralizing IgG to HRVs may prevent
or limit the severity of illness after reinfection. However, cross protection by antibodies to different HRV serotypes is limited in breadth and
duration, allowing recurrent infection. Both allergen exposure and
elevated IgE values predispose patients with asthma to more severe
respiratory symptoms in response to HRV infection. Abnormalities
in the host cellular response to HRV infection that result in impaired
apoptosis and increased viral replication may be responsible for the
severe and prolonged symptoms in individuals with asthma.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most HRV infections produce clinical symptoms, but many are asymptomatic. Symptomatic HRV infection induces a much more robust host
immune response in the blood than asymptomatic infection. After an
incubation period of 1-­4 days, typical symptoms of sneezing, nasal
congestion, rhinorrhea, and sore throat develop. Cough and hoarseness are present in one third of cases. Fever is less common with HRV
than with other common respiratory viruses, including influenza virus,
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and human metapneumovirus.
However, HRV was detected in 35% of febrile infants less than 90 days
of age. Symptoms are frequently more severe and last longer in children, with 70% of children compared with 20% of adults still reporting
symptoms by day 10. Virus can be shed for as long as 3 weeks. When

HRV is detected >30 days from the initial illness, it is more likely to
be a genotypically different strain of HRV. HRVA and HRVC are more
commonly associated with symptomatic HRV infection compared
with HRVB.
HRVs are the most prevalent agents associated with acute wheezing, otitis media, and hospitalization for respiratory illness in children
and are an important cause of severe pneumonia and exacerbation
of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in adults. HRV-­
associated hospitalizations are more frequent in young infants than in
older children and in children with a history of wheezing or asthma.
Children hospitalized with HRV bronchiolitis are more likely to be
older and have a history of wheezing than children with bronchiolitis
caused by RSV. HRV infection in immunocompromised hosts may be
life threatening. Certain strains or species of HRV, namely HRVC, may
be more pathogenic than others.

DIAGNOSIS

Culturing HRVs is labor intensive and of relatively low yield. Sensitive
and specific diagnostic methods based on reverse transcriptase PCR
are commercially available. However, because commercially available
reverse transcriptase PCR tests do not identify the HRV types, it can be
difficult to distinguish prolonged shedding from newly acquired infection. An important caveat of HRV detection is the fact that HRV infection can be asymptomatic, and thus the presence of the virus does not
prove causality in all cases. Serology is impractical because of the great
number of HRV serotypes. A presumptive clinical diagnosis based on
symptoms and seasonality is not specific, because many other viruses
cause similar clinical illnesses. Rapid detection techniques for HRV
might lessen the use of unnecessary antibiotics or procedures.

COMPLICATIONS

Possible complications of HRV infection include sinusitis, otitis media,
asthma exacerbation, bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and, rarely, death.
HRV-­associated wheezing during infancy is a significant risk factor for
the development of childhood asthma. In particular, this association
has been noted with HRVA and HRVC, which have been associated
with greater risk for recurrence of both wheezing and new infection
with HRV. This effect appears to remain until adulthood, but the
mechanisms have not been elucidated. One large study determined
that genetic variants at the 17q21 locus were associated with asthma in
children who had experienced HRV wheezing illnesses during infancy.
A prospective study on a preterm cohort showed that a single nucleotide polymorphism on the gene coding for the vitamin D receptor was
associated with development of lower respiratory infection with HRV.
Further studies are required to determine the likely multiple genetic
and environmental factors that contribute to HRV-­related asthma.

TREATMENT

Supportive care is the mainstay of HRV treatment. The symptoms of
HRV infection are commonly treated with analgesics, decongestants,
antihistamines, or antitussives. Data are limited on the effectiveness of
such nonprescription cold medications for children. If bacterial superinfections are highly suspected or diagnosed, antibiotics may be appropriate. Antibiotics are not indicated for uncomplicated viral upper
respiratory infection. There are no licensed antivirals.

PREVENTION

Good handwashing remains the mainstay of the prevention of HRV
infection and should be reinforced frequently, especially in young
children, the predominant “vectors” for disease. Vaccines have not
been successfully developed because of the numerous HRV serotypes and limited cross protection between serotypes. However,
a polyvalent inactivated vaccine showed promise in a nonhuman
primate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 311 u Coronaviruses

Chapter 311

Coronaviruses
Samuel R. Dominguez and Roberta L. DeBiasi
Coronaviruses are increasingly recognized as important human
pathogens. Currently there are seven known coronaviruses that
have been found to infect humans. Four coronaviruses are endemic
in humans: human coronaviruses (HCoVs) 229E, OC43, NL63, and
HKU1. These CoVs cause up to 15% of common colds and have
been implicated in more serious diseases, including croup, asthma
exacerbations, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia. Evidence also suggests that coronaviruses may cause enteritis and might also be
agents of meningitis or encephalitis. The fifth identified HCoV,
SARS-­associated coronavirus (SARS-­C oV), the etiologic agent of
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), emerged in 2003 and
caused a world-­wide pandemic resulting in over 8,000 cases with an
estimated case fatality rate of 10% before circulation ceased because
of implementation of world-­wide public health measures. Similarly,
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-­C oV), the
sixth identified HCoV, first emerged in 2012 causing significant
respiratory distress with very high mortality rates. MERS-­C oV continues to cause local cases and outbreaks likely as a result of continued emergent events from its animal reservoir. Likely because of
their high mortality, lower transmissibility, and lack of asymptomatic or presymptomatic spread, neither SARS-­C oV nor MERS-­C oV
became endemic viruses.
In 2019 a seventh human coronavirus, SARS-­C oV-­2, emerged as
the etiologic agent of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19),
resulting in a multiyear and ongoing global pandemic with multiple waves of circulating variants and disease burden exceeding any
prior respiratory virus pandemic, including the 1918 influenza pandemic. The ultimate trajectory of SARS-­C oV-­2 global circulation
is unclear, but it is likely that this virus will evolve to become the
fifth endemic human coronavirus. The emergence of three distinct
human coronaviruses resulting in world-­wide pandemics in the
past 2 decades emphasizes the potential for coronaviruses to emerge
from animal hosts and become important human pathogens.

ETIOLOGY

Coronaviruses are enveloped viruses of medium to large size (80-­
220 nm) that possess the largest known single-­stranded positive-­
sense RNA genomes. These viruses encode the protein nsp14-­ExoN,
which is the first known RNA proofreading enzyme and is likely
responsible for the evolution of the large and complex coronavirus genome. Coronaviruses derive their name from the characteristic surface projections of the spike protein, giving a corona or
crownlike appearance on negative-­stain electron microscopy. The
human coronaviruses are all part of the order Nidovirales, suborder
Cornidovirineae, family Coronaviridae, and subfamily Orthocoronavirinae. The subfamily Orthocoronavirinae is further subdivided
into four genera based on genomic phylogenetic relationships. The
genus alphacoronavirus includes HCoV-­229E and HCoV-­NL63.
The remaining 5 HCoVs fall within the genus betacoronavirus.
HCoV-­O C43 and HCoV-­HKU1 are in the subgenus Embecovirus,
MERS-­C oV is in the subgenus Merbecovirus, and SARS-­C oV-­1 and
SARS-­C oV-­2 are in the subgenus Sarbecovirus (species severe acute
respiratory syndrome-­related coronavirus). Gammacoronaviruses
and deltacoronaviruses presently include exclusively nonhuman
pathogens.
Coronaviruses received international attention during the SARS
outbreak, which was responsible for more than 800 deaths in 30

2037

countries. SARS-­C oV, a novel coronavirus at the time of the epidemic, was found to be the causative agent of SARS. The detection
of SARS-­like coronaviruses in a live animal market in the Guangdong province in Southern China, along with serologic evidence of
exposure in food handlers in the same market, suggest that these
markets facilitated the spread of SARS-­C oV to humans from an
animal reservoir. Subsequent studies identified SARS-­like coronaviruses in fecal specimens from asymptomatic Chinese horseshoe
bats that are very closely related to SARS-­C oV and are capable of
infecting human cells. Thus SARS-­C oV likely originated in bats and
was transmitted to humans via an intermediary animal host such as
the palm civet.
Another novel coronavirus, MERS-­C oV, was first isolated from
a man with acute pneumonia and renal failure in Saudi Arabia. As
of late 2023, the World Health Organization (WHO) had recorded
2,605 confirmed cases of MERS in 27 countries, with 937 deaths
worldwide (∼36% mortality rate). MERS-­C oV differs from SARS in
that it seems to be less communicable, although human-­to-­human
transmission has been documented. MERS-­C oV uses dipeptidyl
peptidase 4 and carcinoembryonic antigen–like cell-­adhesion molecule 5 as its cellular receptor and co-­receptor, respectively, whereas
SARS-­
C oV and SARS-­
C oV-­
2 use the angiotensin-­
converting
enzyme-­2 receptor. With this receptor specificity, MERS-­C oV can
infect cells from several animal lineages, including human, pig,
and bat, suggesting the possibility of movement between multiple
species.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Endemic Coronaviruses

Seroprevalence studies have demonstrated that antibodies against
endemic coronaviruses 229E and OC43 increase rapidly during
early childhood, so that by adulthood 90–100% of persons are
seropositive. Although less information is available for HKU1 and
NL63, available studies demonstrate similar patterns of seroconversion to these viruses during early childhood. Seroprevalence studies
have also suggested that prevalence rates may differ by geographic
region. Although some degree of strain-­specific protection may be
afforded by recent infection, reinfections are common and occur
despite the presence of strain-­specific antibodies. Attack rates are
similar in different age-­groups. Although infections occur throughout the year, there is a peak during the winter and early spring for
each of these HCoVs. In the United States, outbreaks of OC43 and
229E have occurred in 2-­to 3-­year alternating cycles. Independent
studies of viral etiologies of upper and lower respiratory infections
during the same period, but from different countries, have confirmed that all known HCoVs have a worldwide distribution. Studies using both viral culture and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
multiplex assays demonstrate that coronaviruses often appear in co-­
infections with other respiratory viruses. Volunteer studies demonstrated that OC43 and 229E are transmitted predominantly through
the respiratory route. Droplet spread appears to be most important,
although aerosol transmission may also occur.

SARS-­CoV

There have been no identified natural or laboratory-­acquired cases
of SARS-­C oV since 2004, but the mechanisms of introduction,
spread, and disease remain important for potential animal-­
to-­
human transmission and disease. The primary mode of SARS-­C oV
transmission occurred through direct or indirect contact of mucous
membranes with infectious droplets or fomites. Aerosol transmission was less common, occurring primarily in the setting of
endotracheal intubation, bronchoscopy, or treatment with aerosolized medications. Fecal-­oral transmission did not appear to be an
efficient mode of transmission but may have occurred because of
the profuse diarrhea observed in some patients. The seasonality of
SARS-­C oV remains unknown. SARS-­C oV is not highly infectious,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2038 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
with generally only two to four secondary cases resulting from a
single infected adult. During the SARS epidemic, a small number
of infected individuals, “superspreaders,” transmitted infection
to a much larger number of persons, but the mechanism for this
high degree of spread remains unknown. In contrast, persons with
mild disease, such as children younger than 12 years of age, rarely
transmitted the infection to others. Infectivity correlated with disease stage; transmission occurred almost exclusively during symptomatic disease. During the 2003 outbreak, most individuals with
SARS-­C oV infection were hospitalized within 3-­4 days of symptom
onset. Consequently, most subsequent infections occurred within
hospitals and involved either healthcare workers or other hospitalized patients.

MERS-­CoV

As of late 2023, the WHO had recorded cases of MERS-­CoV in 27
countries, all of which were linked to exposures in the Arabian Peninsula (∼80% in Saudi Arabia). Though the route of transmission between
animals and humans is not fully understood, MERS-­CoV is proposed
to have repeatedly entered the human population through contact
with respiratory secretions of dromedary camels and possibly with raw
camel products (e.g., unpasteurized milk). Antibodies to MERS-­CoV
are found in dromedaries throughout the Middle East, and strains
identical to human MERS-­CoV isolates have been found in camels in
Egypt, Oman, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. These strains do not appear to
be highly pathogenic or virulent in camels and have likely circulated
within dromedaries for >30 years. Despite well-­documented zoonotic
transmission, most reported cases occur through linked human-­to-­
human transmission in healthcare settings, including outbreaks in Jordan, South Korea, and Saudi Arabia in 2015 and 2016. Risk factors for
nosocomial MERS-­CoV outbreaks include overcrowded emergency
departments, delayed diagnosis or isolation, and poor infection control
practices. Transmission most likely occurs through respiratory droplets and is thus a greater risk during aerosol-­generating procedures.
Outside of healthcare settings, human-­to-­human transmission has
been infrequently documented and is primarily associated with close
contact within households.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Endemic Coronaviruses: Respiratory Manifestations

Even though up to 50% of respiratory tract infections with OC43
and 229E are asymptomatic, coronaviruses are still responsible for
up to 15% of common colds and can cause fatal disease. Cold symptoms caused by HCoVs are indistinguishable from those caused by
rhinoviruses and other respiratory viruses. The average incubation
period is 2-­4 days, with symptoms typically lasting 4-­7 days. Rhinorrhea, cough, sore throat, malaise, and headache are the most
common symptoms. Fever occurs in up to 60% of cases. Coronavirus NL63 is a cause of croup in children younger than 3 years of
age. Coronavirus infections are linked to episodes of wheezing in
asthmatic children, albeit at a lower frequency and severity than
observed with rhinovirus and respiratory syncytial virus infections.
Lower respiratory tract infections, including bronchiolitis and
pneumonia, are also reported in immunocompetent and immunocompromised children and adults. As with respiratory syncytial
virus or rhinovirus, coronavirus detection in upper respiratory
infections is frequently associated with acute otitis media and can
be isolated from middle ear fluid.

Endemic Coronaviruses: Nonrespiratory
Manifestations

There is prior evidence to support a role for coronaviruses in
human gastrointestinal disease, particularly in young children.
Coronavirus-­like particles have been detected by electron microscopy in the stools of infants with nonbacterial gastroenteritis. In

addition, several outbreaks in neonatal intensive care units (ICUs)
of gastrointestinal disease characterized by diarrhea, bloody stools,
abdominal distention, bilious gastric aspirates, and classic necrotizing enterocolitis have also been associated with the presence of
coronavirus-­like particles in stools. In older children and adults,
coronavirus-­like viruses have been observed with similar frequency
in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, making it difficult
to discern if they are pathogenic in the gastrointestinal tract. Additionally, more recent studies using PCR assays of stool from children
with gastroenteritis have infrequently found HCoVs. Coronaviruses
are well-­known causes of neurologic disease in animals, including
demyelinating encephalitis, but their role in causing human neurologic disease remains unclear. Several studies have found an association of HCoVs, particularly HCoV-­HKU1, with febrile seizures
in young children. HCoVs have been detected by culture, in situ
hybridization, and reverse-­transcriptase PCR (RT-­PCR) in brain
tissue from a few patients with multiple sclerosis. HCoV-­O C43 has
been detected by RT-­PCR in the spinal fluid, nasopharynx, or brain
biopsy specimens of two children with acute encephalomyelitis.
However, coronavirus RNA has also been recovered from the spinal
fluid and brain tissue of adults without neurologic disease.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome–Associated
Coronavirus

During the 2002–2003 global outbreak of SARS, the incubation
period for SARS-­C oV ranged from 1-­14 days, with a median of 4-­6
days. SARS-­C oV infections in teenagers and adults included a viral
replication phase and an immunologic phase. During the viral replication phase, there was a progressive increase in viral load that
reached its peak during the second week of illness. The appearance
of specific antibodies coincided with peak viral replication. Clinical symptoms were nonspecific, most commonly consisting of fever,
cough, malaise, coryza, chills or rigors, headache, and myalgia. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhea and nausea or vomiting,
occurred in up to one third of cases. The clinical deterioration that
typified the second and third week of illness was characterized by
a decline in the viral load and evidence of tissue injury, likely from
cytokine-­mediated immunity.
Seroepidemiologic studies suggest that asymptomatic SARS-­
CoV infections were uncommon. The clinical course of SARS-­C oV
infection varied with age. Adults were most severely affected, with
initial onset of fever, cough, chills, myalgia, malaise, and headache.
Following an initial improvement at the end of the first week, fever
recurred, and respiratory distress developed, with dyspnea, hypoxemia, and diarrhea. These symptoms progressed in 20% of patients
to acute respiratory distress syndrome and respiratory failure.
Adolescents manifested increasing severity in direct correlation to
increasing age; respiratory distress and hypoxemia were observed in
10–20% of patients, one third of whom required ventilator support.
Acute renal failure with histologic acute tubular necrosis was present in 6.9% of patients overall, likely a result of hypoxic kidney damage. Of SARS patients, 28.8% had abnormal urinalysis, with viral
genome detectable by quantitative RT-­PCR. The case fatality rate
from SARS-­C oV infection during the 2003 outbreak was 10–17%.
No pediatric deaths were reported. The estimated case fatality rate
according to age varied from <1% for those younger than 20 years
of age to >50% for those older than 65 years of age.
In contrast, children younger than 12 years of age had a relatively
mild nonspecific illness, with only a minority experiencing significant
lower respiratory tract disease and illness typically lasting less than
5 days. Some young children had no respiratory symptoms. Coryza
was more common in children younger than 12 years of age, whereas
systemic symptoms were seen more often in teenagers. There were
no deaths or cases of acute respiratory distress syndrome in children
younger than 12 years of age from SARS-­CoV infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 311 u Coronaviruses
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus

The incubation period of MERS-­C oV is 2-­14 days. The syndrome
usually presents with nonspecific clinical features typical of acute
febrile respiratory illnesses, including low-­grade fever, rhinorrhea,
sore throat, and myalgia. In mildly symptomatic cases, radiographic
findings are typically normal. Severe disease is characterized by the
acute respiratory distress syndrome with multilobular airspace disease, ground-­glass opacities, and occasional pleural effusions on
radiography. The median time between hospitalization and ICU
transfer for critical illness is 2 days. Risk factors for severe disease
include age >50 years and comorbidities such as obesity, diabetes,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), end-­stage renal
disease, cancer, and immunosuppression. Specific host genetic risk
factors have not been identified. Variation in clinical outcomes does
not appear to be explained by viral strain-­specific sequence variability. As with SARS, extrapulmonary manifestations are common
in severe MERS disease. Gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea occur in one third of patients, and acute
kidney injury has been documented in half of critically ill patients.
Encephalitis-­like neurologic manifestations have been observed in
three cases. Laboratory analyses typically detect leukopenia and
lymphopenia, with occasional thrombocytopenia, anemia, and
aminotransferase elevations. The case fatality rate remains at 35%,
though the true incidence of MERS-­C oV infection is likely underestimated by existing data. Most patients have been adults, although
children as young as 9 months of age have been infected. It is not
known whether children are less susceptible to MERS-­C oV or present with a different clinical picture.

DIAGNOSIS

With the advent of commercially available, syndromic, multiplex
PCR respiratory panels, respiratory infections due to the four
endemic HCoVs are now easily diagnosed and widely available
in most clinical settings. These panels have rapid turnaround
times, excellent sensitivity and specificity, and most commonly
use upper respiratory tract specimens. Virus culture of primary
clinical specimens remains a challenge for HCoVs HKU1, OC43,
229E, and NL63, even though the epidemic coronaviruses can
successfully be grown in culture from respiratory samples. Serodiagnosis with complement fixation, neutralization, hemagglutination inhibition, enzyme immunoassay, and Western blots have
been used in the research setting. The diagnosis of SARS-­C oV
infection can be confirmed by serologic testing, detection of viral
RNA using RT-­PCR, or isolation of the virus in cell culture. Even
though the serology for SARS-­C oV has a sensitivity and specificity approaching 100%, antibodies are not detectable until 10 days
after the onset of symptoms, and immunoglobulin (Ig) G seroconversion may be delayed for up to 4 weeks. The diagnosis of MERS-­
CoV should be guided by clinical features and an epidemiologic
link. The mainstay for laboratory confirmation of MERS-­C oV
infection is real-­time RT-­PCR. The best diagnostic sensitivity is
achieved from lower respiratory tract samples collected within the
first week of infection, though MERS-­C oV RNA can be detected
in upper respiratory and blood samples. Alternatively, seroconversion can be documented by screening enzyme-­l inked immunosorbent assays followed by immunofluorescence microscopy. For
all known endemic and emerging HCoVs, respiratory specimens
(nasopharyngeal swabs or aspirates) are most likely to be positive,
but in a setting of a possible novel coronavirus, saliva, serum, or
stool may also be positive.

TREATMENT AND PREVENTION

Several antiviral agents are available for clinical use against coronaviruses targeting the conserved coronavirus protease and polymerase. Ribavirin was extensively used during the 2003 SARS-­C oV
outbreak but is of questionable benefit given its poor in vitro activity against SARS-­C oV at clinically relevant concentrations.

2039

Challenges for the development of effective vaccines targeted
against OC43, 229E, HKU1, and NL63 include the fact that infections are rarely life-­threatening and reinfection is the rule, even in
the presence of natural immunity from previous infections. The
durability of immunity to SARS-­C oV and MERS-­C oV is poorly
understood. Nevertheless, effective vaccines for SARS-­C oV and
MERS-­C oV are highly desirable but not yet available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

311.1 COVID-­19
Samuel Dominguez and Roberta L. DeBiasi
New variants may evolve: recommendations for treatment and prevention may change. See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for
updates.
SARS-­C oV-­2 first emerged in Wuhan China in December 2019
as the etiologic agent of a severe respiratory illness termed COVID­19. Despite measures to contain transmission, SARS-­C oV-­2 rapidly
spread globally, resulting in declaration of a worldwide pandemic
by March 2020. As of late 2023, over 770 million cases and nearly 7
million deaths have occurred globally due to SARS-­C oV-­2. Ongoing transmission has led to the emergence of sequential variants
(e.g., Delta, Omicron, BA.2, BA.5, BQ, XBB1.5 variants) with progressively unique gene variants in the receptor binding domain of
the spike protein, conferring increased transmissibility compared
to the parent strain (Alpha variant). Gene changes in some variants
have been associated with reduced susceptibility to monoclonal
antibody therapeutics and/or reduced neutralization by convalescent and vaccine-­induced antibodies, promoting immune escape
and breakthrough infections in previously infected and/or immunized individuals and ongoing community transmission.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

SARS-­C oV-­2 transmission occurs from human to human primarily
by respiratory droplet, as well as by aerosol transmission, with the
highest rates of transmission occurring from 2 days prior to 2-­3
days after symptom onset. Transmission is quite common among
asymptomatic or presymptomatic infected patients. Close contact
(conversation distance) increases the risk; normal conversation as
well as coughing, sneezing, singing, or just breathing are mechanisms. Immunocompromised hosts may shed infectious virus for
longer periods of time, up to 21 days or more after symptom onset.
Spread within households and close communal settings is common; transmission has been confirmed from infants, toddlers, and
school-­age children (who may have very high viral loads in the
anterior nares even with asymptomatic or mild infection) and from
adolescents to adult household members as well as from adults to
children. A metanalysis of household secondary transmission has
identified household secondary attack rates of nearly 17%, which
exceeds that for SARS-­C oV (7.5%) and MERS-­C oV (4.7%). Secondary attack rates within households are increased from symptomatic compared to asymptomatic index cases, in adults compared to
children, in spouses compared to other household members, and in
households with three or more contacts. Throughout the pandemic,
it has been noted that transmission is increased in unvaccinated
compared to vaccinated individuals.
Young children were initially reported to be less likely to be
infected or more likely to be asymptomatic with SARS CoV-­2
(alpha, delta strains) than adults and unlikely to develop severe
disease. However, despite overall lower rates of hospitalization and
death, children are efficiently infected and can develop severe disease (usually older children and adolescents) that results in hospitalization, ICU admission, and occasional death (mortality <0.5%);
the majority of young children experience mild to moderate illness.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2040 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Percentage of SARS-CoV-2 variants

Percentage of total lineages

100

75

50

25

0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

A

Jun

Jul
2022

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan Feb

Mar
2023

Apr

May

Dec

Jan Feb

Mar
2023

Apr

May

Month and year of specimen collection
Estimated number of variant-attributed COVID-19 cases
5

No. of cases (millions)

0.8
4
0.6
3

0.4

2

0.2

1

Mar 19, 2022

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

B

Jun

Jul
2022

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Month and year of specimen collection
B.1.617.2
B.1.1.529
BA.1.1
BA.2
BA.2.12.1
BA.2.75

BA.2.75.2
BA.4
BA.4.6
BA.5
CH.1.1
BN.1

BF.7
BF.11
BA.5.2.6
BQ.1
BQ.1.1
XBB

XBB.1.5
XBB.1.5.1
XBB.1.9.1
XBB.1.9.2
FD.2
XBB.1.16

XBB.2.3
Other

Fig. 311.1 National weekly proportion estimates* of SARS-­CoV-­2 variants† (A) and estimated number of variant-attributed cases‡ (B) United

States, January 2, 2022–May 13, 2023. *Sequences are reported to CDC through NS3, contract laboratories, public health laboratories, and other
U.S. institutions. Variant proportion estimation methods use a complex survey design and statistical weights to account for the probability that a
specimen is sequenced. †Lineages reaching a prevalence of 1≥% with spike protein substitutions of potential therapeutic relevance and separated
out on the COVID Data Tracker website. ‡Estimated numbers of COVID-19 cases attributable to variants were calculated by multiplying weekly
numbers of reported positive nucleic acid amplification tests from CELR with estimated variant proportions. (From Ma KC, Shirk P, Lambrou AS, et al:
Genomic surveillance for SARS-CoV-2 variants: circulation of omicron lineages—United States, January 2002–May 2023. MMWR 2023;72,:651–656.
Fig. 1, p. 653.)

As of spring 2023, over 15 million laboratory-­confirmed infections
and nearly 40,000 hospitalizations have occurred cumulatively in
U.S. children ≤18 years of age, representing ∼13% of overall infections and up to 4.5% of hospitalizations in the United States. Young
children under 5 years of age have made up a relatively increased
proportion of cases and hospitalizations during later stages of the
pandemic (late variants) presenting more with upper respiratory
infection, croup, or bronchiolitis (Fig. 311.1). Milder illness may
be due to less virulent variants or prior immunity from vaccination
or infection; morbidity and mortality have remained low compared

to adults, despite the increased transmissibility of more recent
variants.
Early in the pandemic, a post-­infectious hyperinflammatory complication of SARS-­CoV-­2 infection termed multisystem inflammatory
syndrome of children (MIS-­C; also referred to as pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with COVID-19,
PIMS-TS) was recognized. MIS-­C is associated with higher acuity in
older children and initially was associated with higher rates of mortality due to hemodynamic instability, myocardial dysfunction, and
cardiovascular collapse. With better recognition of this syndrome, key

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 311 u Coronaviruses

2041

Table 311.1  Case Definition for Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-­C)
Any illness in a person < 21 years that meets:
• The clinical AND the laboratory criteria (Confirmed), OR
• The clinical criteria AND epidemiologic linkage criteria (Probable), OR
• The vital records criteria (Suspect)
CLINICAL CRITERIA
An illness characterized by all of the
following, in the absence of a more
likely alternative diagnosis*
• Subjective or documented fever
(temperature ≥38.0°C)
• Clinical severity requiring
hospitalization or resulting in death
• Evidence of systemic inflammation
indicated by C-­reactive protein ≥3.0
mg/dL (30 mg/L)
• New-­onset manifestations in at least
two of the following categories:
1.	
Cardiac involvement indicated by:
• Left ventricular ejection fraction
<55% OR
• Coronary artery dilatation,
aneurysm, or ectasia, OR
• Troponin elevated above laboratory
normal range, or indicated as
elevated in a clinical note
2.	
Mucocutaneous involvement
indicated by:
• Rash, OR
• Inflammation of the oral mucosa
(e.g., mucosal erythema or swelling,
drying or fissuring of the lips,
strawberry tongue), OR
• Conjunctivitis or conjunctival
injection (redness of the eyes), OR
• Extremity findings (e.g., erythema
[redness] or edema [swelling] of the
hands or feet)
3.	
Shock§
4.	
Gastrointestinal involvement
indicated by:
• Abdominal pain, OR
• Vomiting, OR
• Diarrhea
5.	
Hematologic involvement indicated
by:
• Platelet count <150,000 cells/μL OR
• Absolute lymphocyte count (ALC)
<1,000 cells/μL

LABORATORY CRITERIA FOR
SARS-­COV-­2 INFECTION

EPIDEMIOLOGIC
LINKAGE CRITERIA

• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2 RNA in
a clinical specimen† up to 60 days
before or during hospitalization, or
in a postmortem specimen using a
diagnostic molecular amplification
test (e.g., polymerase chain reaction
[PCR]), OR
• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2– specific
antigen in a clinical specimen†
up to 60 days before or during
hospitalization, or in a postmortem
specimen, OR
• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2–specific
antibodies|| in serum, plasma,
or whole blood associated with
current illness resulting in or during
hospitalization

Close contact‡ with a

confirmed or probable
case of COVID-­19
disease in the 60 days
before hospitalization

VITAL RECORDS CRITERIA
A person whose death
certificate lists MIS-­C or
multisystem inflammatory
syndrome as an underlying
cause of death or a
significant condition
contributing to death

*If documented by the clinical treatment team, a final diagnosis of Kawasaki Disease should be considered an alternative diagnosis. These cases should not be reported to national
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) surveillance.
†Positive molecular or antigen results from self-­administered testing using over-­the-­counter test kits meet laboratory criteria.
‡Includes a positive serology test regardless of COVID-­19 vaccination status. Detection of anti-­nucleocapsid antibody is indicative of SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, and antispike protein

antibody may be induced either by COVID-­19 vaccination or by SARS-­CoV-­2 infection.
§Clinician documentation of shock meets this criterion.
||Close contact is generally defined as being within 6 feet for at least 15 min (cumulative over a 24-­hr period). However, it depends on the exposure level and setting; for example, in

the setting of an aerosol-­generating procedure in healthcare settings without proper personal protective equipment (PPE), this may be defined as any duration.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Information for healthcare providers about multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C). https://www.cdc.gov/mis/mis-­
c/hcp/index.html

discriminatory diagnostic criteria, and institution of rapid immunomodulatory treatment, outcomes have improved (Table 311.1; Table
208.4 in Chapter 208). As of late 2023, there have been >9500 cases and
79 deaths due to MIS-­C in the United States. The incidence of MIS-­C
has substantially decreased with the appearance of the late pandemic
viral variants.

Pathogenesis of COVID-­19

Severe disease in COVID-­19 likely results from both direct virologic
damage and subsequent immunopathology (Fig. 311.2). Postmortem exams have demonstrated COVID-­19 virus in almost all tissues

(lung, blood vessels, brain, gastrointestinal tract, heart, etc.). Substantial viral loads can be detected in the upper and lower respiratory
tracts, stool, and blood. Late progression to severe disease appears
independent of the quantity and timing of viremia; excessive host
immune responses likely play an important role in the progression
to lower respiratory disease, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and
MIS-­C (see Fig. 311.2). COVID-­19 is associated with massive elaboration of inflammatory cytokines and recruitment of inflammatory
cells. The roles for inflammatory cells are controversial, with cytotoxic T cells and macrophages implicated in both immune protection
and immunopathology.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2042 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Stage I
(early infection)

Stage II
(pulmonary phase)

Severity of illness

IIA

Stage III
(hyperinflammation phase)

IIB

Viral response phase

Host inflammatory response phase

Time course
Clinical
symptoms

Mild constitutional symptoms
Fever >99.6˚F
Dry cough

Shortness of breath without
(IIA) and with hypoxia (IIB)

ARDS
SIRS/shock
Cardiac failure

Clinical signs

Lymphopenia

Abnormal chest imaging
Transaminitis
Low-normal procalcitonin

Elevated inflammatory markers
(CRP, LDH, IL-6, D-dimer, ferritin)
Troponin, NT-proBNP elevation

Fig. 311.2 Staging of acute COVID-­19 infection. Classification of COVID-­19 disease states and potential therapeutic targets. The figure illustrates

three escalating phases of COVID-­19 disease progression, with associated signs, symptoms. ARDS, Acute respiratory distress syndrome; JAK, Janus
kinase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; NT-­proBNP, N-­terminal pro B-­type natriuretic peptide; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome. (Modified from Siddiqi HK, Mehra MR. COVID-­19 illness in native and immunosuppressed states: a clinical-­therapeutic staging proposal. J Heart Lung
Transpl. 2020;39[5]:405–407. Fig. 1.)

Table 311.2  Clinical Spectrum of SARS-­CoV-­2 Infection
• Asymptomatic or presymptomatic infection: Individuals who
test positive for SARS-­CoV-­2 using a virologic test (i.e., a nucleic
acid amplification test [NAAT] or an antigen test) but have no
symptoms consistent with COVID-­19.
• Mild illness: Individuals who have any of the various signs and
symptoms of COVID-­19 (e.g., fever, cough, sore throat, malaise,
headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of taste
and smell) but do not have shortness of breath, dyspnea, or
abnormal chest imaging.
• Moderate illness: Individuals who show evidence of lower
respiratory disease during clinical assessment or imaging and who
have an oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry (SpO2)
≥94% on room air at sea level.
• Severe illness: Individuals who have SpO2 <94% on room air at sea
level, a ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of
inspired oxygen (Pao2/Fio2) <300 mm Hg, a respiratory rate >30
breaths/min, or lung infiltrates >50%.
• Critical illness: Individuals who have respiratory failure, septic
shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction.
Spo2 is a key parameter for defining the listed illness categories.
However, pulse oximetry has important limitations. Clinicians
who use Spo2 when assessing a patient must be aware of those
limitations and conduct the assessment in the context of that
patient’s clinical status.

Underlying conditions associated with a higher risk of severe
COVID-­19 include asthma, cancer, cardiovascular disease, chronic
kidney disease, chronic liver disease, chronic lung disease,
diabetes, advanced or untreated HIV infection, obesity, pregnancy,
cigarette smoking, and being a recipient of immunosuppressive
therapy or a transplant.
The initial evaluation for patients may include chest imaging
(e.g., x-­ray, ultrasound or computed tomography scan) and an
electrocardiogram. Laboratory testing should include a complete
blood count with differential and a metabolic profile, including
liver and renal function tests. Although inflammatory markers
such as C-­reactive protein (CRP), D-­dimer, and ferritin are not
routinely measured as part of standard care, results from such
measurements may have prognostic value.
In children with COVID-­19, radiographic abnormalities are common
and, for the most part, should not be the only criteria used to
determine the severity of illness. The normal values for respiratory
rate also vary with age in children; therefore hypoxemia should be
the primary criterion used to define severe COVID-­19, especially
in younger children. In a small subset of children and young
adults, SARS-­CoV-­2 infection may be followed by the severe
inflammatory condition multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children (MIS-­C).

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Clinical spectrum of SARS-­CoV-­2 infection. https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/overview/clinical-­spectrum

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In both children and adults, the spectrum of clinical manifestations
of SARS-­C oV-2 infection ranges from asymptomatic infection to
mild, moderate, or severe, life-­threatening pulmonary and extrapulmonary manifestations (Table 311.2). Children are more likely
than adults to experience asymptomatic (up to 40%) or mild disease
(all variants) but can also experience moderate and severe illness,
including need for critical care support (MIS-­C or early variants in

older children or adolescents). Mild, moderate, or severe illness can
include nonspecific symptoms such as fever, headache, myalgias,
and fatigue (Table 311.3). Respiratory manifestations of COVID­19 in children are similar to those in adults and may include mild
upper respiratory tract symptoms such as rhinorrhea, congestion,
cough, and sore throat and lower respiratory symptoms such as
shortness of breath and chest pain. Patients with severe or critical
pulmonary and systemic features are at risk for venous thrombosis;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 311 u Coronaviruses
Table 311.3  Clinical Criteria for COVID-­19
In the absence of a more likely diagnosis:
• At least two of the following symptoms:
• Fever (measured or subjective)
• Chills
• Rigors
• Myalgia
• Headache
• Sore throat
• Nausea or vomiting
• Diarrhea
• Fatigue
• Congestion or runny nose
OR
• Any one of the following symptoms:
• Cough
• Shortness of breath
• Difficulty breathing
• New olfactory disorder
• New taste disorder
OR
• Severe respiratory illness with at least one of the following:
• Clinical or radiographic evidence of pneumonia
• Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
LABORATORY CRITERIA (SEE TABLE 311.10)
EPIDEMIOLOGIC LINKAGE
• One or more of the following exposures in the prior 14 days:
1.	Close contact* with a confirmed or probable case of COVID-­19
disease
2.	Member of a risk cohort as defined by public health authorities
during an outbreak
CASE CLASSIFICATION†
Suspect
• Meets supportive laboratory evidence‡ with no prior history of
being a confirmed or probable case.
Probable
• Meets clinical criteria AND epidemiologic linkage with no
confirmatory laboratory testing performed for SARS-­CoV-­2
• Meets presumptive laboratory evidence
• Meets vital records criteria with no confirmatory laboratory
evidence for SARS-­CoV-­2
Confirmed
• Meets confirmatory laboratory evidence
VITAL RECORDS CRITERIA
• A death certificate that lists COVID-­19 disease or SARS-­CoV-­2
as an underlying cause of death or a significant condition
contributing to death.
*Close contact is generally defined as being within 6 feet for at least 15 min. However,
it depends on the exposure level and setting; for example, in the setting of an
aerosol-­generating procedure in healthcare settings without proper personal
protective equipment (PPE), this may be defined as any duration. Data are insufficient
to precisely define the duration of exposure that constitutes prolonged exposure and
thus a close contact.
†The terms confirmatory, presumptive, and supportive are categorical labels used here
to standardize case classifications for public health surveillance. The terms should not
be used to interpret the utility or validity of any laboratory test methodology.
‡For suspect cases (positive serology only), jurisdictions may opt to place them in a
registry for other epidemiologic analyses or investigate to determine probable or
confirmed status.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­
19): 2020 interim case definition. Approved August 5, 2020. https://ndc.services.cdc.
gov/case-definitions/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/

prophylactic doses of enoxaparin are recommended. Chest imaging is essential in those with respiratory symptoms (Fig. 311.3).
Croup and bronchiolitis presentations have been observed in association with the Omicron and later variants. Anosmia and ageusia have been reported in 10–15% of cases in children as well as

2043

adults. Gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal pain (pseudo-­
appendicitis), diarrhea, and vomiting may be more prominent in
pediatric patients (COVID-­19 and/or MIS-­C) compared to adults
(Fig. 311.4). Although children with and without underlying medical conditions may be infected, up to 60% of hospitalized children
have one or more underlying medical conditions and up to 80% of
children with severe disease requiring critical care support have an
underlying condition.
Cutaneous lesions have often been reported in pediatric patients
with COVID-­19 and pediatric patients with MIS-­C (Table 311.4 and
Fig. 311.5).
SARS-­C oV-­2 is a neurotropic virus; 10–20% of pediatric patients
with COVID-­19 and/or MIS-­C have central or peripheral nervous
system manifestations during the acute illness. The most common
neurologic manifestations include seizures (including status epilepticus), headaches, behavioral changes, myalgias, and encephalopathy (∼30% with reversible splenial lesions). Other identifiable
syndromes include stroke, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
(ADEM) (∼50% are myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein [MOG]
antibody positive), Guillain-­Barré syndrome (also reported with
the vaccine), optic neuritis, psychosis, and cerebellar or brainstem
lesions.
Neuroimaging findings associated with neurologic complications in
children with COVID-19 are shown in Fig. 311.6. Cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) findings include a pleocytosis.
Neonates are often hospitalized because of SARS-­CoV-­2 infection due
to febrile illness with less prominent respiratory complaints, primarily to
exclude neonatal bacterial sepsis or neonatal herpes simplex virus (HSV)
infection. Although nearly 15% of women presenting in labor during the
early phase of the COVID-19 pandemic were found to be SARS-­CoV-­2
PCR positive (majority are asymptomatic), very few infants born to these
women are PCR positive at birth or become infected perinatally. Preterm
birth and stillbirth due to effects on the placenta, placental inflammation,
and other specific abnormalities have been reported in pregnant women
with symptomatic SARS-­
CoV-­
2 infection. Congenital abnormalities
or intrauterine growth restriction have not been observed in live-­born
infants with in-­utero SARS-­CoV-­2 exposure; potential long-­term neurodevelopmental effects are not yet known.
Over the course of the pandemic, extrapulmonary manifestations
and complications of SARS-­CoV-­2 infection have increasingly been
appreciated, including new onset or exacerbation of type 1 and type
2 diabetes, intestinal inflammation (pseudo-­appendicitis) and mesenteric lymphadenitis (see Fig. 311.4), and vascular complications such as
thrombosis of vessels in the extremities as well as cerebral vasculature.
SARS-­CoV-­2 infection has been associated with sickle cell vasoocclusive crises and acute chest syndrome in patients with sickle cell disease
and increased seizures in children with seizure disorders.

MIS-­C

The primary clinical manifestations of MIS-­C occur 2-­6 weeks after
SARS-­CoV-­2 infection and consist of unremitting fever, involvement
of two or more organ systems (cardiac, renal, respiratory, hematologic, gastrointestinal, dermatologic, or neurologic), clinical severity
requiring hospitalization, and laboratory evidence of inflammation
(see Table 311.1). In addition, there is evidence for recent SARS-­
CoV-­2 infection by RT-­PCR, serology, or antigen test; or exposure to
a suspected or confirmed COVID-­19 case within the 4 weeks before
the onset of symptoms.
The median age for children with MIS-­C is 8-­10 years (range 4-­14
years), but MIS-­C can affect any age group, including adolescents
and rarely infants. A similar syndrome, MIS-­A, has been reported in
adults (≥21 years). The vast majority of cases of MIS-­C have occurred
in children with no underlying medical conditions or immunodeficiency. Cardiac manifestations including myocardial dysfunction,
coronary artery dilatation, and aneurysm formations (Fig. 311.7),
valvular dysfunction, reduced left ventricular ejection fraction,
shock, cardiac arrhythmias, and pericardial effusion are present
in up to 50% of children at presentation. With institution of rapid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

Fig. 311.3 Chest radiography and chest CT findings of children with COVID-­19 in conjunction with symptom and time interval between imaging

studies. A, Posteroanterior chest radiograph of a 13-­yr-­old patient who presented with fever for 2 days. Chest radiography and chest CT images
were obtained on the same day. Chest radiograph was normal. B, Chest CT image in the axial plan revealed a single, peripheral located, ground-­
glass opacity (GGO) at the posterobasal segment of the right lower lobe. The opacity was obscured with the right liver lobe and diaphragm on
chest radiography. C, Posteroanterior chest radiograph of a 10-­yr-­old patient who presented with cough and fever for 2 days. Chest radiography and
chest CT images were obtained on the same day. Chest radiograph revealed peripheral GGO (arrow) at the basal segments of the right liver lobe.
D, Axial section chest CT examination revealed bronchovascular distributed GGOs at the periphery of the basal segments of the right lower lobe. E,
Posteroanterior chest radiograph of a 13-­yr-­old patient who presented with cough and fever for 2 days. Chest radiography and chest CT images were
obtained on the same day. Chest radiograph was interpreted as normal. F, Axial chest CT image without contrast demonstrates bilateral, multifocal,
peripheral, and perivascular distributed millimetric nodular-­shaped GGOs. The opacities were not detected on chest radiography due to the smaller
size and lower density. G, Posteroanterior chest radiograph of a 16-­yr-­old patient who presented with cough and fever for 3 days. Chest radiography
and chest CT images were obtained on the same day. Chest radiograph demonstrates paramediastinal GGO at the right upper lobe (red box). H,
Axial chest CT image without contrast demonstrates peripherally distributed GGO at the right upper lobe with an interlobular interstitial thickening.
(From Bayramoglu Z, Canıpek E, Comert RG, et al. Imaging features of pediatric COVID-­19 on chest radiography and chest CT: a retrospective,
single-­center study. Acad Radiol. 2021;28:18–27. Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 311 u Coronaviruses

*

2045

*

A

UB

B

C

Fig. 311.4 A 14-­yr-­old with multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C). Imaging findings showed bowel wall thickening, acute kidney
injury, ascites, and mesenteric adenopathy. A, Axial contrast-­enhanced CT image shows diffuse mural thickening and mild mucosal hyperenhancement of colon (arrows). B, Coronal image from same CT examination as A shows mesenteric lymphadenopathy (black arrows) and pelvic ascites
(arrowheads). Wall of urinary bladder (UB) is thickened, and thickening of colon (white arrow) is again noted. C, Supine anteroposterior abdominal
radiograph obtained 15 hours after CT (A and B) shows retention of IV contrast material in kidneys (asterisks) (termed delayed nephrogram) in setting
of acute kidney injury. Residual oral contrast material is present in descending colon and sigmoid (arrows) and shows wall thickening and irregularity.
(From Blumfield E, Levin TL, Kurian J, et al. Imaging findings in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) associated with coronavirus
disease (COVID-­19). AJR. 2021;216:507–518. Fig. 7.)

Table 311.4  Rashes Reported in COVID-­19 Infected
Patients
• Morbilliform*
• Chilblain-­like/pernio*
• Urticarial
• Macular papular erythema*
• Vesicular
• Acrocyanosis
• Acral desquamation
• Papulosquamous
• Livedo reticularis–like*
• Erythema multiforme-­like*
• Erythroderma
• Grover-­like
• Retiform purpura*
• Petechial

• Bullous
• Palpable purpura/vasculitis
(leukocytoclastic)*
• Dengue-­like
• Pressure injury
• Erythema nodosum
• Livedo racemose*
• Miliaria rubra
• Acneiform
• Enanthem
• Anagen effluvium
• Erythema elevatum diutinum
• Photo-­distributed

*Common.
Modified from Dinulos JE, Dinulos JG. Cutaneous coronavirus disease 2019 in children: a
clinical primer for diagnosis and treatment. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2021;33:691–703. Table 1.

immunomodulation, short-­term outcomes appear to be favorable,
including resolution of coronary abnormalities in the majority of
cases. Studies to evaluate the long-­term prognosis for cardiac function are in progress, including studies using sensitive measures such
as cardiac MRI. Patients with severe cardiac dysfunction must be
followed by a pediatric cardiologist and abstain from sports for 3-­6
months or until cleared by the cardiologist.
Sub-­phenotypes of MIS-­C include cases that appear very similar to
Kawasaki disease (marked conjunctival injection, adenopathy, and/
or prominent rash [Table 208.4 in Chapter 208]) and cases lacking

Kawasaki disease features but with prominent abdominal symptoms
mimicking an acute abdomen. Analysis of cytokine responses in children with MIS-­C has identified elevation of a variety of biomarkers,
confirming the hyperinflammatory nature of this illness (Table 311.5).
Rapid institution of immunomodulatory therapy has been shown to
be lifesaving in the setting of MIS-­C and has included intravenous
immunoglobulin (IGIV) with methylprednisolone and/or other biologics such as anakinra, tocilizumab, or infliximab (Table 311.6). The
incidence of MIS-­C has dramatically decreased with the appearance of
newer variants.
Infectious complications are uncommon and are noted in Table
311.7. Another complication is rebound (recurrence) of COVID-­19
symptoms after an initial episode (Table 311.8).

Post-­Acute Sequelae of SARS-­CoV-­2 Infection (Long
COVID)

An estimated 10–40% of adults and a much lower percentage of
children who have recovered from recognized or unrecognized
SARS-­C oV-­2 infection may develop long-­standing and in some
cases severe symptoms that are not specifically related to their original symptoms (Table 311.9). These may include ill-­defined pain
syndromes, headaches, abdominal pain, fatigue and postexertional
malaise, shortness of breath, chronic cough, palpitations, dizziness/
syncope, among others, as well as anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder. The pathogenesis of long COVID is not yet
known but may include genetic determinants related to immune
dysregulation, autonomic instability, or persistent indolent viral
effects. Long COVID may occur in individuals with mild symptoms, as well as those with moderate or severe infection. Affected
individuals may benefit from multidisciplinary and coordinated
evaluation in centers that can coordinate subspecialty evaluations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2046 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
been used for direct viral detection. Antibody to the spike protein
may develop with either natural infection or vaccination, but presence of nucleocapsid antibody indicates natural infection. Virus
may be detected by PCR or antigen-based methods for many days
after the onset of symptoms, but immunocompetent individuals
are generally not contagious after 10 days and immunocompromised patients are generally not contagious after 21 days, with late
viral detection representing nonviable, replication incompetent
remnants. Cycle time (Ct) in nonquantitative PCR assays cannot
directly correlate with disease or likelihood of disease severity or
progression but can be used as a rough estimate of viral load and
shedding over time within a single patient, with lower Ct representing high viral loads and high Ct more likely representing shedding
of nonviable virus.
Antibodies usually develop within 2 weeks of infection, but there
is great variability in antibody responses to natural infection. Some
infected individuals mount high antibody responses that are durable
over many months, but others may not mount an effective or long-­lived
response after natural infection, highlighting the importance of vaccination for reliable immunity. Antibody responses have been documented to wane over time in both naturally infected and vaccinated
individuals, leading to the recommendation for booster doses of vaccine. Vaccination has continued to be highly effective in prevention of
severe disease, hospitalization, and death and in reducing the likelihood of MIS-­C.

A

TREATMENT AND PREVENTION

B

C
Fig. 311.5 Dermatologic manifestations of COVID-­19. A, Petechial

rash. B, Chilblains of the foot. C, Livedo reticularis of the lower extremity. (A and B from Gottlieb M, Long B. Dermatologic manifestations
and complications of COVID-­19. Am J Emerg Med. 2020;38:1715–
1721. Figs. 4 and 5; C from Nantsupawat T, Mankongpaisarnrung C,
Soontrapa S, et al. Obscure severe infrarenal aortoiliac stenosis with
severe transient lactic acidosis. J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep.
2013;1(1):2324709613479940. Fig. 2.)

at a single visit, with focus on the symptoms that are most disruptive to quality of life and function.

DIAGNOSIS

Numerous diagnostic assays have been developed for the diagnosis
of SARS-­C oV-­2, including laboratory-­based and rapid/point-­of-­
care nucleic acid amplification tests, rapid antigen tests, and serologic assays (Table 311.10). Multiple platforms targeting different
aspects of the viral spike and nucleocapsid genes or proteins have

Therapeutic agents for SARS-­C oV-­2 include antivirals that inhibit
viral replication such as intravenous remdesivir, oral nirmatrelvir/
ritonavir combination therapy, and oral molnupiravir. These antivirals reduce morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients (5-­10
day courses of intravenous remdesivir) as well as nonhospitalized
high-­risk children and adults (oral agents and shorter 3-­day courses
of intravenous remdesivir). High-­risk conditions associated with
severe disease include obesity, diabetes, chronic lung disease, neurologic disorders, cardiovascular disease, sickle cell disease, or immunosuppression because of underlying conditions or medications.
Systemic corticosteroid therapy (dexamethasone) has been shown to
significantly reduce morbidity and mortality in the treatment of hospitalized patients with COVID-­19 pulmonary disease. Several monoclonal antibodies were developed and found to be effective during
the early phase of the pandemic in preventing progression to severe
disease in individuals with high-risk conditions. However, these
antibodies have not retained activity against more recent variants of
SARS-CoV-2. High-­titer immune plasma has demonstrated variable
efficacy with the original variant and is not recommended. Other
biologics, such as the interleukin-­6 inhibitor tocilizumab, have been
used in critically ill adults unresponsive to first-­line therapies but
are used less commonly in children.
Multiple vaccines have been developed to combat spread of
SARS-­C oV-­2, including novel platforms such as mRNA-­based vaccines and adenovirus vector-­based vaccines (see Chapter 215). For
the majority of these SARS-­C oV-­2 vaccines, the primary target is
the viral spike protein. The FDA had granted EUA approval for
SARS-­C oV-­2 vaccines in the United States in children >6 months
of age and adults.
Guidelines in late 2023 regarding isolation and precautions for people
with COVID-19 are summarized in Table 311.11. However, guidelines
continue to evolve and are available at the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention website (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
your-health/isolation.html).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 311 u Coronaviruses

A

D

B

C

I

H

G

F

E

2047

J

Fig. 311.6 MRI scans showing a range of neurologic complications. A-­C, MRI brain and spine scans from 2-­yr-­old child with acute disseminated

encephalomyelitis. Multiple hyperintense foci on axial T2-­weighted (A) and T2 FLAIR (B) images involve both cerebral hemispheres, including the
basal ganglia, thalami, and subcortical and periventricular white matter (arrowheads). C, Sagittal T2-­weighted image of the spine shows a focus of
hyperintensity within the cord close to the conus (arrowhead). D-­F, MRI brain scans from 11-­yr-­old child who presented with MIS-C, encephalopathy,
and MERS. D, Axial T2-­weighted image shows a focus of hyperintensity involving the splenium of the corpus callosum along the midline (arrowhead).
The B1000 (E) and the ADC maps (F) from diffusion-­weighted imaging show subtle diffusion restriction involving the lesion. G-­J, MRI spine scans
from a 16-­mo-­old infant who presented with Guillain-­Barré syndrome. Sagittal T1-­weighted images before (G) and after contrast (H) show enhancement of the lumbosacral nerve roots (arrowheads). I, J, Axial T1-­weighted postcontrast images show bilateral enhancement of the nerve roots.
ADC, Apparent diffusion coefficient;; FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; MERS, mild encephalopathy with reversible splenial lesion; MIS-C,
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. (Modified from Ray ST, Abdel-­Mannon O, Sa M, et al. Neurological manifestations of SARS-­CoV-­2
infection in hospitalised children and adolescents in the UK: a prospective national cohort study. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2021;5:631–641. Fig. 2.)

V
V

A

B

C

Fig. 311.7 Early cardiac imaging. Echocardiography (day 21) showing a giant (z score +26) left anterior descending artery aneurysm (A) and a large
(z score +8.5) right coronary artery aneurysm (B, arrow). C, Three-­dimensional reconstruction of coronary architecture. (Modified from Villacis-­Nunez
DS, Hashemi S, Nelson MC, et al. Giant coronary aneurysms in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children associated with SARS-­CoV-­2 infection.
JACC Case Rep. 2021;3[13]:1499–1508. Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2048 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 311.5  Evaluation of MIS-­C
LABORATORY TESTING
• A C-­reactive protein ≥3.0 mg/dL (30 mg/L) is required for the
CSTE/CDC MIS-­C surveillance case definition; other laboratory
tests may also indicate evidence of inflammation (e.g., erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, fibrinogen, procalcitonin, and ferritin).
• Similarly, SARS-­CoV-­2 laboratory testing is indicated. Although
detection of anti-­nucleocapsid antibody or anti-­spike protein
antibody fulfill criteria for the case definition, when feasible
SARS-­CoV-­2 anti-­nucleocapsid antibody testing is recommended,
particularly in children with a history of COVID-­19 vaccination
because anti-­nucleocapsid antibody is indicative of SARS-­CoV-­2
infection, whereas antispike protein antibody may be induced
either by COVID-­19 vaccination or by SARS-­CoV-­2 infection.
Serology testing should be obtained before administering
intravenous immunoglobulin or any other exogenous antibody
treatments whenever possible.
IMAGING
Given the frequent association of MIS-­C with cardiac involvement,
the following tests are usually performed:
• Echocardiogram
• Electrocardiogram
Other imaging should be directed by patient signs or symptoms but
could include:
• Imaging to evaluate for acute appendicitis
• Imaging to evaluate for pharyngeal space infection
OTHER EVALUATIONS
It is important to evaluate children with suspected MIS-­C for
alternative diagnoses, particularly because MIS-­C clinical
manifestations overlap with those of other etiologies. Testing
to evaluate for other potential diagnoses should be directed by
patient signs or symptoms. Alternative diagnoses to consider
include:
• Acute viral infection (e.g., SARS-­CoV-­2, influenza, adenovirus)
• Acute viral infection myocarditis (e.g., influenza, enteroviruses)
• Kawasaki disease
• Rickettsial disease (e.g., typhus)
CSTE/CDC, Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists/Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Information for healthcare
providers about multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C).
https://www.cdc.gov/mis/mis-­c/hcp/index.html

Table 311.6  Treatment of MIS-­C
Initial treatment is tailored according to the patient’s presenting
signs and symptoms and may include:
• Fluid resuscitation
• Inotropic support
• Respiratory support
Antiinflammatory measures have included the frequent use of
intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids. There is some evidence that
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) with milder
manifestations can be treated with steroid monotherapy and that
prolonged duration of outpatient steroids should be avoided. The use
of other antiinflammatory medications (e.g., anakinra) and the use of
anticoagulation treatments have been variable. Aspirin has commonly
been used because of concerns for coronary artery involvement, and
antibiotics are routinely used to treat potential sepsis while awaiting
bacterial cultures. Thrombotic prophylaxis is often used given the
hypercoagulable state typically associated with MIS-­C.

Table 311.7  Infectious Complications in Patients with
COVID-­19
• Co-infections at presentation: Although most individuals present
with only SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, concomitant viral infections,
including influenza and other respiratory viruses, have been
reported. Community-­acquired bacterial pneumonia also has
been reported, but it is uncommon, with a prevalence that ranges
from 0% to 6% of people with SARS-­CoV-­2 infection. Antibacterial
therapy is generally not recommended unless additional evidence
for bacterial pneumonia is present (e.g., leukocytosis, the
presence of a focal infiltrate on imaging).
• Reactivation of latent infections: There are case reports of
underlying chronic hepatitis B virus and latent tuberculosis
infections reactivating in patients with COVID-­19 who receive
immunomodulators as treatment, although the data are currently
limited. Reactivation of herpes simplex virus and varicella
zoster virus infections have also been reported. Cases of severe
and disseminated strongyloidiasis have been reported in
patients with COVID-­19 during treatment with tocilizumab and
corticosteroids. Many clinicians would initiate empirical treatment
(e.g., with the antiparasitic drug ivermectin), with or without
serologic testing, in patients who require immunomodulators
for the treatment of COVID-­19 and have come from areas
where Strongyloides is endemic (i.e., tropical, subtropical, or warm
temperate areas).
• Nosocomial infections: Hospitalized patients with COVID-­19 may
acquire common nosocomial infections, such as hospital-­acquired
pneumonia (including ventilator-­associated pneumonia), line-­
related bacteremia or fungemia, catheter-­associated urinary tract
infection, and Clostridioides difficile–associated diarrhea. Early
diagnosis and treatment of these infections are important for
improving outcomes in these patients.
• Opportunistic fungal infections: Invasive fungal infections,
including aspergillosis and mucormycosis, have been reported in
hospitalized patients with COVID-­19. Although these infections
are relatively rare, they can be fatal, and they may be seen more
commonly in patients who are immunocompromised or receiving
mechanical ventilation. The majority of mucormycosis cases have
been reported in India and are associated with diabetes mellitus
or the use of corticosteroids.


From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Clinical spectrum of SARS-­CoV-­2
infection. https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/overview/clinical-­
spectrum

Table 311.8  Viral or Symptom Rebound Soon After
COVID-­19
• Observational studies and results from clinical trials of therapeutic
agents have described SARS-­CoV-­2 viral or COVID-­19 symptom
rebound in patients who have completed treatment for
COVID-­19.
• Viral and symptom rebounds have also occurred when
anti–SARS-­CoV-­2 therapies were not used.
• Typically, this phenomenon has not been associated with
progression to severe COVID-­19.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Clinical spectrum of SARS-­CoV-­2
infection. https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/overview/clinical-­spectrum

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Information for healthcare
providers about multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C).
https://www.cdc.gov/mis/mis-­c/hcp/index.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 311 u Coronaviruses

2049

Table 311.9  Adjusted Hazard Ratios of Selected Potential Post–COVID-­19 Symptoms and Conditions Among Children
and Adolescents Age 2-­17 Years With and Without COVID-­19, by Age Group: HealthVerity Medical Claims
Database, United States, March 1, 2020–January 31, 2022
ADJUSTED HAZARD RATIO (95% CI)*
OUTCOME

2-­4 YR

5-­11 YR

12-­17 YR

SYMPTOM
Smell and taste disturbances

1.22 (0.70-­2.15)

0.94 (0.83-­1.07)

1.23 (1.16-­1.31)†

Circulatory signs and symptoms

1.17 (1.12-­1.23)†

1.11 (1.08-­1.13)†

1.04 (1.02-­1.06)†

Malaise and fatigue

1.13 (1.05-­1.22)†

1.08 (1.05-­1.12)†

1.03 (1.01-­1.04)†

Musculoskeletal pain

1.16 (1.10-­1.21)†

1.06 (1.04-­1.07)†

1.00 (0.99-­1.01)

Dizziness and syncope

1.08 (0.90-­1.29)

1.03 (0.99-­1.08)

1.00 (0.98-­1.02)

GI and esophageal disorders

1.15 (1.10-­1.20)†

1.02 (1.00-­1.04)†

0.97 (0.95-­0.99)†

Sleeping disorders

0.99 (0.93-­1.06)

0.89 (0.86-­0.92)†

0.91 (0.89-­0.94)†

Respiratory signs and symptoms

1.07 (1.04-­1.10)†

0.93 (0.92-­0.94)†

0.88 (0.87-­0.89)†

Symptoms of mental conditions

1.03 (0.97-­1.10)

0.92 (0.90-­0.95)†

0.89 (0.86-­0.91)†

CONDITION
Acute pulmonary embolism

—‡

—‡

2.03 (1.61-­2.56)†

Myocarditis and cardiomyopathy

2.39 (1.57–3.65)†

2.84 (2.39-­3.37)†

1.66 (1.48-­1.88)†

Venous thromboembolic event

—‡

2.69 (1.73-­4.19)†

1.52 (1.22-­1.91)†

Acute and unspecified renal failure

1.52 (1.07–2.14)†

1.38 (1.16–1.63)†

1.27 (1.15–1.40)†

Type 1 diabetes

1.01 (0.57-­1.78)

1.31 (1.13-­1.53)†

1.20 (1.09–1.33)†

Coagulation and hemorrhagic disorders

1.47 (1.20-­1.80)†

1.28 (1.15-­1.43)†

1.10 (1.03–1.19)†

Type 2 diabetes

1.24 (0.85-­1.81)

1.14 (1.02-­1.28)†

1.18 (1.11-­1.24)†

Cardiac dysrhythmias

1.44 (1.22-­1.70)†

1.23 (1.14-­1.32)†

1.12 (1.08-­1.17)†

Cerebrovascular disease

1.66 (0.85-­3.23)

1.14 (0.79-­1.64)

1.18 (0.93-­1.48)

Chronic kidney disease

0.86 (0.54-­1.36)

1.04 (0.83-­1.31)

1.12 (0.96-­1.31)

Asthma

1.12 (1.07-­1.18)†

1.02 (1.00-­1.05)†

0.96 (0.94-­0.98)†

Muscle disorders

0.87 (0.77-­0.98)†

0.86 (0.82-­0.91)†

0.96 (0.93-­0.99)†

Neurologic conditions

0.98 (0.93-­1.04)

0.96 (0.93-­0.98)†

0.91 (0.89-­0.93)†

Anxiety and fear-­related disorders

0.91 (0.83-­1.00)

0.86 (0.83-­0.88)†

0.84 (0.82-­0.85)†

Mood disorders

0.82 (0.62-­1.08)

0.73 (0.69-­0.77)†

0.80 (0.77-­0.83)†

*Each adjusted hazard ratio was obtained from a single Cox proportional hazards model stratified by age group, with the specific symptom or condition as the outcome and the
following covariates: presence of COVID-­19, age (continuous variable), sex, race, U.S. Census Bureau region, payor type, previous medical complexity, and previous hospitalization.
†P-­value < 0.05.
‡Age-­stratified analyses were performed only when there were at least 10 patients with COVID-­19 and at least 10 patients without COVID-­19 in that age group with the specific

symptom or condition.
From Kompaniyets L, Bull-­Otterson L, Boehmer TK, et al. Post-­COVID-­19 symptoms and conditions among children and adolescents–United States, March 1, 2020-­January 21, 2022.
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022;71(31):993–998. Table 3.

Table 311.10  Laboratory Evidence for COVID-­19 Infection
Laboratory evidence using a method approved or authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or designated authority:
CONFIRMATORY* LABORATORY EVIDENCE
• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2 ribonucleic acid (RNA) in a clinical or postmortem specimen using a diagnostic molecular amplification test
performed by a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-­certified provider† OR
• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2 RNA in a clinical or postmortem specimen by genomic sequencing‡
PRESUMPTIVE* LABORATORY EVIDENCE
• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2–specific antigen in a clinical or postmortem specimen using a diagnostic test performed by a CLIA-­certified provider.†
SUPPORTIVE* LABORATORY EVIDENCE
• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2 specific antigen by immunocytochemistry, OR
• Detection of SARS-­CoV-­2 RNA or specific antigen using a test performed without CLIA oversight.
*The terms confirmatory, presumptive, and supportive are categorical labels used here to standardize case classifications for public health surveillance. The terms should not be used
to interpret the utility or validity of any laboratory test methodology.
†Includes those tests performed under a CLIA certificate of waiver.
‡Some genomic sequencing tests that have been authorized for emergency use by the FDA do not require an initial polymerase chain reaction (PCR) result to be generated. Genomic
sequencing results may be all the public health agency receives.
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19) 2023 Case Definition. https://ndc.services.cdc.gov/case-­definitions/coronavirus-­
disease-­2019-­covid-­19/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2050 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 311.11  Isolation and Precautions for People with COVID-­19
WHEN TO ISOLATE
• If you test negative: You can end your isolation.
• If you test positive: Follow the full isolation recommendations below.
• When you have COVID-­19, isolation is counted in days, as follows.
If You Had No Symptoms
• Day 0 is the day you were tested (not the day you received your
positive test result).
• Day 1 is the first full day following the day you were tested.
• If you develop symptoms within 10 days of when you were tested,
the clock restarts at day 0 on the day of symptom onset.
If You Had Symptoms
• Day 0 of isolation is the day of symptom onset, regardless of when
you tested positive.
• Day 1 is the first full day after the day your symptoms started.
Isolation
• If you test positive for COVID-­19, stay home for at least 5 days and
isolate from others in your home.
• You are likely most infectious during these first 5 days.
• Wear a high-­quality mask if you must be around others at home
and in public.
• Do not go places where you are unable to wear a mask. For travel
guidance, see CDC’s Travel webpage.
• Do not travel.
• Stay home and separate from others as much as possible.
• Use a separate bathroom, if possible.
• Take steps to improve ventilation at home, if possible.
• Do not share personal household items, such as cups, towels, and
utensils.
• Monitor your symptoms. If you have an emergency warning sign (like
trouble breathing), seek emergency medical care immediately.
• Learn more about what to do if you have COVID-­19.
ENDING ISOLATION
• End isolation based on how serious your COVID-­19 symptoms were.
• Loss of taste and smell may persist for weeks or months after
recovery and need not delay the end of isolation.
If You Had No Symptoms
• You may end isolation after day 5.
If You Had Symptoms and Your Symptoms Are Improving
• You may end isolation after day 5 if you are fever free for 24 hr
(without the use of fever-­reducing medication).
Your Symptoms Are Not Improving
Continue to isolate until:

If You Had Symptoms and Had Moderate illness (you experienced
shortness of breath or had difficulty breathing)
• You need to isolate through day 10.
Severe Illness (You Were Hospitalized) or Have a Weakened
Immune System
• You need to isolate through day 10.
• Consult your doctor before ending isolation.
• Ending isolation without a viral test may not be an option for you.
• If you are unsure if your symptoms are moderate or severe or
if you have a weakened immune system, talk to a healthcare
provider for further guidance.
Regardless of When You End Isolation
Until at least day 11:
• Avoid being around people who are more likely to get very sick
from COVID-­19.
• Remember to wear a high-­quality mask when indoors around
others at home and in public.
• Do not go places where you are unable to wear a mask until you
are able to discontinue masking (see below).
• For travel guidance, see CDC’s Travel webpage.
Removing Your Mask
After you have ended isolation, when you are feeling better (no
fever without the use of fever-­reducing medications and symptoms
improving):
• Wear your mask through day 10.
OR
• If you have access to antigen tests, you should consider using
them. With two sequential negative tests 48 hr apart, you may
remove your mask sooner than day 10.
Note: If your antigen test results* are positive, you may still be
infectious. You should continue wearing a mask and wait at least
48 hours before taking another test. Continue taking antigen tests
at least 48 hr apart until you have two sequential negative results.
This may mean you need to continue wearing a mask and testing
beyond day 10.
After you have ended isolation, if your COVID-­19 symptoms recur
or worsen, restart your isolation at day 0. Talk to a healthcare
provider if you have questions about your symptoms or when to
end isolation.

• You are fever free for 24 hr (without the use of fever-­reducing
medication).
• Your symptoms are improving.*
*As noted in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration labeling for authorized over-­the-­counter antigen tests, negative test results do not rule out SARS-­CoV-­2 infection and should not
be used as the sole basis for treatment or patient management decisions, including infection control decisions.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Isolation and precautions for people with COVID-­19. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-­ncov/your-­health/isolation.html

Chapter 312

Rotaviruses, Caliciviruses,
and Astroviruses
Dorsey M. Bass
Diarrhea is a leading cause of childhood death in the world, accounting for 5-­10 million deaths per year. In early childhood, the single most
important cause of severe dehydrating diarrhea is rotavirus infection.
Rotavirus and other gastroenteric viruses are not only major causes of
pediatric deaths but also lead to significant morbidity. Before rotavirus

vaccines were available, children in the United States were estimated
to have a risk of hospitalization for rotavirus diarrhea of 1:43, corresponding to 80,000 hospitalizations annually.

ETIOLOGY

Rotaviruses, astroviruses, caliciviruses such as the Norwalk agent, and
enteric adenoviruses are the medically important pathogens of human
viral gastroenteritis (see Chapter 387).
Rotaviruses are in the Reoviridae family and cause disease in virtually all mammals and birds. These viruses are wheel-­like, triple-­shelled
icosahedrons containing 11 segments of double-­stranded RNA. The
diameter of the particles on electron microscopy is approximately 80
nm. Rotaviruses are classified by serogroup (A, B, C, D, E, F, and G)
and subgroup (I or II). Rotavirus strains are species specific and do not
cause disease in heterologous hosts. Group A includes the common
human pathogens and a variety of animal viruses. Group B rotavirus
is reported as a cause of severe disease in infants and adults in China

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 312 u Rotaviruses, Caliciviruses, and Astroviruses
only. Occasional human outbreaks of group C rotavirus are reported.
The other serogroups infect only nonhumans.
Subgrouping of rotaviruses is determined by the antigenic structure
of the inner capsid protein, VP6. Serotyping of rotaviruses, described
for group A only, is determined by classic cross-­neutralization testing
and depends on the outer capsid glycoproteins, VP7 and VP4. The VP7
serotype is referred to as the G type (for glycoprotein). There are 10 G
serotypes, of which 4 cause most illness and vary in occurrence from
year to year and region to region. The VP4 serotype is referred to as the
P type. There are 11 P serotypes. Although both VP4 and VP7 elicit
neutralizing immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibodies, the relative role of
these systemic antibodies compared with mucosal IgA antibodies and
cellular responses in protective immunity remains unclear.
Caliciviruses, which constitute the Caliciviridae family, are small,
27-­to 35-­nm viruses and are the most common cause of gastroenteritis outbreaks in older children and adults. Caliciviruses also cause a
rotavirus-­like illness in young infants. They are positive-­sense, single-­
stranded RNA viruses with a single structural protein. Human caliciviruses are divided into two genera, the noroviruses and sapoviruses.
Caliciviruses have been named for locations of initial outbreaks:
Norwalk, Snow Mountain, Montgomery County, Sapporo, and others. Caliciviruses and astroviruses are sometimes referred to as small,
round viruses on the basis of their appearance on electron microscopy.
Astroviruses constitute the Astroviridae family and are important
agents of viral gastroenteritis in young children, with a high incidence
in both the developing and developed worlds. Astroviruses are positive-­
sense, single-­stranded RNA viruses. They are small particles, approximately 30 nm in diameter, with a characteristic central five-­or six-­pointed
star when viewed on electron microscopy. The capsid consists of three
structural proteins. There are eight known human serotypes.
Enteric adenoviruses are a common cause of viral gastroenteritis in
infants and children. Although many adenovirus serotypes exist and
are found in human stool, especially during and after typical upper
respiratory tract infections (see Chapter 309), only serotypes 40 and 41
cause gastroenteritis. These strains are very difficult to grow in tissue
culture. The virus consists of an 80-­nm–diameter icosahedral particle
with a relatively complex double-­stranded DNA genome.
Aichi virus is a picornavirus that is associated with gastroenteritis and was initially described in Asia. Several other viruses that may
cause diarrheal disease in animals have been postulated but are not
well established as human gastroenteritis viruses. These include coronaviruses, toroviruses, and pestiviruses. The picobirnaviruses are an
unclassified group of small (30-­nm), single-­stranded RNA viruses that
have been found in 10% of patients with HIV-­associated diarrhea.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Worldwide, rotavirus is estimated to cause more than 111 million cases of
diarrhea annually in children <5 years. Of these, 18 million cases are considered at least moderately severe, with approximately 200,000 deaths per year.
Rotavirus caused 3 million cases of diarrhea, 80,000 hospitalizations, and
20-­40 deaths annually in the United States before widespread vaccine use.
Rotavirus infection is most common in winter months in temperate
climates. In the United States, the annual winter peak historically spread
from west to east. Unlike the spread of other winter viruses, such as influenza, this wave of increased incidence was not caused by a single prevalent
strain or serotype. Since widespread adoption of rotavirus vaccines, this
geographic phenomenon has vanished and peaks have decreased. Typically, several serotypes predominate in a given community for one or two
seasons, but nearby locations may harbor unrelated strains. Disease tends
to be most severe in patients 3-­24 months of age, although 25% of the cases
of severe disease occur in children older than 2 years of age, with serologic
evidence of infection developing in virtually all children by 4-­5 years of
age. Infants younger than 3 months are relatively protected by transplacental antibody and possibly breastfeeding. Infections in neonates and in
adults in close contact with infected children are generally asymptomatic.
Some rotavirus strains have stably colonized newborn nurseries for years,
infecting virtually all newborns without causing any overt illness.
Rotavirus and the other gastrointestinal viruses spread efficiently
by the fecal-­oral route, and outbreaks are common in children’s hospitals and childcare centers. The virus is shed in stool at a very high

2051

concentration before and for days after the clinical illness. Very few
infectious virions are needed to cause disease in a susceptible host.
The epidemiology of astroviruses is not as thoroughly studied as that
of rotavirus, but these viruses are a common cause of mild to moderate
watery winter diarrhea in children and infants and are an uncommon
pathogen in adults. Hospital outbreaks are common. Enteric adenovirus gastroenteritis occurs year-­round, mostly in children younger than
2 years. Nosocomial outbreaks occur but are less common than with
rotavirus and astrovirus. Calicivirus is best known for causing large,
explosive outbreaks among older children and adults, particularly in
settings such as schools, cruise ships, and hospitals. Often a single food,
such as shellfish or water used in food preparation, is identified as a
source. Like astrovirus and rotavirus, caliciviruses are also commonly
found in winter infantile gastroenteritis and are now the leading cause
of significant pediatric viral diarrhea in communities with high rates of
rotavirus vaccination.

PATHOGENESIS

Viruses that cause human diarrhea selectively infect and destroy villus
tip cells in the small intestine. Biopsies of the small intestines show
variable degrees of villus blunting and round cell infiltrate in the lamina propria. Pathologic changes may not correlate with the severity of
clinical symptoms and usually resolve before the clinical resolution of
diarrhea. The gastric mucosa is not affected despite the commonly used
term gastroenteritis, although delayed gastric emptying has been documented during Norwalk virus infection.
In the small intestine, the upper villus enterocytes are differentiated
cells, which have both digestive functions, such as hydrolysis of disaccharides, and absorptive functions, such as the transport of water and
electrolytes via glucose and amino acid cotransporters. Crypt enterocytes are undifferentiated cells that lack the brush-­border hydrolytic
enzymes and are net secretors of water and electrolytes. Selective viral
infection of intestinal villus tip cells thus leads to (1) decreased absorption of salt and water and an imbalance in the ratio of intestinal fluid
absorption to secretion and (2) diminished disaccharidase activity and
malabsorption of complex carbohydrates, particularly lactose. Most
evidence supports altered absorption as the more important factor in
the genesis of viral diarrhea. It has been proposed that a rotavirus nonstructural protein (NSP4) functions as an enterotoxin.
Viremia may occur in severe, primary infections, but symptomatic
extraintestinal infection is extremely rare in immunocompetent persons. In contrast, immunocompromised patients may occasionally
experience central nervous system, hepatic, or renal involvement. The
increased vulnerability of infants (compared with older children and
adults) to severe morbidity and mortality from gastroenteritis viruses
may relate to a number of factors, including decreased intestinal
reserve function, lack of specific immunity, and decreased nonspecific
host defense mechanisms such as gastric acid and mucus. Viral enteritis greatly enhances intestinal permeability to luminal macromolecules
and has been postulated to increase the risk for food allergies and celiac
disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Rotavirus infection typically begins after an incubation period of
<48 hours (range: 1-­7 days) with mild to moderate fever as well as
vomiting, followed by the onset of frequent, watery stools. All three
symptoms are present in about 50–60% of cases. Vomiting and fever
typically abate during the second day of illness, but diarrhea often continues for 5-­7 days. The stool is without gross blood or white blood
cells. Dehydration may develop and progress rapidly, particularly in
infants. The most severe disease typically occurs among children 4-­36
months of age. Malnourished children and children with underlying intestinal disease, such as short-­bowel syndrome, are particularly
likely to acquire severe rotavirus diarrhea. Rarely, immunodeficient
children experience severe and prolonged illness. Rotavirus has rarely
been associated with mild encephalopathy that may progress to cerebellitis and with reversible splenium lesions. Although most newborns
infected with rotavirus are asymptomatic, some outbreaks of necrotizing enterocolitis have been associated with the appearance of a new
rotavirus strain in the affected nurseries.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2052 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
The clinical course of astrovirus infection appears to be similar to
that of rotavirus gastroenteritis, with the notable exception that the disease tends to be milder, with less significant dehydration. Adenovirus
enteritis tends to cause diarrhea of longer duration, often 10-­14 days.
The Norwalk virus has a short (12-­hour) incubation period. Vomiting and nausea tend to predominate in an illness associated with the
Norwalk virus, and the duration is brief, usually consisting of 1-­3 days
of symptoms. The clinical and epidemiologic picture of Norwalk virus
often closely resembles so-­called food poisoning from preformed toxins such as Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus.

DIAGNOSIS

In most cases, a satisfactory diagnosis of acute viral gastroenteritis can
be made on the basis of the clinical and epidemiologic features. Many
hospitals now offer multiplex PCR stool testing for multiple diarrheal
pathogens, including a variety of bacterial and protozoan and all five
common viral agents in one test. Enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent
assays, which offer >90% specificity and sensitivity, are available for
the detection of group A rotaviruses, caliciviruses, and enteric adenoviruses in stool samples. Research tools include electron microscopy
of stools, RNA polymerase chain reaction analysis to identify G and
P antigens, and culture. The diagnosis of viral gastroenteritis should
always be questioned in patients with persistent or high fever, blood or
white blood cells in the stool, or persistent severe or bilious vomiting,
especially in the absence of diarrhea.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Isotonic dehydration with acidosis is the most common finding in children with severe viral enteritis. The stools are free of blood and leukocytes. Although the white blood cell count may be moderately elevated
secondary to stress, the marked left shift seen with invasive bacterial
enteritis is absent.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis includes other infectious causes of enteritis,
such as bacteria and protozoa. Occasionally, surgical conditions such
as appendicitis, bowel obstruction, and intussusception may initially
mimic viral gastroenteritis.

TREATMENT

Avoiding and treating dehydration are the main goals in the treatment
of viral enteritis. A secondary goal is maintenance of the nutritional
status of the patient (see Chapters 74 and 387).
There is no routine role for antiviral drug treatment of viral gastroenteritis. Controlled studies show limited benefits for antidiarrheal drugs,
and there is a significant risk for serious side effects with these types
of agents. Antibiotics are similarly of no benefit. Antiemetics such as
ondansetron may help alleviate vomiting in children older than 2 years.
Immunoglobulins have been administered orally to both normal and
immunodeficient patients with severe rotavirus and norovirus gastroenteritis, but this treatment is currently considered experimental.
Therapy with probiotic organisms such as Lactobacillus spp. has been
shown to be helpful only in mild cases and not in dehydrating disease.

Supportive Treatment

Rehydration via the oral route can be accomplished in most patients
with mild to moderate dehydration (see Chapters 74 and 387). Severe
dehydration requires immediate intravenous therapy followed by oral
rehydration. Modern oral rehydration solutions containing appropriate quantities of sodium and glucose promote the optimum absorption of fluid from the intestine. There is no evidence that a particular
carbohydrate source (rice) or the addition of amino acids improves the
efficacy of these solutions for children with viral enteritis. Other clear
liquids, such as flat soda, fruit juice, and sports drinks, are inappropriate for the rehydration of young children with significant stool loss.
Rehydration via the oral (or nasogastric) route should be done over
6-­8 hours, and feedings should be initiated immediately thereafter.
Providing the rehydration fluid at a slow, steady rate, typically 5 mL/
min, reduces vomiting and improves the success of oral therapy. Rehydration solution should be continued as a supplement to make up for

ongoing excessive stool loss. Initial intravenous fluids are required for
the infant in shock or the occasional child with intractable vomiting.
After rehydration has been achieved, resumption of a normal diet
for age has been shown to result in a more rapid recovery from viral
gastroenteritis. Prolonged (>12 hours) administration of exclusive
clear liquids or dilute formula is without clinical benefit and actually
prolongs the duration of diarrhea. Breastfeeding should be continued
even during rehydration. Selected infants may benefit from lactose-­free
feedings (e.g., soy formula and lactose-­free cow’s milk) for several days,
although this step is not necessary for most children. Hypocaloric diets
low in protein and fat such as BRAT (bananas, rice, cereal, applesauce,
and toast) have not been shown to be superior to a regular diet.

PROGNOSIS

Most fatalities occur in infants with poor access to medical care and
are attributed to dehydration. Children may be infected with rotavirus
each year during the first 5 years of life, but each subsequent infection decreases in severity. Primary infection results in a predominantly
serotype-­specific immune response, whereas reinfection, which is usually with a different serotype, induces a broad immune response with
cross-­reactive heterotypic antibody. After the initial natural infection,
children have limited protection against subsequent asymptomatic
infection (38%) and greater protection against mild diarrhea (73%)
and moderate to severe diarrhea (87%). After the second natural infection, protection increases against subsequent asymptomatic infection
(62%) and mild diarrhea (75%) and is complete (100%) against moderate to severe diarrhea. After the third natural infection, there is even
more protection against subsequent asymptomatic infection (74%) and
near-­complete protection against even mild diarrhea (99%).

PREVENTION

Good hygiene reduces the transmission of viral gastroenteritis, but
even in the most hygienic societies, virtually all children become
infected as a result of the efficiency of infection of the gastroenteritis
viruses. Good handwashing and isolation procedures can help control
nosocomial outbreaks. The role of breastfeeding in prevention or amelioration of rotavirus infection may be slight, given the variable protection observed in a number of studies. Vaccines offer the best hope for
control of these ubiquitous infections.

Vaccines

A trivalent rotavirus vaccine was licensed in the United States in 1998
and was subsequently linked to an increased risk for intussusception,
especially during the 3-­to 14-­day period after the first dose and the
3-­to 7-­day period after the second dose. The vaccine was withdrawn
from the market in 1999. Subsequently, two new live, oral rotavirus
vaccines have been approved in the United States after extensive safety
and efficacy testing.
A live, oral, pentavalent rotavirus vaccine was approved in 2006 for
use in the United States. The vaccine contains five reassortant rotaviruses
isolated from human and bovine hosts. Four of the reassortant rotaviruses express one serotype of the outer protein VP7 (G1, G2, G3, or G4),
and the fifth expresses the protein P1A (genotype P[8]) from the human
rotavirus parent strain. The pentavalent vaccine protects against rotavirus gastroenteritis when administered as a three-­dose series at 2, 4, and
6 months of age. The first dose should be administered between 6 and 12
wk of age, with all three doses completed by 32 weeks of age. The vaccine
provides substantial protection against rotavirus gastroenteritis, with a
primary efficacy of 98% against severe rotavirus gastroenteritis caused
by G1-­G4 serotypes and 74% efficacy against rotavirus gastroenteritis of
any severity through the first rotavirus season after vaccination. It provides a 96% reduction in hospitalizations for rotavirus gastroenteritis
through the first 2 years after the third dose. In a study of more than
70,000 infants, the pentavalent vaccine did not increase the risk for intussusception, although other studies suggest a slight increased risk.
Another monovalent rotavirus vaccine was licensed in the United
States and also appears to be safe and effective. It is an attenuated monovalent human rotavirus and is administered as two oral doses at 2 and
4 months of age. The vaccine has 85% efficacy against severe gastroenteritis and was found to reduce hospital admissions for all diarrhea by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 313 u Human Papillomaviruses
42%. Despite being monovalent, the vaccine is effective in prevention
of all four common serotypes of human rotavirus.
Preliminary surveillance data on the rotavirus incidence from the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggest that rotavirus vaccination greatly reduced the disease burden in the United
States during the 2007–2008 rotavirus season and thereafter. Given the
incomplete vaccine coverage during this period, the results suggest a
degree of “herd immunity” from rotavirus immunization. Studies from
several developed countries show greater than 90% protection against
severe rotavirus disease. Studies from developing countries show
50–60% protection from severe disease. Vaccine-­associated disease has
been reported in vaccine recipients who have severe combined immunodeficiency disease (a contraindication). In addition, vaccine-­derived
virus may undergo reassortment and become more virulent, producing
diarrhea in unvaccinated siblings.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 313

Human Papillomaviruses
Kristen A. Feemster
See also Chapter 708.
Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) cause a variety of proliferative
cutaneous and mucosal lesions, including common skin warts, benign
and malignant anogenital tract lesions, oral pharyngeal cancers, and
life-­threatening respiratory papillomas. Most HPV-­related infections
in children and adolescents are benign (see also Chapter 708).

ETIOLOGY

The papillomaviruses are small (55 nm), DNA-­containing viruses that
are ubiquitous in nature, infecting most mammalian and many nonmammalian animal species. Strains are almost always species specific.
Viral DNA is divided into an early region, which encodes proteins
associated with viral replication and transcription, and a late region,
which encodes capsid proteins necessary for virion assembly. These
structural proteins are also the immunodominant antigens leading
to type-­specific immune responses. More than 100 different types
of HPVs have been identified through the comparison of sequence
homologies. The different HPV types typically cause disease in specific anatomic sites; more than 30 HPV types have been identified from
genital tract specimens.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

HPV infections of the skin are common, and most individuals are
probably infected with one or more HPV types at some time. There are
no animal reservoirs for HPV; all transmission is presumably from person to person. There is little evidence to suggest that HPV is transmitted by fomites. Common warts, including palmar and plantar warts,
are frequently seen in children and adolescents and typically infect the
hands and feet, common areas of frequent minor trauma.
HPV is also the most prevalent viral sexually transmitted infection
in the United States. Up to 80% of sexually active women will acquire
HPV through sexual transmission; most have their first infection
within 3 years of beginning sexual intercourse. Thus HPV disproportionately affects youth, with 75% of new infections occurring in 15-­to
24-­year-­olds. The greatest risk for HPV in sexually active adolescents
is exposure to new sexual partners, but HPV can still be acquired even
with a history of one partner, underscoring the ease of transmission of
this virus through sexual contact. It is estimated that after 11 acts of
sexual intercourse, 100% of all HPV types infecting an individual will
be transmitted to the other sexual partner. Couple studies show that

2053

there is high concordance in the genital area as well as between the hand
and the genital area in the other partner. Whether the DNA detected
in HPV on the hand is capable of transmitting infectious particles is
unknown. Unlike other sexually transmitted infections, female-­to-­
male transmission appears greater than male-­to-­female transmission.
This may be because males in general have superficial transient infections or deposition. In turn, males do not develop an adequate immune
response, so reinfections are quite common. The prevalence of HPV in
women decreases with time, suggesting immune protection, whereas
in men, the prevalence of HPV remains high across all ages.
As with many other genital pathogens, perinatal transmission to
newborns can occur. Transmission from caregiver to child during
the early childhood years has also been documented. However, both
perinatal and early childhood infections appear transient. It remains
unclear whether these HPV DNA detections are simply a deposition
of caregiver DNA or a true infection. Detection of HPV DNA in older
preadolescent children is rare. HPV DNA detection in non–sexually
active adolescents has been reported, but a history of sexual activity in
adolescents is not always disclosed and is therefore difficult to confirm.
Although caregivers can spread HPV to young children, if lesions are
detected in a child older than 3 years of age, the possibility of sexual
transmission should be raised.
In adolescents, HPV DNA is most commonly detected without evidence of any lesion. Some of these detections are thought to be the
result of partner deposition and hence do not represent a true infection. In older women, detection of HPV DNA is more commonly associated with a lesion. This is because the HPV DNA detected in older
women reflects those HPV infections that became established persistent infections. Persistence is now the known necessary prerequisite
for the development of significant precancerous lesions and cervical
cancer.
Approximately 15–20% of sexually active adolescents have detectable HPV at any given time and have normal cytologic findings. The
most common clinically detected lesion in adolescent women is the
cervical lesion termed low-­grade squamous intraepithelial lesion
(LSIL) (Table 313.1). LSILs can be found in 25–30% of adolescents
infected with HPV. External genital warts are much less common,
occurring in <1% of adolescents; the incidence has decreased since
introduction of HPV vaccines, but approximately 10% of individuals will develop genital warts in their lifetime. LSIL is a cytologic and
histologic term to reflect the benign changes caused by an active viral
infection and is likely present in most, if not all, women with HPV
infection. However, the majority of women have very minute or subtle
lesions not easily detected by cytology. As with HPV DNA detection,
most LSILs regress spontaneously in young women and do not require
any intervention or therapy. Less commonly, HPV can induce more
severe cellular changes, termed high-­grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions (HSILs) (see Chapter 590).
Although HSILs are considered precancerous lesions, they rarely
progress to invasive cancer. HSILs occur in approximately 0.4–3% of
sexually active women, whereas invasive cervical cancer occurs in 8
cases per 100,000 adult women. In the United States, there are approximately 12,000 new cases (∼7 cases/100,000) and 4,000 deaths from cervical cancer each year. Worldwide, cervical cancer is the fourth most
common cause of cancer deaths among women. HPV is also associated
with a range of other anogenital cancers, including an estimated 9,000
cases of anal cancer and 44,000 cases of oropharyngeal cancers in men
and women.
Some infants may acquire papillomaviruses during passage through
an infected birth canal, leading to recurrent juvenile laryngeal papillomatosis (JLP; also referred to as respiratory papillomatosis). Cases
also have been reported after cesarean section. The incubation period
for emergence of clinically apparent lesions (genital warts or laryngeal
papillomas) after perinatally acquired infection is unknown but is estimated to be around 3-­6 months (see Chapter 438.2). It may be that
infections can also occur during hygienic care from an infected parent.
Genital warts may represent a sexually transmitted infection even
in some very young children. Therefore genital warts appearing in
childhood should raise suspicion for possible sexual abuse with HPV

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2054 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 313.1  Terminology for Reporting Cervical Cytology
and Histology
DESCRIPTIVE DIAGNOSIS
OF EPITHELIAL CELL
ABNORMALITIES
SQUAMOUS CELL
Atypical squamous cells of
undetermined significance
(ASC-­US)

EQUIVALENT TERMINOLOGY
Squamous atypia

Atypical squamous cells,
cannot exclude HSIL (ASC-­H)
Low-­grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion (LSIL)

Mild dysplasia, condylomatous
atypia, HPV-­related changes,
koilocytic atypia, cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 1

High-­grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion (HSIL)

Moderate dysplasia, CIN 2, severe
dysplasia, CIN 3, carcinoma in situ

GLANDULAR CELL
Endometrial cells, cytologically benign, in a postmenopausal woman
Atypical
Endocervical cells, NOS
Endometrial cells, NOS
Glandular cells, NOS
Endocervical cells, favor neoplastic
Glandular cells, favor neoplastic
ENDOCERVICAL ADENOCARCINOMA IN SITU
Adenocarcinoma
Endocervical
Endometrial
Extrauterine
NOS
NOS, Not otherwise specified.

transmission during the abusive contact. A child with genital warts
should thus be provided with a complete evaluation for evidence of
possible abuse (see Chapter 17.1), including the presence of other sexually transmitted infections (see Chapter 163). However, the presence of
genital warts in a child does not confirm sexual abuse, because perinatally transmitted genital warts may go undetected until the child is
older. Typing for specific genital HPV types in children is not helpful
in diagnosis or to confirm sexual abuse status, because the same genital
types occur in both perinatal transmission and abuse. In true virginal
populations, including children who are not sexually abused, rates of
clinical disease are close to zero.

PATHOGENESIS

Initial HPV infection of the cervix or other anogenital surfaces is
thought to begin by viral invasion of the basal cells of the epithelium,
a process that is enhanced by disruption of the epithelium caused by
trauma or inflammation. It is thought that the virus initially remains
relatively dormant because virus is present without any evidence of
clinical disease. The life cycle of HPV depends on the differentiation
program of keratinocytes. The pattern of HPV transcription varies
throughout the epithelial layer and through different stages of disease (LSIL, HSIL, invasive cancer). Understanding of HPV transcription enhances understanding of its ability to behave as an oncovirus.
Early region proteins, E6 and E7, function as transactivating factors
that regulate cellular transformation. Complex interactions between
E6-­and E7-­transcribed proteins and host proteins result in the perturbation of normal processes that regulate cellular DNA synthesis.
The perturbations caused by E6 and E7 are primarily disruption of the
anti-­oncoprotein p53 and retinoblastoma protein (Rb), respectively,
contributing to the development of anogenital cancers. Disruption of
these proteins results in continued cell proliferation, even under the
circumstances of DNA damage, which leads to basal cell proliferation,
chromosomal abnormalities, and aneuploidy, hallmarks of squamous
intraepithelial lesion (SIL) development.

Evidence of productive viral infection occurs in benign lesions such
as external genital warts and LSILs, with the abundant expression of
viral capsid proteins in the superficial keratinocytes. The appearance of
the HPV-­associated koilocyte is a result of the expression of E4, a structural protein that causes collapse of the cytoskeleton. Low-­level expression of E6 and E7 proteins results in cell proliferation seen in the basal
cell layer of LSILs. LSILs are a manifestation of active viral replication
and protein expression. In HSILs, expression of E6 and E7 predominates throughout the epithelium, with little expression of the structural
proteins L1 and L2. This results in the chromosomal abnormalities and
aneuploidy characteristic of the higher-­grade lesions. The critical events
that lead to cancer have not been verified; however, several mechanisms
are thought to be critical, including viral integration into the host chromosome and activation of telomerase to lengthen chromosomes and
avoid physiologic cell senescence. Over 150 HPV types have been documented and are classified by extent of their DNA homology into 5
genera, with the different types having different life cycle and disease
characteristics. The predominant group is α HPV types, which are associated with cutaneous and mucosal anogenital infections and cancers.
β, γ, μ, and ν cause predominantly benign cutaneous lesions but can
be difficult to manage in severely immunocompromised individuals. Β
types are commonly detected on the skin without any apparent lesions
but are associated with the development of skin cancers in those with
epidermodysplasia verruciformis or other forms of immunodeficiencies. Genital lesions caused by the α HPV types may be broadly grouped
into those with little to no malignant potential (low risk) and those with
greater malignant potential (high risk). Low-­risk HPV types 6 and 11
are most commonly found in genital warts and are rarely found isolated
in malignant lesions. High-­risk HPV types are those types that are associated with anogenital cancers, specifically cervical cancer. HPV 16 and
18 are thought to be more oncogenic than other HPV types because
they comprise 70% of cervical cancers, whereas each of the other 12
high-­risk types (31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 68, and 73) contribute less than 1–9%. HPV 16 appears to be even more important
in anal and HPV-­associated oropharyngeal cancers, comprising close
to 90% of these cancers. HPV 16 is also commonly found in women
without lesions or in those with LSILs, making the connection with
cancer confusing. Genital warts and SIL are commonly associated with
the detection of multiple HPV types, including a combination of low-­
and high-­risk HPV types. Data show that it is likely that a single lesion
arises from a single HPV type. Detection of multiple HPV types reflects
the presence of cervical and anal coexisting lesions. Almost all (95%)
incident low-­risk and high-­risk HPV DNA detections, with or without
detectable SIL, will spontaneously resolve within 1-­3 years. Although
HPV 16 has a slower rate of regression than some of the other high-­
risk types, the majority of incident HPV 16 detections also will resolve.
Data suggest that clearance of an HPV type results in natural immune
protection against reinfection with that same type. Redetections of the
same type are not common and when found are often associated with a
history of a new sexual partner, suggesting that these are not reactivated
infections but are due to new exposures. These redetections rarely result
in high-­grade disease. Persistent high-­risk–type infections are associated with increased risk for development of HSILs and invasive cancer.
Progression of HSIL to invasive cancer is still rare, with only 5–15%
showing progression. Approximately 50% of HPV 16–associated HSILs
and 80% of non–HPV 16 HSILs will spontaneously regress in young
women. Genital and common warts in general also resolve without
therapy but may take years to do so. Genital warts in only extremely
rare conditions can become malignant.
Most infants with recognized genital warts are infected with the
low-­risk types. In contrast, children with a history of sexual abuse
have a clinical picture more like that of adult genital warts, consisting of mixed low-­and high-­risk types. There are rare reports of HPV-­
associated genital malignancies occurring in preadolescent children
and adolescents. On the other hand, precancerous HSILs do occur
in sexually active adolescents. There is a concern that younger age of
sexual debut has contributed to the increase in invasive cervical cancers seen in women younger than 50 years of age in the United States,
specifically cervical adenocarcinomas. Persistent HPV infections are
considered necessary but not sufficient for the development of invasive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 313 u Human Papillomaviruses

2055

which may occur in men and women without a history of anal sex.
Although rare, lesions caused by genital genotypes can also be found on
other mucosal surfaces, such as the conjunctivae, tongue, gingivae, and
nasal mucosa. They may be single or multiple lesions and are frequently
found in multiple anatomic sites, including the cervix. External genital
warts can be flat, dome shaped, keratotic, pedunculated, and cauliflower
shaped and may occur singly, in clusters, or as plaques. On mucosal
epithelium, the lesions are softer. Depending on the size and anatomic
location, lesions may be pruritic and painful, may cause burning with
urination, may be friable and bleed, or may become superinfected.
Adolescents are frequently disturbed by the development of genital
lesions. Other rarer lesions caused by HPV of the external genital area
include Bowen disease, bowenoid papulosis, squamous cell carcinomas,
Buschke-­Löwenstein tumors, and vulvar intraepithelial neoplasias.

Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions and Cancers

Fig. 313.1 Common warts of the left hand and the chest wall. (From

Meneghini CL, Bonifaz E. An Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology, Chicago:
Year Book; 1986:45.)

SILs detected with cytology are usually invisible to the naked eye and
require the aid of colposcopic magnification and acetic acid. With aid,
the lesions appear white and show evidence of neovascularity. SILs
can occur on the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, and intraanus. HPV-­
associated squamous cell lesions can also be found in the oropharynx.
Invasive cancers tend to be more exophytic, with aberrant-­appearing
vasculature. These lesions are rarely found in non–sexually active
individuals.

Laryngeal Papillomatosis

The median age at diagnosis of recurrent laryngeal papillomatosis is 3
years. Children present with hoarseness, an altered cry, and sometimes
stridor. Rapid growth of respiratory papillomas can occlude the upper
airway, causing respiratory compromise. These lesions may recur
within weeks of removal, requiring frequent surgery. The lesions do
not become malignant unless treated with irradiation.

DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 313.2 Common warts of the hand in a mother and perianal condylomata acuminata in her son. (From Meneghini CL, Bonifaz E. An Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology, Chicago: Year Book; 1986:44.)

cancers. Other risk factors for which there is relatively strong suggestive evidence of association include smoking cigarettes, prolonged oral
contraceptive use, greater parity, and Chlamydia trachomatis and herpes simplex virus infections.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical findings in HPV infection depend on the site of epithelial
infection.

Skin Lesions

The typical HPV-­induced lesions of the skin are proliferative, papular,
and hyperkeratotic. Common warts are raised circinate lesions with a
keratinized surface (Fig. 313.1). Plantar and palmar warts are practically flat. Multiple warts are common and may create a mosaic pattern.
Flat warts appear as small (1-­to 5-­mm), flat, flesh-­colored papules.

Genital Warts

Genital warts may be found throughout the perineum around the anus,
vagina, and urethra, as well as in the cervical, intravaginal, and intraanal
areas (Fig. 313.2). Intraanal warts occur predominantly in patients who
have had receptive anal intercourse, in contrast with perianal warts,

The diagnosis of external genital warts and common warts may be
reliably determined by visual inspection of a lesion by an experienced
observer and does not require additional tests for confirmation. A
biopsy should be considered if the diagnosis is uncertain, the lesions
do not respond to therapy, or the lesions worsen during therapy.
Screening for cervical cancer in young women begins with cytology, which is performed by either Papanicolaou smear or liquid-­based
cytology and may also include high-­risk HPV DNA testing for women
age 30-­65 years. Screening guidelines were updated in 2018 by the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) and recommend starting
screening at age 21 years. Screening earlier is more likely to result in
unnecessary referrals for colposcopy, because most lesions, including
both LSILs and HSILs in this age-­group, are likely to regress. Guidelines recommend screening with cytology every 3 years through 29
years of age. For women age 30-­65 years of age, USPSTF recommends
screening every 3 years with cervical cytology alone, or every 5 years
with high-­risk HPV testing alone or high-­risk HPV testing with cytology (co-testing). High-­risk HPV testing is not recommended earlier
than age 30 years, because HPV infections are extremely common in
young women, resulting in a very low positive predictive value in this
age-­group. These recommendations apply to all persons who have a
cervix, regardless of sexual history of HPV vaccination history.
The recommended terminology used for cytologic evaluation is
based on the Bethesda system (see Table 313.1). Recent updates to the
terminology used for histology uses similar terms. Many clinicians
still prefer the World Health Organization terminology using cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 1, 2, and 3 (see Table 313.1). Although
the purpose of screening is to identify CIN 3+ lesions, the majority
of CIN lesions are found in women who were referred for atypical
squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-­US) or LSILs
on cytology. On the other hand, few CIN 3 or cancers exist in women
younger than 24 years of age. Thus, for women 21-­24 years of age, ASC­US and LSILs are treated the same.
Consensus guidelines from the American Society of Colposcopy and
Cervical Pathology for the management of cervical cancer screening
abnormalities were updated in 2019 and used a risk-­based (related to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2056 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
a patient’s risk of CIN 3) rather than test-­based algorithm. Treatment
guidelines are also dichotomized by age group, 21-­24 years and 25 years
or older. Women age 21-­24 years with ASC-­US or LSIL should have
repeat cytology at 12 months and 24 months after the initial abnormal
result. For persistent ASC-­US or LSILs at 2 years of follow-­up or for
HSIL at any point, referral for colposcopy is recommended. If colposcopy results show LSIL, cytology should be repeated in 1 year. If there
are two negative cytology results, routine age-­based screening can be
resumed. If repeat cytology shows HSIL with CIN2+, observation with
repeat colposcopy every 6 months should be performed. If HSIL persists for 2 years or if CIN 3+ is identified, treatment with an excisional
procedure is recommended. In women 25 years of age and older, HSIL
can be treated without histologic confirmation. However, this approach
should be avoided in those 21-­24 years of age, because HSIL is often
misdiagnosed in this group or will resolve spontaneously.
In all women age 21 years and older, high-­risk HPV testing is acceptable to assist in ASC-­US triage. This recommendation is based on the
observations that adult women with ASC-­US and a positive HPV test
result for high-­risk types are more likely to have CIN 2/3 than women
with a negative HPV test result. However, in women with ASC-­US
and a positive HPV test for high-­risk types, repeat cytology is recommended for confirmation. In women 21-­24 years of age referred for
colposcopy and found to have no lesion or biopsy-­confirmed LSIL
after ASC-­US or LSIL cytology, repeat cytology is recommended at
12-­month intervals as described previously. In women with biopsy-­
confirmed LSIL after atypical squamous cells of high grade (ASC-­H)
or HSIL, observation with cytology and colposcopy is recommended at
6-­month intervals for up to 2 years. For persistent ASC-­H or HSIL at
2 years or progression at any time, treatment is recommended. These
guidelines and updates can be found at http://www.asccp.org.
Very sensitive tests for the presence of HPV DNA, RNA, and proteins are becoming generally available, although they are not required
for the diagnosis of external genital warts or related conditions. There
are no indications for HPV DNA testing in women younger than 21
years of age or children. HPV DNA testing is also not recommended in
women 21-­29 years of age but is acceptable for ASC-­US triage. Diagnosis of JLP is made based on laryngeal examination. There are no routine
screening recommendations for noncervical or oropharyngeal lesions.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A number of other conditions should be considered in the differential diagnosis of genital warts, including condyloma latum, seborrheic keratoses, dysplastic and benign nevi, molluscum contagiosum,
pearly penile papules, neoplasms, Bowen disease, bowenoid papulosis,
Buschke-­Löwenstein tumors, and vulvar intraepithelial neoplasias.
Condyloma latum is caused by secondary syphilis and can be diagnosed with darkfield microscopy and standard serologic tests for
syphilis. Seborrheic keratoses are common, localized, hyperpigmented
lesions that are rarely associated with malignancy. Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a poxvirus, is highly infectious, and is often umbilicated. Pearly penile papules occur at the penile corona and are normal
variants that require no treatment.

TREATMENT

Most common (plantar, palmar, skin) warts eventually resolve spontaneously (see Chapter 708). Symptomatic lesions should be removed.
Removal includes a variety of self-­applied therapies, including salicylic
acid preparations and provider-­applied therapies (cryotherapy, laser
therapy, electrosurgery). Genital warts are benign and usually remit,
but only over an extended period. It is recommended that genital
lesions be treated if the patient or the parent requests therapy. Treatments for genital warts are categorized into self-­applied and provider-­
applied. No one therapy has been shown to be more efficacious than
any other. Recommended patient-­
applied treatment regimens for
external genital warts include topical podofilox, imiquimod, and sinecatechins. Podofilox 0.5% solution (using a cotton swab) or gel (using a
finger) is applied to visible warts in a cycle of applications twice per day
for 3 days followed by 4 days of no therapy, repeated for up to a total
of four cycles as needed. The total volume of podofilox used per day
should not exceed 0.5 mL, and patients should wash hands before and

after each application. Imiquimod 5% cream is applied at bedtime, 3
times per week, every other day, for up to 16 weeks. Imiquimod 3.75%
cream is applied at bedtime every night for up to 8 weeks. For both formulations, the treated area should be washed with mild soap and water
6-­10 hours after treatment. Sinecatechins (15% ointment) is a topical
product from green tea extract used for external genital wart treatment
that is applied 3 times daily until warts have completely resolved but no
longer than 16 weeks. A 0.5-­cm strand of ointment should be applied
to each wart as a thin layer.
Provider-­applied therapies include surgical treatments (electrosurgery, tangential scissor or shave excision, curettage, laser surgery),
cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen or a cryoprobe and office-­based application of bichloroacetic (BCA) or trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 80–90%
solution. Surgical treatments require appropriate training and equipment but can be most beneficial for patients with large or extensive
warts. Surgical removal or cryotherapy are also recommended for
urethral meatus warts, while surgical removal, cryotherapy or BCA /
TCA is recommended for vaginal, cervical, and intraanal warts. BCA
or TCA treatment should be applied only to warts and can be repeated
once per week for 3-­6 weeks.
Alternative regimens include podophyllin resin, intralesional interferon, photodynamic therapy, and topical cidofovir, but there are few
available data regarding their efficacy. Intralesional interferon is associated with significant adverse effects and is reserved for treatment
of recalcitrant cases. Podophyllin resin is no longer recommended
because of the availability of other, safer regimens but may be considered for provider-­administered treatment if there can be strict adherence to recommendations to prevent complications from systemic
absorption.
Many therapies are painful, and children should not undergo painful genital treatments unless adequate pain control is provided. Parents and patients should not be expected to apply painful therapies
themselves. None of the patient-­applied therapies are approved for use
during pregnancy, and podofilox is contraindicated in pregnancy. For
any of the nonsurgical treatments, prescription is contraindicated in a
patient with any history of hypersensitivity to any product constituents.
If HPV exposure as a result of sexual abuse is suspected or known,
the clinician should ensure that the child’s safety has been achieved and
is maintained.
When indicated, the most common treatments for CIN 2/3 are ablative and excisional treatments, including cryotherapy, laser, and loop
electrosurgical excisional procedures. Once confirmed by histology
with CIN 1, LSILs can be observed as described previously. The decision to treat a persistent CIN 1 rests between the provider and patient.
Risks of treatment, including premature delivery in a future pregnancy,
should be discussed before any treatment decision. Treatment in pregnancy is not recommended unless invasive cancer is present.
JLP is commonly treated with surgical removal of lesions, but laser
and microdebriders are also used. However, because of the incidence
of scar formation after repeat debridement procedures, medical
therapies have been increasingly investigated. Adjunctive treatments
have included interferon-­α, antivirals such as cidofovir administered
locally or systemically, photodynamic therapy, antiinflammatory drugs
(celecoxib), heat shock protein, human monoclonal antibodies (bevacizumab), and HPV vaccination. However, the effectiveness of adjunctive therapies is not consistent.

COMPLICATIONS

The presence of HPV lesions in the genital area may be a cause of profound embarrassment to a child or parent. Complications of therapy
are uncommon; chronic pain (vulvodynia) or hypoesthesia may occur
at the treatment site. Lesions may heal with hypopigmentation or
hyperpigmentation and less commonly with depressed or hypertrophic
scars. Surgical therapies can lead to infection and scarring. Premature
delivery and low birthweight in future pregnancies are complications
of excisional therapy for CIN.
It is estimated that 5–15% of untreated CIN 3 lesions will progress to
cervical cancer. Most cancer is prevented by early detection and treatment of these lesions. Despite screening, cervical cancer develops rapidly in a few adolescents and young women. The reason for the rapid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 313 u Human Papillomaviruses
development of cancer in these rare cases remains unknown, but host
genetic defects are likely underlying causes. JLPs rarely become malignant, unless they have been treated with irradiation. Vulvar condylomas rarely become cancerous. HPV-­associated cancers of the vagina,
vulva, anus, penis, and oral cavity are much rarer than cervical tumors,
and therefore screening for noncervical lesions is not currently recommended. However, anal, vaginal, and vulvar cancers are more common in women with cervical cancer; thus it is recommended to screen
women with cervical cancer for other anogenital or oropharyngeal
tumors with visual and/or digital inspection

PROGNOSIS

With all forms of therapy, genital warts commonly recur, and approximately half of children and adolescents require a second or third treatment. Recurrence is also evident in patients with JLP. Patients and
parents should be warned of this likelihood. Combination therapy for
genital warts (imiquimod and podofilox) does not improve response
and may increase complications. Prognosis of cervical disease is better, with 85–90% cure rates after a single treatment with the loop electrosurgical excision procedure. Cryotherapy has a slightly lower cure
rate. Recalcitrant disease should prompt an evaluation and is common
in immunocompromised individuals, specifically men and women
infected with HIV.

PREVENTION

The only means of preventing all types of HPV infection is to avoid
direct contact with lesions. Condoms may reduce the risk for HPV
transmission; condoms also prevent other sexually transmitted infections, which are risk factors associated with SIL development. In addition, condoms appear to hasten the regression of LSILs in women.
Avoiding smoking cigarettes is important in preventing cervical cancer. Prolonged oral contraceptive use and parity have been shown to
be risks for cervical cancer. However, the mechanisms associated with
these factors have not been identified, and consequently no change in
counseling is recommended.
HPV vaccines show efficacy against type-­specific persistence and
development of type-­specific disease, including the cervix, vagina,
vulva, and anus. A quadrivalent HPV vaccine containing types 6, 11,
16, and 18 was licensed in the United States in 2006, and a bivalent
HPV vaccine containing types 16 and 18 was licensed in the United
States in 2009. A 9-­valent vaccine containing types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33,
45, 52, and 58 was approved in 2014. Initial licensure was for vaccination of persons age 9-­26 years. In 2018, the FDA expanded licensure to
include men and women age 27-­45 years based on quadrivalent HPV
vaccine clinical trial results in women age 27-­45 years and bridging
immunogenicity and safety data in women and men. The bivalent vaccine is indicated for the prevention of cervical precancer and cancer in
females. The 4-­and 9-­valent HPV vaccines are indicated for the prevention of anal, cervical, vaginal, and vulvar precancers/cancers, as well
as genital warts in females and anal precancer cancer and genital warts
in males. The indication for the 9-­valent HPV vaccine was expanded to
include oropharyngeal and other head and neck cancers in 2021.
The types targeted by the nonavalent vaccine account for up to
85% of cervical cancer cases. The efficacy of these vaccines is mediated by the development of neutralizing antibodies. Prelicensure studies demonstrate 90–100% efficacy in the prevention of persistent HPV
infection, CIN 2/3, adenocarcinoma in situ, anogenital warts, and precancerous vaginal and vulvar lesions. Since vaccine introduction, data
from Sweden and Australia show a decrease in national rates of genital warts within 4 years of implementing vaccination programs. Data
from the United States show significant reductions in the prevalence
of the HPV types contained in the quadrivalent vaccine among adolescent and young adult females in the years 2009–2012 (postvaccine)
compared with 2003–2006 (prevaccine). Additionally, the HPV vaccine–type prevalence was 2.1% in vaccinated compared with 16.9% in
unvaccinated 14-­to 24-­year-­old sexually active females. A systematic
review of 20 studies conducted in nine high-­income countries showed
reductions of at least 68% in the prevalence of HPV 16 and 18 among

2057

13-­to 19-­year-­olds in countries with HPV vaccination rates >50%.
Recent data also demonstrate significant reductions in cervical cancer
rates and CIN 3 with the highest reductions among women who were
vaccinated at age 12-­13 years after implementation of a national HPV
vaccination program in the United Kingdom. A 29% reduction in cervical cancer annual incidence rates from 2003–2006 to 2011–2014 was
observed among females age 15-­24 years in the United States. Additionally, an analysis of data from a population-­based cancer registry
showed a decline in the incidence of squamous cell carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma among young women age 15-­29 years, with the largest reductions in the 15-­to 20-­year age group. Available effectiveness
data suggest that HPV vaccination confers herd immunity in addition
to individual protection.
Vaccination in the United States is recommended routinely for all
adolescents at 11-­12 years of age and is administered intramuscularly
in the deltoid region in a two-­dose series at 0 and 6-­12 months. A two-­
dose series was approved and recommended in 2016 for younger adolescents who initiate the HPV vaccine series before age 15 years based
on immunogenicity data showing a comparable immune response
among younger adolescents who receive a two-­dose series compared
with older adolescents, who receive a three-­dose series. The effectiveness of one dose has also been evaluated in observational and post-­hoc
analyses from clinical trials.
It is important that vaccination take place in children before they
become sexually active, because the rate of HPV acquisition is high
shortly after the onset of sexual activity. Vaccine can be given to adolescents as young as 9 years of age, and catch-­up vaccination is now
recommended in all persons through 26 years of age. Vaccination is
also recommended for adults 27-­45 years using shared clinical decision
making if they have not been previously vaccinated. For any adolescent
who receives his or her first HPV vaccine dose at age 15 years or older,
a three-­dose series at 0, 1-­2, and 6 months is recommended. The three-­
dose series is also recommended for adolescents and young adults 9-­26
years of age who have an immunocompromising condition. Individuals who are already infected with one or more vaccine-­related HPV
types before vaccination are protected from clinical disease caused
by the remaining vaccine HPV types. Therefore a history of prior
HPV infection is not a contraindication to vaccine receipt. Currently
licensed HPV vaccines are not therapeutic. However, there are therapeutic HPV vaccines under development that are primarily designed
to generate a cell-­mediated immune response to target infected cells.
Post-­licensure vaccine safety surveillance has not identified any serious adverse events attributable to HPV vaccine receipt. Three large
observational studies and safety monitoring through active and passive surveillance networks among more than 1 million individuals have
not identified any association between HPV vaccination and outcomes
such as autoimmune disorders, stroke, or venous thrombotic emboli.
Vaccination can cause fever in approximately 1 in 60 and discomfort
at the injection site in 1 in 30 vaccine recipients. Syncope has also been
found to be correlated with vaccine administration in 0.1% of vaccine
recipients. Therefore it is advised that adolescents remain seated for 15
minutes after vaccination.
Despite an excellent safety and efficacy profile, HPV vaccine uptake
has been slow. Immunization rates have consistently lagged behind
rates for the other vaccines included in the adolescent immunization
platform. In 2020, 75% of 13-­to 17-­year-­olds had received at least one
HPV vaccine dose compared with 89% who received at least one dose
of the quadrivalent meningococcal vaccine and 92% who received
tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine. Reasons for
the slow uptake include inconsistent provider recommendation, lack
of knowledge about HPV, parental belief that vaccination is not necessary for younger adolescents, and misconceptions about vaccine
safety, among others. There is a growing body of literature evaluating
interventions to improve HPV vaccine uptake. One important strategy
is a strong, consistent recommendation in which HPV vaccines are
presented in the same way as Tdap and meningococcal vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2058 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 314

Arboviral Infections
Scott B. Halstead
The arthropod-­borne viral infections are caused by a group of
mosquito-­or tick-­transmitted viral pathogens of several taxa and
manifest clinically mostly as neurologic infections, influenza-­like
illnesses, or acute viral exanthems. In temperate countries, arboviruses are transmitted during warmer weather; however, in tropical
and subtropical countries, arboviruses may be transmitted year-­
round either in an urban cycle (human to mosquito to human) or
by arthropods that feed on other vertebrate species and then feed
on humans.

ETIOLOGY

The principal arthropod-­borne viral infections in North America
are West Nile encephalitis (WNE), St. Louis encephalitis (SLE),
Powassan (POW) encephalitis, a complex of California encephalitis group viruses, and, less frequently, western equine encephalitis
(WEE), eastern equine encephalitis (EEE), and Colorado tick fever
(Fig. 314.1). In 2013, chikungunya virus (CHIK) emerged from its
original African zoonosis via Asia into the tropical and subtropical Western Hemisphere, exposing indigenes and many visitors
who were traveling in the region. A few cases occurred in southern
United States. In 2015, Zika virus (ZIKV), a flavivirus also maintained in Africa zoonoses, was introduced into the Americas, again
from endemic areas in Asia. Limited transmission occurred within
the continental United States. The major source of infection among
Americans for each of these viruses has been travel to tropical and
subtropical countries. CHIK appears to be endemic now, whereas
ZIKV illnesses have decreased dramatically.
Throughout the world outside North America, there are many
arboviruses that pose major health problems (Fig. 314.2). In descending order, these are the dengue viruses (DENV; Chapter 315), transmitted in all subtropical and tropical countries; Japanese encephalitis
(JE), transmitted in northern, southern, and Southeast Asia; tick-­
borne encephalitis (TBE), transmitted across Europe and into northern and eastern Asia; yellow fever (YF; Chapter 316), transmitted
from zoonotic cycles in Africa and South America; and Venezuelan
equine encephalitis (VEE), transmitted in parts of South and Central
America.
The etiologic agents belong to different viral taxa: alphaviruses of
the family Togaviridae (CHIK, EEE, VEE, WEE), flaviviruses of the
family Flaviviridae (DENV, JE, POW, SLE, TBE, WNE, YF, ZIKV),
the California complex of the family Bunyaviridae (California
encephalitis), and Reoviridae (Colorado tick fever virus). Alphaviruses are 69-­nm, enveloped, positive-­sense RNA viruses. Studies
suggest that this group of viruses had a marine origin (specifically
the southern ocean) and has subsequently spread to both the Old
and New Worlds. VEE circulates in nature in six subtypes. Virus
types I and III have multiple antigenic variants. Types IAB and IC
have caused epizootics and human epidemics. Flaviviruses are 40-­
to 50-­nm, enveloped, positive-­sense RNA viruses that evolved from
a common ancestor. They are mosquito-­borne (WNE, SLE, JE, YF,
DENV, ZIKV) and tick-­borne (POW, TBE) agents, globally distributed, and responsible for many important human viral diseases.
The California serogroup, 1 of 16 Bunyavirus groups, are 75-­to
115-­nm enveloped viruses possessing a three-­segment, negative-­
sense RNA genome. Reoviruses are 60-­to 80-­nm double-­stranded
RNA viruses.

DIAGNOSIS

For arboviral infections not described separately, the etiologic diagnosis is established by testing either an acute-­phase serum to detect
the virus, viral antigen, or viral RNA (influenza-­like illnesses or viral
exanthems) or by recovery of virus from central nervous system
(CNS) tissue or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). More commonly, the diagnosis is established serologically. Serum obtained ≥5 days after the
onset of illness is tested for the presence of virus-­specific immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibodies using an enzyme-­linked immunosorbent
assay IgM capture test, an indirect immunofluorescence test, or a precipitin test. Alternatively, acute and convalescent sera can be tested
for a fourfold or greater increase in enzyme-­linked immunosorbent
assay, hemagglutination inhibition, or neutralizing antibody titers.
Commercial serologic diagnostic kits are marketed for DENV, CHIK,
JE, TBE, WNE, YF, and ZIKV viral infections. The serum and CSF
should be tested for JE or WNE virus–specific IgM. However, IgM
may reflect past infection, because it may be present up to 12 months
after infection. For suspected flavivirus infections, including ZIKV, it
may be possible to establish infection using a serologic test, calling on
the specificity of neutralizing antibodies. The most common of these
is the plaque or focus-­reduction neutralizing antibody test. Reference
laboratories offer tests for all of the pathogenic flaviviruses. The diagnosis may also be established by the isolation of virus in cell cultures,
by identification of viral RNA, or by detection of viral proteins (e.g.,
dengue NS1) from blood, brain tissue obtained by brain biopsy, or
tissues obtained at autopsy.

PREVENTION

Several vaccines for JE and TBE are licensed in endemic and nonendemic countries. An experimental vaccine for VEE is available
to protect laboratory workers. Travelers who plan to be in rural
areas of Asia during the expected period of seasonal transmission
should receive JE vaccine. Similarly, travelers who plan to travel,
camp, or picnic in rural areas of Europe and East Asia should consult local health authorities concerning the need to be vaccinated
against TBE. An inactivated JE vaccine manufactured in Japan by
intracerebral injection of young mice once available throughout
the world was taken off the market owing to a high incidence of
adverse events. In 2008–2009, tissue culture–based JE vaccine (Ixiaro) was licensed in Europe, Australia, and the United States. In the
United States, this vaccine, licensed for use in children and adults,
distributed by Novartis (Basel), is administered intramuscularly as
two doses of 0.5 mL each, 28 days apart. The final dose should be
completed at least 1 week before the patient’s expected arrival in a
JE endemic area. This vaccine contains alum and protamine sulfate
and has exhibited only mild adverse events. Chimerivax-­JE, marketed by Sanofi Pasteur and licensed in Australia and several Asian
countries, is a live-­attenuated two-­dose vaccine composed of the
structural gene of JE inserted into the YF 17D vaccine backbone.
A highly efficacious live-­attenuated single-­dose JE vaccine, SA 14-­
14-­2, developed in China for children is licensed and marketed in
Asian countries. This vaccine can be co-­administered with live-­
attenuated measles vaccine without altering the immune responses
to either vaccine. In humans, prior DENV infection provides partial
protection against clinical JE.
No TBE vaccines are licensed or available in the United States.
Two inactivated cell culture–derived TBE vaccines are available
in Europe, in adult and pediatric formulations: FSME-­IMMUN
(Baxter, Austria) and Encepur (Novartis, Germany). The adult formulation of FSME-­IMMUN is also licensed in Canada. Two other
inactivated TBE vaccines are available in Russia: TBE-­
Moscow
(Chumakov Institute, Russia) and EnceVir (Microgen, Russia).
Immunogenicity studies suggest that the European and Russian
vaccines should provide cross-­protection against all three TBE virus
subtypes. For both FSME-­IMMUN and Encepur, the primary vaccination series consists of three doses. The specific recommended

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 314 u Arboviral Infections
Human Eastern Equine Encephalitis Cases by State, 1964-2010

2059

Human Western Equine Encephalitis Cases by State, 1964-2007

EEE Human cases

WEE Human cases
VT

VT

13

NH 10

27

MA 37

1

MA

43

4

1

RI

16
2

6

2

40

16

CT

CT
1

6
173

53

NJ 20

RI

1

5

26

3
4

NH

78

36

NJ

7

17
DE

3
13

MD 16

28

MD

17

2

AK

3

2

13
7

6

DE

94

AK

DC

DC

70
HI

A

WV

Puerto Rico

HI

B

Human Saint Louis Encephalitis Cases by State, 1964-2010

Puerto Rico

Human California Serogroup* Viral Encephalitis Cases by State, 1964-2010

SLE Human cases

CAL Human cases
VT

4
2

VT

1

MA

MA
367

5

10

5
33

1

697 369

1

123

41

7

127
12

1021

441
8

77

68

31

NJ 131
DE

1

241 143

1

1

5

MD

9

2

23

DC

5

AK

9

2

NJ

3

DE

5

3
7

27

MD

4

25
DC

380
HI

1

237

163
14

168

918
28

14

79

RI
CT

8

134

1

6

141
348 150

AK

RI
CT

58

586

37

25

14
88

NH

1
8

3

4

NH

19

2

WV

4
WV 12

Puerto Rico

HI

C

D

Puerto Rico

WV 602

*The majority of reported California serogroup cases are La Crosse virus (LAC).

Powassan Virus Neuroinvasive Disease Cases Reported by State, 2001-2012
POWV Human cases
VT

NH
2
MA

19
13

10
1

RI

1
CT
1

NJ
DE
MD

AK

E

DC

HI

Puerto Rico

WV

Fig. 314.1 The distribution and incidence of reported cases of eastern equine encephalitis (A), western equine encephalitis (B), St. Louis encephalitis (C), California serogroup encephalitis (D), and Powassan encephalitis; (E), reported by state to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
1964 to 2010. (From Division of Vector-­Borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/arbor/arbo
case/htm)

intervals between doses vary by country and vaccine. Because the
routine primary vaccination series requires ≥6 months for completion, most travelers to TBE-­endemic areas will find avoiding tick
bites to be more practical than vaccination.
For all viral diseases discussed in this chapter, personal measures
should be taken to reduce exposure to mosquito or tick bites, especially
for short-­term residents in endemic areas. These measures include
avoiding evening outdoor exposure, using insect repellents, covering

the body with clothing, and using bed nets or house screening. Commercial pesticides, widely used by rice farmers, may be useful in reducing populations of vector mosquitoes or ticks. Fenthion, fenitrothion,
and phenthoate are effectively adulticidal and larvicidal. Insecticides
may be applied from portable sprayers or from helicopters or light
aircraft.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2060 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Flaviviridae
Zika Virus
Japanese encephalitis virus
Yellow fever virus
West Nile virus
Saint Louis encephalitis virus
Tick-borne encephalitis virus
Dengue virus

Togaviridae (alphaviruses)
Venezuelan equine
encephalitis virus
Sindbis virus
O’Nyong-nyong virus
Ross River virus
Chikungunya virus

A

B

Bunyaviridae
Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic
fever virus
Toscana virus
La Crosse virus
Rift Valley fever virus

C
Fig. 314.2 World distribution of major arbovirus infections. (From Charlier C, Beaudoin MC, Couderc T, et al. Arboviruses and pregnancy: maternal, fetal, and neonatal effects. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2017;1:134–146. Fig. 1.)

314.1 Eastern Equine Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
In the United States, EEE is a disease with a very low incidence, with a
median of eight cases occurring annually in the Atlantic and Gulf states
from 1964 to 2007. A severe outbreak in 2019 resulted in 19 fatalities
among 38 cases (see Fig. 314.1). Transmission occurs often in focal
endemic areas of the coast of Massachusetts, the six southern counties
of New Jersey, and northeastern Florida. In North America, the virus
is maintained in freshwater swamps in a zoonotic cycle involving the
Culiseta melanura mosquito and birds. Various other mosquito species
obtain viremic meals from birds and transmit the virus to horses and
humans. Virus activity varies markedly from year to year in response to
still unknown ecologic factors. Most infections in birds are silent, but
infections in pheasants are often fatal, and epizootics in these species
are used as sentinels for periods of increased viral activity. Cases have
been recognized on Caribbean islands. The case:infection ratio is lowest in children (1:8) and somewhat higher in adults (1:29).
EEE virus infections result in fulminant encephalitis with a rapid
progression to coma and death in one third of cases. In infants and
children, abrupt onset of fever, irritability, and headache are followed
by lethargy, confusion, seizures, and coma. High temperature, bulging fontanel, stiff neck, and generalized flaccid or spastic paralysis are
observed. There may be a brief prodrome of fever, headache, and dizziness. Unlike most other viral encephalitides, the peripheral white
blood cell count usually demonstrates a marked leukocytosis and the
CSF may show marked pleocytosis. Pathologic changes are found in
the cortical and gray matter, with viral antigens localized to neurons.
There is necrosis of neurons, neutrophilic infiltration, and perivascular
cuffing by lymphocytes.
The prognosis in EEE is better for patients with a prolonged prodrome; the occurrence of convulsions conveys a poor prognosis.
Patient fatality rates are 33–75% and are highest in the elderly. Residual
neurologic defects are common, especially in children.

The diagnosis of encephalitis may be aided by CT or MRI and by
electroencephalography. Focal seizures or focal findings on CT or
MRI or electroencephalography should suggest the possibility of herpes simplex encephalitis, which should be treated with acyclovir (see
Chapter 299).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.2 Western Equine Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
WEE infections occur principally in the United States and Canada
west of the Mississippi River (see Fig. 314.1). Cases occur mainly in
rural areas where water impoundments, irrigated farmland, and naturally flooded land provide breeding sites for the Culex tarsalis mosquito. The virus is transmitted in a cycle involving mosquitoes, birds,
and other vertebrate hosts. Humans and horses are susceptible to
encephalitis. The case:infection ratio varies by age, having been estimated at 1:58 in children younger than 4 years of age and 1:1,150 in
adults. Infections are most severe at the extremes of life; one third of
cases occur in children younger than 1 year of age. Recurrent human
epidemics have been reported from the Yakima Valley in Washington
State and the Central Valley of California; the largest outbreak on
record resulted in 3,400 cases and occurred in Minnesota, North and
South Dakota, Nebraska, and Montana, as well as Alberta, Manitoba,
and Saskatchewan, Canada. Epizootics in horses precede human epidemics by several weeks. For the past 20 years, only three cases of
WEE have been reported, presumably reflecting successful mosquito
abatement.
In WEE, there may be a prodrome with symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection. The onset is usually sudden with chills, fever, dizziness, drowsiness, increasing headache, malaise, nausea and vomiting,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 314 u Arboviral Infections
stiff neck, and disorientation. Infants typically present with the sudden
cessation of feeding, fussiness, fever, and protracted vomiting. Convulsions and lethargy develop rapidly. On physical examination, patients
are somnolent, exhibit meningeal signs, and have generalized motor
weakness and reduced deep tendon reflexes. In infants, a bulging fontanel, spastic paralysis, and generalized convulsions may be observed.
On pathologic examination, disseminated small focal abscesses, small
focal hemorrhages, and patchy areas of demyelination are distinctive.
Patient fatality rates in WEE are 3–9% and are highest in the elderly.
Major neurologic sequelae have been reported in up to 13% of cases
and may be as high as 30% in infants. Parkinsonian syndrome has been
reported as a residual in adult survivors.

2061

sensorium, restlessness, confusion, lethargy, and delirium or coma.
The peripheral white blood cell count is modestly elevated, with 100-­
200 white blood cells/μL found in the CSF. On autopsy, the brain shows
scattered foci of neuronal damage and perivascular inflammation.
The principal risk factor for fatal outcome of SLE is advanced age,
with patient fatality rates being as high as 80% in early outbreaks. In
children, mortality rates are 2–5%. In adults, underlying hypertensive
cardiovascular disease has been a risk factor for fatal outcome. Recovery from SLE is usually complete, but the rate of serious neurologic
sequelae has been reported to be as high as 10% in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.4 West Nile Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead

314.3 St. Louis Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
Cases of SLE are reported from nearly all states; the highest attack
rates occur in the gulf and central states (see Fig. 314.1). Epidemics
frequently occur in urban and suburban areas; the largest occurred in
1975 and involved 1,800 persons living in Houston, Chicago, Memphis,
and Denver. Cases often cluster in areas where there is ground water or
septic systems, which support mosquito breeding. The principal vectors are Culex pipiens and Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes in the
central gulf states, Culex nigripalpus in Florida, and Culex tarsalis in
California. SLE virus is maintained in nature in a bird-­mosquito cycle.
Viral amplification occurs in bird species abundant in residential areas
(e.g., sparrows, blue jays, and doves). Virus is transmitted in the late
summer and early fall. The case:infection ratio may be as high as 1:300.
Age-­specific attack rates are lowest in children and highest in individuals older than 60 years. The most recent small outbreaks were in Florida
in 1990 and Louisiana in 2001. For the past 15 years, there have been a
mean of 18 cases annually.
Clinical manifestations of SLE vary from a mild flulike illness to fatal
encephalitis. There may be a prodrome of nonspecific symptoms with
subtle changes in coordination or mentation of several days to 1 week
in duration. Early signs and symptoms include fever, photophobia,
headache, malaise, nausea, vomiting, and neck stiffness. About half of
patients exhibit an abrupt onset of weakness, incoordination, disturbed

*Per 100,000 population.

≥1.00
0.5–0.99
0.25–0.49
0.01–0.24
0.00

Fig. 314.3 Rate (per 100,000 population) of reported cases of West

Nile virus neuroinvasive disease, United States, 2016. (From Burakoff A,
Lehman J, Fischer M, et al. West Nile virus and other nationally notifiable arboviral diseases, United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2018;67[1]L13–17.)

West Nile virus (WNV) was imported into the United States in
1999 and survives in a broad enzootic cycle across the United States
and Canada. Every state in the continental United States plus nine
provinces in Canada have reported mosquito, bird, mammalian, or
human WN virus infection, most frequently during the summer or
fall months. Through the end of 2015, a total of 43,937 cases had
been reported in the United States, 40–50% of which were neuroinvasive, with 1,911 deaths (Fig. 314.3). In 2020, there were 505 WNV
cases, 159 of which were neuroinvasive, resulting in 52 deaths.
WNV transmission cycles have come to resemble JE with large
epizootics and human cases occurring every 5-­10 years. WNV has
entered the blood supply through asymptomatic viremic potential
blood donors. Since 2003, blood banks screen for WNV RNA. During the major outbreak of 2012, 597 viremic potential blood donors
were identified and the donation was rejected. WNV has also been
transmitted to humans via the placenta, breast milk, and organ
transplantation. Throughout its range, the virus is maintained in
nature by transmission between mosquitoes of the Culex genus and
various species of birds. In the United States, human infections are
largely acquired from C. pipiens. Horses are the nonavian vertebrates most likely to exhibit disease with WNV infection. During
the 2002 transmission season, 14,000 equine cases were reported,
with a mortality rate of 30%. Disease occurs predominantly in individuals >50 years of age. WNV has been implicated as the cause
of sporadic summertime cases of human encephalitis and meningitis in Israel, India, Pakistan, Romania, Russia, Canada, the United
States, and parts of Central and South America. All North and
South American WNVs are genetically similar and are related to a
virus recovered from a goose in Israel in 1998.
West Nile encephalitis (WNE) may be asymptomatic, but when
clinical features appear, they include an abrupt onset of high fever,
headache, myalgias, and nonspecific signs of emesis, rash, abdominal pain, or diarrhea. Most infections manifest as a flulike febrile
illness, whereas a minority of patients demonstrate meningitis or
encephalitis or both. Rarely there may be cardiac dysrhythmias,
myocarditis, rhabdomyolysis, optic neuritis, uveitis, retinitis, orchitis, pancreatitis, or hepatitis. WNV disease in the United States has
been accompanied by prolonged lymphopenia and an acute asymmetric polio-­like paralytic illness with CSF pleocytosis involving
the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord. A striking but uncommon feature has been parkinsonism and movement disorders (with
tremor and myoclonus). WNV infections have been shown to lead
to chronic kidney disease in a small group of patients.
Cases of WNE and deaths due to the disease occur mainly in the
elderly, although many serologic surveys show that persons of all ages
are infected. In 2015, among a total of 2,175 human cases, 1,455 were
neuroinvasive disease with 146 deaths, a 10% mortality rate (see Fig.
314.2). Paralysis may result in permanent weakness.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2062 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

314.5 Powassan Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
POW virus is transmitted by Ixodes cookei among small mammals
in eastern Canada and the United States; it has been responsible for
39 deaths in the United States since 2008 (see Fig. 314.1). Other ticks
may transmit the virus in a wider geographic area, and there is some
concern that Ixodes scapularis (also called Ixodes dammini), a competent vector in the laboratory, may become involved as it becomes more
prominent in the United States.
In a limited experience, POW encephalitis has occurred mainly in
adults with vocational or recreational exposure and has a high fatality
rate.
POW encephalitis has occurred mostly in adults living in enzootic
areas with vocational or recreational exposure; it is associated with significant long-­term morbidity and has a case fatality rate of 10–15%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.6 La Crosse and California Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
La Crosse viral infections are endemic in the United States, occurring
annually from July to September, principally in the north-­central and
central states (see Fig. 314.1). Infections occur in peridomestic environments as the result of bites from Aedes triseriatus mosquitoes, which
often breed in tree holes. The virus is maintained vertically in nature by
transovarial transmission and can be spread between mosquitoes by
copulation and amplified in mosquito populations by viremic infections in various vertebrate hosts. Amplifying hosts include chipmunks,
squirrels, foxes, and woodchucks. A case:infection ratio of 1:22-­300 has
been surmised. La Crosse encephalitis is principally a disease of children, who may account for up to 75% of cases. A mean of 100 cases has
been reported annually for the past 10 years.
The clinical spectrum includes a mild febrile illness, aseptic meningitis, and fatal encephalitis. Children typically present with a prodrome
of 2-­3 days of fever, headache, malaise, and vomiting. The disease
evolves with clouding of the sensorium, lethargy, and, in severe cases,
focal or generalized seizures. On physical examination, children are
lethargic but not disoriented. Focal neurologic signs, including weakness, aphasia, and focal or generalized seizures, have been reported in

Criteria

16–25% of cases. CSF shows low to moderate leukocyte counts. On
autopsy, the brain shows focal areas of neuronal degeneration, inflammation, and perivascular cuffing.
Recovery from California encephalitis is usually complete. The case
fatality rate is approximately 1%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.7 Colorado Tick Fever
Scott B. Halstead
Colorado tick fever virus is transmitted by the wood tick Dermacentor
andersoni, which inhabits high-­elevation areas of states extending from
the central plains to the Pacific coast. The tick is infected with the virus
at the larval stage and remains infected for life. Squirrels and chipmunks
serve as primary reservoirs. Human infections typically occur in hikers
and campers in indigenous areas during the spring and early summer.
Colorado tick fever begins with the abrupt onset of a flulike illness,
including high temperature, malaise, arthralgia and myalgia, vomiting,
headache, and decreased sensorium. Rash is uncommon. The symptoms rapidly disappear after 3 days of illness. However, in approximately
half of patients, a second identical episode reoccurs 24-­72 hours after
the first one, producing the typical saddleback temperature curve of
Colorado tick fever. Complications, including encephalitis, meningoencephalitis, and a bleeding diathesis, develop in 3–7% of infected persons
and may be more common in children younger than 12 years of age.
Recovery from Colorado tick fever is usually complete. Three deaths
have been reported, all in persons with hemorrhagic signs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.8 Chikungunya Fever
Scott B. Halstead
Chikungunya virus is enzootic in several species of African subhuman
primates but also is endemic in urban Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus
transmission cycles in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. From the 18th
century, chikungunya exited Africa eastward, producing Asian pandemics in 1790, 1824, 1872, 1924, 1963, and 2005. In 1827, chikungunya went the other direction via the slave trade, reaching the Western

Definition

1 Clinical criteria:
Acute onset of fever 38.5°C and severe
arthralgia or arthritis

Possible case when not explained by other medical
condition: dengue or alphaviral infection, arthritic disease,
endemic malaria

2 Epidemiologic criteria:
Residing in or visited epidemic area
within 15 days before onset of symptoms

Probable case if clinical and epidemiologic criteria are
met: other pathogens with similar clinical manifestations
can cocirculate within the same geographic region

3 Laboratory criteria:
After acute phase
• Virus isolation
• Presence of viral RNA
• Specific IgM antibodies
• Four-fold increase in IgG titers in paired
samples

Confirmed case if a patient tests positive for 1 of the
laboratory criteria, irrespective of clinical manifestations

Fig.

314.4 Algorithm showing
diagnostic criteria for chikungunya
virus fever. (From Burt FJ, Rolph
MS, Rulli NE, et al. Chikungunya: a re-­
emerging virus. Lancet.
2012;379:662–668. Fig. 6.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 314 u Arboviral Infections
Hemisphere predominantly in the Caribbean. In 2005, proceeding
again in an easterly direction, virus appeared on Reunion Island and
then traveled to Asia across the Indian Ocean. In 2013, chikungunya
virus from this epidemic was introduced into the Americas, where it
is now endemic.
Clinical manifestations begin 3-­7 days after a mosquito bite; the
onset is abrupt, with high fever and often severe joint symptoms
(hands, feet, ankles, wrists) that include symmetric bilateral polyarthralgia or arthritis. Infections in children are often asymptomatic,
but all ages are vulnerable to classic disease. There may be headache,
myalgias, conjunctivitis, weakness, lymphopenia, and a maculopapular
rash. Mortality is rare; some individuals develop prolonged joint symptoms (tenosynovitis, arthritis) lasting over a year. The acute episode
lasts 7-­10 days. The differential diagnosis includes dengue, West Nile,
enterovirus diseases, leptospirosis, rickettsial disease, measles, parvovirus disease, rheumatologic diseases, and other alphavirus diseases (e.g.,
Ross River virus) in endemic areas. Figure 314.4 lists the diagnostic
criteria.
The incidence of febrile convulsions is high in infants. The prognosis is generally good, although in large outbreaks in Africa and India,
severe disease and deaths have been attributed to chikungunya infections, predominantly in adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.9 Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
VEE virus was isolated from an epizootic in Venezuelan horses in 1938.
Human cases were first identified in 1943. Hundreds of thousands of
equine and human cases have occurred over the past 70 years. During
1971, epizootics moved through Central America and Mexico to southern Texas. After 3 decades of quiescence, epizootic disease emerged
again in Venezuela and Colombia in 1995. Between December 1992
and January 1993, the Venezuelan state of Trujillo experienced an outbreak of this virus. Overall, 28 cases of the disease were reported, along
with 12 deaths. A bigger outbreak occurred in June 1993, resulting
in the death of 55 humans and 66 horses. A much larger outbreak in
Venezuela and Colombia occurred in 1995. On May 23, 1995, equine
encephalitis-­like cases were reported in the northwest portion of the
country. Eventually, the outbreak spread toward the north, as well as to
the south. The outbreak caused about 11,390 febrile cases in humans,
as well as 16 deaths. About 500 equine cases were reported with 475
deaths.
The incubation period is 2-­5 days, followed by the abrupt onset of
fever, chills, headache, sore throat, myalgia, malaise, prostration, photophobia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. In 5–10% of cases, there is
a biphasic illness; the second phase is heralded by seizures, projectile
vomiting, ataxia, confusion, agitation, and mild disturbances in consciousness. There is cervical lymphadenopathy and conjunctival suffusion. Cases of meningoencephalitis may demonstrate cranial nerve
palsy, motor weakness, paralysis, seizures, and coma. Microscopic
examination of tissues reveals inflammatory infiltrates in lymph nodes,
spleen, lung, liver, and brain. Lymph nodes show cellular depletion,
necrosis of germinal centers, and lymphophagocytosis. The liver shows
patchy hepatocellular degeneration, the lungs demonstrate a diffuse
interstitial pneumonia with intraalveolar hemorrhages, and the brain
shows patchy cellular infiltrates. Vertical transmission from mother
to fetus has been documented. Ten fetal autopsies performed during
an outbreak demonstrated VEE virus in the brains of aborted fetuses.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK559332/. Infants born to
mothers with VEE may have neurologic sequelae or fatal cerebral
lesions.
There is no specific treatment for VEE. The treatment is intensive
supportive care (see Chapter 82), including control of seizures (see
Chapter 633).

2063

In patients with VEE meningoencephalitis, the fatality rate ranges
from 10–25%. Sequelae include nervousness, forgetfulness, recurrent
headache, and easy fatigability.
Several veterinary vaccines are available to protect equine animals.
VEE virus is highly infectious in laboratory settings, and biosafety level
3 containment should be used. An experimental vaccine is available for
use in laboratory workers. Several vaccine constructs are in the pipeline for potential use in humans.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.10 Japanese Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
JE is a mosquito-­borne viral disease of humans, as well as horses, swine,
and other domestic animals. The virus causes human infections and
acute disease in a vast area of Asia, from Indochina through the Indian
subcontinent, northern Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, the Philippines,
and the Indonesian archipelago. Culex tritaeniorhynchus summarosus,
a night-­biting mosquito that feeds preferentially on large domestic animals and birds but only infrequently on humans, is the principal vector
of zoonotic and human JE in northern Asia. A more complex ecology
prevails in southern Asia. From Taiwan to India, C. tritaeniorhynchus
and members of the closely related Culex vishnui group are vectors.
Before the introduction of JE vaccine, summer outbreaks of JE occurred
regularly in Japan, Korea, China, Okinawa, and Taiwan. Over the past
decade, there has been a pattern of steadily enlarging recurrent seasonal
outbreaks in Vietnam, Thailand, Nepal, and India, with small outbreaks
in the Philippines, Indonesia, and the northern tip of Queensland, Australia. Seasonal rains are accompanied by increases in mosquito populations and JE transmission. Pigs serve as an amplifying host.
The annual incidence in endemic areas ranges from 1-­
10 per
10,000 population. Children younger than 15 years of age are principally affected, with nearly universal exposure by adulthood. The
case:infection ratio for JE virus has been variously estimated at 1:25 to
1:1,000. Higher ratios have been estimated for populations indigenous
to enzootic areas. JE occurs in travelers visiting Asia; therefore a travel
history in the diagnosis of encephalitis is critical.
After a 4-­to 14-­day incubation period, cases typically progress
through the following four stages: prodromal illness (2-­3 days), acute
stage (3-­4 days), subacute stage (7-­10 days), and convalescence (4-­7
weeks). The onset may be characterized by an abrupt onset of fever,
headache, respiratory symptoms, anorexia, nausea, abdominal pain,
vomiting, and sensory changes, including psychotic episodes. Grand
mal seizures are seen in 10–24% of children with JE; parkinsonian-­
like nonintention tremor and cogwheel rigidity are seen less frequently.
Particularly characteristic are rapidly changing central nervous system
signs (e.g., hyperreflexia followed by hyporeflexia or plantar responses
that change). The sensory status of the patient may vary from confusion through disorientation and delirium to somnolence, progressing
to coma. There is usually a mild pleocytosis (100-­1,000 leukocytes/μL)
in the cerebrospinal fluid, initially polymorphonuclear but in a few
days predominantly lymphocytic. Albuminuria is common. Fatal cases
usually progress rapidly to coma, and the patient dies within 10 days.
JE should be suspected in patients reporting exposure to night-­biting
mosquitoes in endemic areas during the transmission season. The
etiologic diagnosis of JE is established by testing acute-­phase serum
collected early in the illness for the presence of virus-­specific IgM antibodies or, alternatively, demonstrating a fourfold or greater increase in
IgG antibody titers by testing paired acute and convalescent sera. The
virus can also be identified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
There is no specific treatment for JE. The treatment is intensive supportive care (see Chapter 82), including control of seizures (see Chapter 633).
Patient fatality rates for JE are 24–42% and are highest in children
5-­9 years of age and in adults older than 65 years of age. The frequency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2064 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
of sequelae is 5–70% and is directly related to the age of the patient
and severity of disease. Sequelae are most common in patients younger
than 10 years at the onset of disease. The more common sequelae are
mental deterioration, severe emotional instability, personality changes,
motor abnormalities, and speech disturbances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

314.11 Tick-­Borne Encephalitis
Scott B. Halstead
TBE refers to neurotropic tick-­transmitted flaviviral infections occurring across the Eurasian land mass. In the Far East, the disease is called
Russian spring-­summer encephalitis; the milder, often biphasic form in
Europe is simply called TBE. TBE is found in all countries of Europe
except Portugal and the Benelux countries. The incidence is particularly
high in Austria, Poland, Hungary, Czech Republic, Slovakia, former
Yugoslavia, and Russia. The incidence tends to be very focal. Seroprevalence is as high as 50% in farm and forestry workers. The majority of
cases occur in adults, but even young children may be infected while
playing in the woods or on picnics or camping trips. The seasonal distribution of cases is midsummer in southern Europe, with a longer season
in Scandinavia and the Russian Far East. TBE can be excreted in the milk
of goats, sheep, or cows. Before World War II, when unpasteurized milk
was consumed, milk-­borne cases of TBE were common.

2007

Viruses are transmitted principally by hard ticks, Ixodes ricinus in
Europe and Ixodes persulcatus in the Far East. Viral circulation is maintained by a combination of transmission from ticks to birds, rodents, and
larger mammals and transstadial transmission from larval to nymphal and
adult stages. In some parts of Europe and Russia, ticks feed actively during
the spring and early fall, giving rise to the name spring-­summer encephalitis.
After an incubation period of 7-­14 days, the European form begins
as an acute nonspecific febrile illness that is followed in 5–30% of cases
by meningoencephalitis. The Far Eastern variety more often results in
encephalitis with higher case fatality and sequelae rates. The first phase
of illness is characterized by fever, headache, myalgia, malaise, nausea, and vomiting for 2-­7 days. Fever disappears but after 2-­8 days may
return, accompanied by vomiting, photophobia, and signs of meningeal irritation in children and more severe encephalitic signs in adults.
This phase rarely lasts more than 1 week.
There is no specific treatment for TBE. The treatment is intensive
supportive care (see Chapter 82), including control of seizures (see
Chapter 633).
The main risk for a fatal outcome is advanced age; the fatality rate
in adults is approximately 1%, but sequelae in children are rare. Transient unilateral paralysis of an upper extremity is a common finding
in adults. Common sequelae include chronic fatigue, headache, sleep
disorders, and emotional disturbances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2008–12

Yap Island:
First outbreak

2013

No reported outbreaks

French Polynesia:
Second outbreak; first severe
complications; non-vector-borne
transmission

2014–16
2016
Florida:
First outbreak in
continental USA

2014–16
Spread in 20
Pacific countries

2015–16
Cape Verde:
First African outbreak

2016
Singapore:
First Asian outbreak

2015–16
Spread in 48
countries
in the Americas
and Caribbean
May, 2015
First reported
local circulation
in the Americas,
Brazil

African outbreaks
Asian outbreaks
Pacific outbreaks
American outbreaks
Asian endemic areas before 2007
African endemic areas before 2007

Fig. 314.5 Zika virus outbreaks from 2007 to 2016. (From Baud D, Gubler DJ, Schaub B, et al. An update on Zika virus infection. Lancet.
2017;390:2099–2109. Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 314 u Arboviral Infections
Table 314.1  Surveillance Case Classification: Children,
Neonate to 2 Years of Age, Born to Mothers
with Any Evidence of Zika Virus Infection
During Pregnancy
ZIKA-­ASSOCIATED BIRTH DEFECTS
Selected structural anomalies of the brain or eyes present at birth
(congenital) and detected from birth to age 2 yr. Microcephaly at
birth, with or without low birthweight, was included as a structural
anomaly.
• Selected congenital brain anomalies: intracranial calcifications;
cerebral atrophy; abnormal cortical formation (e.g.,
polymicrogyria, lissencephaly, pachygyria, schizencephaly, gray
matter heterotopia); corpus callosum abnormalities; cerebellar
abnormalities; porencephaly; hydranencephaly; ventriculomegaly/
hydrocephaly.
• Selected congenital eye anomalies: microphthalmia or
anophthalmia; coloboma; cataract; intraocular calcifications;
chorioretinal anomalies involving the macula (e.g., chorioretinal
atrophy and scarring, macular pallor, and gross pigmentary
mottling), excluding retinopathy of prematurity; optic nerve
atrophy, pallor, and other optic nerve abnormalities.
• Microcephaly at birth: birth head circumference <3rd percentile
for infant sex and gestational age based on INTERGROWTH-­21st
online percentile calculator (http://intergrowth21.ndog.ox.ac.uk/).
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL ABNORMALITIES POSSIBLY
ASSOCIATED WITH CONGENITAL ZIKA VIRUS INFECTION
Consequences of neurologic dysfunction detected from birth
(congenital) to age 2 yr. Postnatal-­onset microcephaly was included
as a neurodevelopmental abnormality.
• Hearing abnormalities: Hearing loss or deafness documented
by testing, most frequently auditory brainstem response (ABR).
Includes sensorineural hearing loss, mixed hearing loss, and
hearing loss not otherwise specified. Failed newborn hearing
screening is not sufficient for diagnosis.
• Congenital contractures: Multiple contractures (arthrogryposis)
and isolated clubfoot documented at birth. Brain anomalies
must be documented for isolated clubfoot but not for
arthrogryposis.
• Seizures: Documented by electroencephalogram or physician
report. Includes epilepsy or seizures not otherwise specified;
excludes febrile seizures.
• Body tone abnormalities: Hypertonia or hypotonia documented
at any age in conjunction with (1) a failed screen or assessment for
gross motor function; (2) suspicion or diagnosis of cerebral palsy
from age 1-­2 yr; or (3) assessment by a physician or other medical
professional, such as a physical therapist.
• Movement abnormalities: Dyskinesia or dystonia at any age;
suspicion or diagnosis of cerebral palsy from age 1-­2 yr.
• Swallowing abnormalities: Documented by instrumented or
noninstrumented evaluation, presence of a gastrostomy tube, or
physician report.
• Possible developmental delay: Abnormal result from most recent
developmental screening (i.e., failed screen for gross motor
domain or failed screen for two or more developmental domains
at the same time point or age); developmental evaluation; or
assessment review by developmental pediatrician. Results from
developmental evaluation are considered the gold standard if
available.
• Possible visual impairment: Includes strabismus (esotropia or
exotropia), nystagmus, failure to fix and follow at age <1 yr;
diagnosis of visual impairment at age ≥1 yr.
• Postnatal-­onset microcephaly: Two most recent head
circumference measurements reported from follow-­up care
<3rd percentile for child’s sex and age based on World Health
Organization child growth standards; downward trajectory of head
circumference percentiles with most recent measurement <3rd
percentile. Age at measurement was adjusted for gestational age
in infants born at <40 wk of gestational age through age 24 mo
chronological age.
From Rice ME, Galang RR, Roth NM, et al. Vital signs: Zika-­associated birth defects
and neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus
infection—US territories and freely associated states, 2018. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2018;67(31):858–866.

2065

314.12 Zika Virus
Scott B. Halstead

EPIDEMIOLOGY

ZIKV, a member of the Flavivirus genus, is maintained in complex
African zoonotic cycles, spilling over from time to time into the
Aedes aegypti/A. albopictus urban transmission cycles, possibly over
a period of many years (Fig. 314.5). After the virus was discovered
in Africa in 1947, human antibodies were found widely dispersed
throughout tropical Asia. However, in all these locations, human
ZIKV disease was mild and rare until 2007, when there was an outbreak of a mild febrile exanthem on the Yap Islands in the western
Pacific. Soon thereafter an outbreak on Tahiti in 2013–2014 was followed in 4 weeks by a small outbreak of Guillain-­Barré syndrome
(GBS). In 2015 a massive epidemic in South America was accompanied by focal reports, particularly in Brazil, of ZIKV infections
of pregnant women that produced infected and damaged fetuses or
newborns. The epidemiology of ZIKV infections is essentially identical to that of the DENV and CHIK. Residents of urban areas, particularly those without adequate sources of piped water, are at highest
risk. A. aegypti, the principal vector mosquito, is very abundant and
widespread throughout South and Central America, Mexico, and the
Caribbean region. During the North, Central, and South American
pandemic, ZIKV was found to infect the male reproductive tract, be
secreted in urine and saliva, and be sexually transmitted. By 2017,
the ZIKV epidemic in the American tropics appeared to wane, with
few cases reported since then. During 2015–2016, large numbers of
imported ZIKV infections, some in pregnant women, were reported
in the United States and other temperate-­zone developed countries. Small outbreaks of endogenous human ZIKV infections were
reported in South Florida during the summer of 2016.
From the pediatric perspective, the most important outcome of
human ZIKV infection is termed the congenital Zika syndrome (CZS),
which consists of microcephaly, facial disproportion, hypertonia/
spasticity, hyperreflexia, irritability, seizures, arthrogryposis, ocular
abnormalities, and sensorineural hearing loss (Table 314.1). A comprehensive understanding of the precise antecedents to CZS is not known.
It appears that the earlier during pregnancy that ZIKV infections occur,
the greater the likelihood of and the more severe is the CZS. Vertical
transmission appears to follow viremia with ZIKV, transiting the uterus
to infect the placenta and then the fetus. However, factors that affect the
occurrence or severity of CZS, such as age, ethnicity, or prior immune
status of the mother, are not known. In vitro studies have demonstrated
that DENV antibodies can enhance ZIKV infection in vitro, in Fc-­
receptor–bearing cells. In Nicaraguan children, a prior DENV infection did not enhance Zika disease, and, as yet, there is no evidence that
a prior DENV infection alters the chance of ZIKV crossing the placenta
or increases the risk of CZS. Maternal–fetal transmission of ZIKV can
occur during labor and delivery. There are no reports of ZIKV infection
acquired by an infant at the time of delivery leading to microcephaly.
There are no data to contraindicate breastfeeding, although the virus
has been identified in breast milk. Maternal and newborn laboratory
testing is indicated during the first 2 weeks of life if the mother had
relevant epidemiologic exposure within 2 weeks of delivery and had
clinical manifestations of ZIKV infection (e.g., rash, conjunctivitis,
arthralgia, or fever). Infants and children who acquire ZIKV infection
postnatally appear to have a mild course, similar to that seen in adults.

CLINICAL FEATURES

Congenital Zika syndrome may be defined in a fetus with diagnostic
evidence of ZIKV infection, including (1) severe microcephaly (>3 SD
below the mean), partially collapsed skull, overlapping cranial sutures,
prominent occipital bone, redundant scalp skin, and neurologic
impairment; (2) brain anomalies, including cerebral cortex thinning,
abnormal gyral patterns, increased fluid spaces, subcortical calcifications, corpus callosum anomalies, reduced white matter, and cerebellar
vermis hypoplasia; (3) ocular findings, such as macular scarring, focal
pigmentary retinal mottling, structural anomalies (microphthalmia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2066 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 314.2  CDC Recommendations for Preconception Counseling and Prevention of Sexual Transmission of Zika Virus
Among Persons with Possible Zika Virus Exposure: United States, August 2018
EXPOSURE SCENARIO

RECOMMENDATIONS (UPDATE STATUS)

Only the male partner travels to an area with risk for ZIKV
transmission and couple is planning to conceive

The couple should use condoms or abstain from sex for at least 3 mo after the
male partner’s symptom onset (if symptomatic) or last possible ZIKV exposure (if
asymptomatic). (Updated recommendation)

Only the female partner travels to an area with risk for ZIKV
transmission and couple is planning to conceive

The couple should use condoms or abstain from sex for at least 2 mo after the
female partner’s symptom onset (if symptomatic) or last possible ZIKV exposure
(if asymptomatic). (No change in recommendation)*

Both partners travel to an area with risk for ZIKV
transmission and couple is planning to conceive

The couple should use condoms or abstain from sex for at least 3 mo from the
male partner’s symptom onset (if symptomatic) or last possible ZIKV exposure (if
asymptomatic). (Updated recommendation)

One or both partners have ongoing exposure (i.e., live in or
frequently travel to an area with risk for ZIKV transmission)
and couple is planning to conceive

The couple should talk with their healthcare provider about their plans for
pregnancy, their risk for ZIKV infection, the possible health effects of ZIKV
infection on a baby, and ways to protect themselves from ZIKV. If either partner
develops symptoms of ZIKV infection or tests positive for ZIKV infection, the
couple should follow the suggested time frames listed previously before trying
to conceive. (No change in recommendation)*

Men with possible ZIKV exposure whose partner is pregnant

The couple should use condoms or abstain from sex for the duration of the
pregnancy. (No change in recommendation)*

*Petersen EE, Meaney-­Delman D, Neblett-­Fanfair R, et al. Update: interim guidance for preconception counseling and prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus for persons with
possible Zika virus exposure—United States, September 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:1077–1081.
From Polen KD, Gilboa SM, Hills S, et al. Update: interim guidance for preconception counseling and prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus for men with possible Zika virus
exposure: United States, August 2018. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018;67(31):868–870.

coloboma, cataracts, and posterior anomalies), chorioretinal atrophy, or optic nerve hypoplasia/atrophy; (4) congenital contractures,
including unilateral or bilateral clubfoot and arthrogryposis multiplex congenita; and (5) neurologic impairment, such as pronounced
early hypertonia/spasticity with extrapyramidal symptoms, motor disabilities, cognitive disabilities, hypotonia, irritability/excessive crying,
tremors, swallowing dysfunction, vision impairment, hearing impairment, and epilepsy (see Table 314.1).
Acquired ZIKV infection may present with nonspecific viral syndrome–like features. Nonetheless, patients are at increased risk of
myelitis and GBS. In addition, the virus may remain present in the
blood and body fluids for months after resolution of clinical symptoms.

MANAGEMENT

For infants with confirmed ZIKV infection, close follow-­up is necessary. The appropriate follow-­up evaluation depends on whether the
infant has clinical signs and symptoms of congenital ZIKV syndrome.
All infants should have close monitoring of growth and development,
repeat ophthalmologic examinations, and auditory brainstem response
testing (see Table 314.1).

LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS

Laboratory testing for ZIKV infection in the neonate includes the
following: serum and urine for ZIKV RNA by real-­time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-­PCR) and serum ZIKV IgM
enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay. If the IgM is positive, the plaque
reduction neutralization test is used to confirm the specificity of the
IgM antibodies against ZIKV and to exclude a false-­positive IgM result.
If CSF is available, it should be tested for ZIKV RNA (via rRT-­PCR),
as well as ZIKV IgM. CSF specimens need not be collected for the sole
purpose of ZIKV testing but may be reasonable for the evaluation of
infants with microcephaly or intracranial calcifications. A definitive

diagnosis of congenital ZIKV infection is confirmed by the presence of
ZIKV RNA in samples of serum, urine, or CSF collected within the first
2 days of life; IgM antibodies may be positive or negative. A negative
rRT-­PCR result with a positive ZIKV IgM test result indicates probable
congenital ZIKV infection.
Fetuses or infants born to mothers who test positive for ZIKV
infection should be studied sonographically or for clinical evidence
of congenital Zika syndrome; a comprehensive evaluation (including
ophthalmologic examination, laboratory tests, and specialist consultation) should be performed before hospital discharge.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of newborns with congenital Zika syndrome is unclear.
Reported acute mortality rates among live-­born infants range from
4–6%. The combination of ZIKV-­related microcephaly and severe cerebral abnormalities generally has a poor prognosis, but little is known
about the prognosis for congenitally infected infants with less severe or
no apparent abnormalities at birth.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis for congenital ZIKV infection includes other
congenital infections and other causes of microcephaly.

PREVENTION

The prevention of the congenital Zika syndrome includes avoidance
of travel to endemic regions, if possible; if travel to endemic regions
cannot be avoided, careful contraception (male and female) is essential, especially with the knowledge that ZIKV can persist in semen for
months after a primary infection (Table 314.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 315 u Dengue Fever, Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever, and Severe Dengue

2067

Dengue fever is a benign syndrome caused by several arthropod-­
borne viruses and is characterized by biphasic fever, myalgia or
arthralgia, rash, leukopenia, and lymphadenopathy. Dengue hemorrhagic fever (Philippine, Thai, or Singapore hemorrhagic fever;
hemorrhagic dengue; acute infectious thrombocytopenic purpura)
is a severe, often fatal, febrile disease caused by one of four dengue
viruses. It is characterized by capillary permeability, abnormalities
of hemostasis, and, in severe cases, a protein-­losing shock syndrome
(dengue shock syndrome), which is thought to have an immunopathologic basis.
A revised case definition adopted by the World Health Organization
(WHO) in 2009 includes as severe dengue those cases accompanied
by fluid loss leading to shock, fluid loss with respiratory distress, liver
damage evidenced by elevations of ALT or AST to >1000 U/L, severe
bleeding, and altered consciousness or significant heart abnormalities.

involving canopy-­feeding jungle monkeys and Aedes spp, which feed
on monkeys.
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, epidemics were common in
temperate areas of the Americas, Europe, Australia, and Asia. After
several decades of virus control in the Americas, dengue fever and
dengue-­like disease are now endemic in tropical Asia, the South Pacific
Islands, northern Australia, tropical Africa, the Arabian Peninsula, the
Caribbean, and Central and South America (Fig. 315.1). The wide distribution of A. aegypti is frequently attributed to global warming, but
this view is mistaken. This mosquito was widely dispersed during the
“little ice age” in the 1700s, supporting yellow fever epidemics in New
York and continental Europe. Mosquito breeding depends on access
to stored fresh water, not temperature. Dengue fever occurs frequently
among travelers to endemic areas. Locally acquired disease has been
reported in Florida, Arizona, and Texas, and imported cases in the
United States occur in travelers to endemic areas. More than 390 million dengue infections occur annually; approximately 96 million have
clinical disease.
Dengue outbreaks in urban areas infested with A. aegypti may be
explosive; in virgin soil epidemics, up to 70–80% of the population may
be involved. Most overt disease occurs in older children and adults.
Because A. aegypti has a limited flight range, spread of an epidemic
occurs mainly through viremic human beings and follows the main
lines of transportation. Sentinel cases may infect household mosquitoes; a large number of nearly simultaneous secondary infections
give the appearance of a contagious disease. Where dengue is highly
endemic, indigenous children and susceptible foreigners may be the
only persons to acquire overt disease, because adults have become
immune.

ETIOLOGY

Dengue-­Like Diseases

Chapter 315

Dengue Fever, Dengue
Hemorrhagic Fever, and
Severe Dengue
Scott B. Halstead

There are at least four distinct antigenic types of dengue virus (dengue
1, 2, 3, and 4), members of the family Flaviviridae. In addition, three
other arthropod-­
borne viruses (arboviruses) cause similar dengue
fever syndromes with rash (Table 315.1; see also Chapter 314).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Dengue viruses are transmitted by mosquitoes of the Stegomyia family.
Aedes aegypti, a daytime biting mosquito, is the principal vector, and
all four virus types have been recovered from it. Transmission occurs
from viremic humans by bite of the vector mosquito in which virus
multiplies during an extrinsic incubation period and then by bite is
passed on to a susceptible human in what is called the urban transmission cycle. In most tropical areas, A. aegypti is highly urbanized,
breeding in water stored for drinking or bathing and in rainwater collected in any container. Dengue viruses have also been recovered from
A. albopictus, as in the 2001 and 2015 Hawaiian epidemics, whereas
outbreaks in the Pacific area have been attributed to several other Aedes
species. These species breed in water trapped in vegetation. In Southeast Asia and West Africa, dengue virus may be maintained in a cycle
Table 315.1  Vectors and Geographic Distribution of
Dengue-­Like Diseases

VIRUS

GEOGRAPHIC
GENUS AND
DISEASE

VECTOR

DISTRIBUTION

Togavirus

Chikungunya

Aedes aegypti
Aedes africanus
Aedes
albopictus

Africa, India,
Southeast
Asia, Latin
America,
United States

Togavirus

O’nyong-­nyong

Anopheles
funestus

East Africa

Flavivirus

West Nile fever

Culex molestus
Culex univittatus

Europe, Africa,
Middle East,
India

Dengue-­like diseases may occur in epidemics. Epidemiologic features
depend on the vectors and their geographic distribution (see Chapter
314). Chikungunya virus is enzootic in subhuman primates throughout much of West, Central, and South Africa. Periodic introductions of
virus into the urban transmission cycle have led to pandemics, resulting in widespread endemicity in the most populous areas of Asia. In
Asia, A. aegypti is the principal vector; in Africa, other Stegomyia spp.
may be important vectors. In Southeast Asia, dengue and chikungunya outbreaks occur concurrently in the urban cycle. Outbreaks of
o’nyong-­nyong fever usually involve villages or small towns, in contrast
to the urban outbreaks of dengue and chikungunya. West Nile virus
is enzootic in Africa. Chikungunya is now endemic in urban cycles
in tropical countries throughout the world. Intense transmission in
Caribbean and Central and South American countries beginning in
2013 results in the emergence of limited chikungunya transmission in
the United States.

Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever

Dengue hemorrhagic fever occurs where multiple types of dengue
virus are simultaneously or sequentially transmitted. It is endemic in
tropical America, Asia, the Pacific Islands, and parts of Africa, where
warm temperatures and the practices of water storage in homes plus
outdoor breeding sites result in large, permanent populations of A.
aegypti. Under these conditions, infections with dengue viruses of all
types are common. A first infection, referred to as a primary infection,
may be followed by infection with a different dengue virus, referred to
as a secondary infection. In areas of high endemicity, secondary infections are frequent.
Secondary dengue infections are relatively mild in the majority of
instances, ranging from an inapparent infection through an undifferentiated upper respiratory tract or dengue-­like disease, but may also
progress to dengue hemorrhagic fever. Nonimmune foreigners, both
adults and children, who are exposed to dengue virus during outbreaks
of hemorrhagic fever have classic dengue fever or even milder disease.
The differences in clinical manifestations of dengue infections between
natives and foreigners in Southeast Asia are related to immunologic
status. Dengue hemorrhagic fever is unusual in patients with primary dengue infection, with the exception of infants whose mothers

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2068 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Jan isoth 10C

Presence of dengue
High
Medium
Low

10-degree
isotherms

July isoth 10C

Fig. 315.1 Global dengue burden, 2014. (From Guzman MG, Harris E. Dengue. Lancet. 2015;385:453–462. Fig. 1.)

are immune to dengue. Dengue hemorrhagic fever or severe dengue
occurs rarely in individuals of African ancestry because of an as yet
incompletely described resistance gene. This gene is thought to have
originated in populations with long-­standing exposure to yellow fever
and explains the low incidence of severe dengue throughout much of
Africa and among African populations in the American tropics despite
high rates of dengue infection.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of dengue hemorrhagic fever is incompletely
understood, but epidemiologic studies strongly associate this syndrome with second heterotypic infections with dengue types 1-­4
or in infants born to mothers who have had two or more lifetime
dengue infections. Retrospective studies of sera from human mothers whose infants acquired dengue hemorrhagic fever and prospective studies in children acquiring sequential dengue infections have
shown that the circulation of infection-­enhancing antibodies at
the time of infection is the strongest risk factor for development
of severe disease. The absence of dengue neutralizing antibodies in
the presence of enhancing antibodies from passive transfer or active
production is the best correlate of risk for dengue hemorrhagic fever.
Monkeys that are infected sequentially or have received enhancing
antibodies experience enhanced viremias. In humans studied early
during the course of secondary dengue infections, viremia levels
directly predicted disease severity. When dengue virus immune
complexes attach to monocyte/macrophage Fc receptors, a signal
is sent that suppresses innate immunity, resulting in enhanced viral
production. In the Americas, dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome have been associated with dengue types 1-­4
strains of recent Southeast Asian origin. Outbreaks of dengue hemorrhagic fever in all areas of the world are correlated with secondary
dengue infections.
Early in the acute stage of secondary dengue infections, there is
rapid activation of the complement system. Shortly before or during shock, blood levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor,
interferon-­γ, and interleukin-­2 are elevated, C1q, C3, C4, C5-­C8,
and C3 proactivators are depressed, and C3 catabolic rates are
elevated. All of these outcomes are attributed to circulating viral
nonstructural protein 1 (NS1), a viral toxin that activates myeloid
cells to release cytokines by attaching to toll-like receptor 4. NS1
also contributes to increased vascular permeability by activating
complement and, most importantly, interacting with and damaging endothelial cells and interacting with blood clotting factors and
platelets. The mechanism of bleeding in dengue hemorrhagic fever
is not fully understood, but a mild degree of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, liver damage, and thrombocytopenia may operate synergistically. NS1-­mediated capillary damage allows fluid,

electrolytes, small proteins, and, in some instances, red blood cells
to leak into extravascular spaces. This internal redistribution of
fluid, together with deficits caused by fasting, thirsting, and vomiting, results in hemoconcentration, hypovolemia, increased cardiac
work, tissue hypoxia, metabolic acidosis, and hyponatremia.
Usually no pathologic lesions are found to account for death. In
rare instances, death may be a result of gastrointestinal or intracranial hemorrhages. Minimal to moderate hemorrhages are seen
in the upper gastrointestinal tract, and petechial hemorrhages are
common in the interventricular septum of the heart, on the pericardium, and on the subserosal surfaces of major viscera. Focal
hemorrhages are occasionally seen in the lungs, liver, adrenals,
and subarachnoid space. The liver is usually enlarged, often with
fatty changes. Yellow, watery, and at times blood-­tinged effusions
are present in serous cavities in approximately 75% of patients at
autopsy.
Dengue virus is frequently absent in tissues at the time of death; viral
antigens or RNA have been localized to hepatocytes and macrophages
in the liver, spleen, lung, and lymphatic tissues.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Dengue Fever

The incubation period is 1-­7 days. The clinical manifestations are
variable and are influenced by the age of the patient. In infants and
young children, the disease may be undifferentiated or characterized by fever for 1-­5 days, pharyngeal inflammation, rhinitis, and
mild cough. A majority of infected older children and adults experience sudden onset of fever, with temperature rapidly increasing to
39.4–41.1°C (103–106°F), usually accompanied by frontal or retroorbital pain, particularly when pressure is applied to the eyes. Occasionally, severe back pain precedes the fever (back-­break fever). A
transient, macular, generalized rash that blanches under pressure
may be seen during the first 24-­48 hours of fever. The pulse rate
may be slow relative to the degree of fever. Myalgia and arthralgia
occur soon after the onset of fevers and increase in severity over
time. From the second to sixth day of fever, nausea and vomiting are
apt to occur, and generalized lymphadenopathy, cutaneous hyperesthesia or hyperalgesia, taste aberrations, and pronounced anorexia
may develop.
Approximately 1-­2 days after defervescence, a generalized, morbilliform, maculopapular rash appears that spares the palms and soles. It
disappears in 1-­5 days; desquamation may occur. Rarely there is edema
of the palms and soles. About the time this second rash appears, the
body temperature, which has previously decreased to normal, may
become slightly elevated and demonstrate the characteristic biphasic
temperature pattern.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 315 u Dengue Fever, Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever, and Severe Dengue
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever and Dengue Shock
Syndrome

The differentiation between dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic
fever is difficult early in the course of illness. A relatively mild
first phase with abrupt onset of fever, malaise, vomiting, headache,
anorexia, and cough may be followed after 2-­5 days by rapid clinical
deterioration and collapse. In this second phase, the patient usually
has cold, clammy extremities, a warm trunk, flushed face, diaphoresis, restlessness, irritability, mid-­epigastric pain, and decreased urinary output. There may be scattered petechiae on the forehead and
extremities; spontaneous ecchymoses may appear, and easy bruising and bleeding at sites of venipuncture are common. A macular or
maculopapular rash may appear, and there may be circumoral and
peripheral cyanosis. Respirations are rapid and often labored. The
pulse is weak, rapid, and thready, and the heart sounds are faint.
The liver may enlarge to 4-­6 cm below the costal margin and is usually firm and somewhat tender. Approximately 20–30% of cases of
dengue hemorrhagic fever are complicated by shock (dengue shock
syndrome). Dengue shock can be subtle, arising in patients who
are fully alert, and is accompanied by increased peripheral vascular
resistance and raised diastolic blood pressure. Shock is not from
congestive heart failure but from venous pooling. With increasing
cardiovascular compromise, the diastolic pressure rises toward the
systolic level and the pulse pressure narrows. Fewer than 10% of
patients have gross ecchymosis or gastrointestinal bleeding, usually
after a period of uncorrected shock. After a 24-­to 36-­hour period
of crisis, convalescence is fairly rapid in the children who recover.
The temperature may return to normal before or during the stage of
shock. Bradycardia and ventricular extrasystoles are common during convalescence.

Dengue with Warning Signs and Severe Dengue

In hyperendemic areas, dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome (DHF/DSS) is the life-­threatening event during a dengue infection that challenges the identifying physician. When the four dengue
viruses spread to the American hemisphere and to South Asia, there
were millions of primary and secondary dengue infections in individuals of all ages. Dengue disease in these areas presented a wider clinical
spectrum resulting in a new diagnostic algorithm and case definitions
(see later).

DIAGNOSIS

A clinical diagnosis of dengue fever derives from a high index of suspicion and knowledge of the geographic distribution and environmental cycles of causal viruses (for nondengue causes see Chapter 314).

DENGUE ± WARNING SIGNS

with warning
signs
without

CRITERIA FOR DENGUE ± WARNING SIGNS
Warning signs*
Probable dengue
live in/travel to dengue endemic area. • Abdominal pain or tenderness
Fever and two of the following criteria: • Persistent vomiting
• Clinical fluid accumulation
• Nausea, vomiting
• Mucosal bleed
• Rash
• Lethargy, restlessness
• Aches and pain
• Liver enlargement >2 cm
• Tourniquet test positive
• Laboratory: increase in HCT
• Leukopenia
concurrent with rapid decrease
• Any warning sign
in platelet count
Laboratory-confirmed dengue
(important when no sign of plasma
leakage)

2069

Because clinical findings vary and there are many possible causative
agents, the term dengue-­like disease should be used until a specific
diagnosis is established. A case is confirmed by virologic diagnosis,
which can be established by serologic tests, by detection of viral proteins or viral RNA, or by the isolation of the virus from blood leukocytes or acute-­phase serum. A probable case is a typical acute febrile
illness with supportive serology and occurrence at a location where
there are confirmed cases.
The WHO criteria for dengue hemorrhagic fever are fever (2-­7 days
in duration or biphasic); minor or major hemorrhagic manifestations,
including a positive tourniquet test, thrombocytopenia (≤100,000/μL),
and objective evidence of increased capillary permeability (hematocrit
increased by ≥20%); pleural effusion or ascites (by chest radiography
or ultrasonography); or hypoalbuminemia. Dengue shock syndrome
criteria include those for dengue hemorrhagic fever as well as hypotension, tachycardia, narrow pulse pressure (≤20 mm Hg), and signs of
poor perfusion (cold extremities).
In 2009, the WHO promulgated guidelines for the diagnosis of probable dengue, dengue with warning signs, and a category called severe
dengue (Fig. 315.2). The presence of warning signs in an individual
with probable dengue alerts the physician to the possible need for hospitalization. Severe dengue is a mixture of the syndromes that are associated with dengue infection, including classic DHF/DSS, but also rare
instances of encephalitis or encephalopathy, liver damage, or myocardial damage. Severe dengue also includes respiratory distress, a harbinger of pulmonary edema caused by overhydration, an all-­too-­common
outcome of inexpert treatment (see “Treatment” and “Complications”
sections).
After primary and secondary dengue infections, there is an
appearance of anti-­
dengue (immunoglobulin [Ig] M) antibodies. These disappear after 6-­12 weeks, a feature that can be used
to date a dengue infection. In secondary dengue infections, most
dengue antibody is of the IgG class. Serologic diagnosis depends on
a fourfold or greater increase in IgG antibody titer in paired sera by
hemagglutination inhibition, complement fixation, enzyme immunoassay, or neutralization test. Carefully standardized IgM and IgG
capture enzyme commercial immunoassays are now widely used
to identify acute-­phase antibodies from patients with primary or
secondary dengue infections in single-­serum samples. Usually such
samples should be collected not earlier than 5 days and not later
than 6 weeks after onset. It may not be possible to distinguish the
infecting virus by serologic methods alone, particularly when there
has been prior infection with another member of the same arbovirus group. Virus can be recovered from acute-­phase serum after
inoculating tissue culture or living mosquitoes. Viral RNA can be

SEVERE DENGUE

1. Severe plasma leakage
2. Severe hemorrhage
3. Severe organ impairment

CRITERIA FOR SEVERE DENGUE
Severe plasma leakage
leading to:
• Shock (DSS)
• Fluid accumulation with respiratory
distress
Severe bleeding
as evaluated by clinician

Severe organ involvement
• Liver: AST or ALT >= 1000
• CNS: Impaired consciousness
*(requiring strict observation and medical
• Heart and other organs
intervention)

Fig. 315.2 Suggested dengue case classification and

levels of severity. (From World Health Organization
[WHO] and Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases [TDR]. Dengue: guidelines for
diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control, 2009. Fig.
1.4, http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/44
188/9789241547871_eng.pdf?sequence=1)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2070 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
detected in blood or tissues by specific complementary RNA probes
or amplified first by polymerase chain reaction or by real-­time
polymerase chain reaction. A viral nonstructural protein, NS1, is
released by infected cells into the circulation and can be detected in
acute-­stage blood samples using monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies. The detection of NS1 is the basis of commercial tests, including rapid lateral flow tests. These tests offer a reliable point-­of-­care
diagnosis of acute dengue infection.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of dengue fever includes dengue-­like diseases,
viral respiratory and influenza-­like diseases, including COVID-19, the
early stages of malaria, mild yellow fever, scrub typhus, viral hepatitis,
and leptospirosis.
Four arboviral diseases have dengue-­like courses but without rash:
Colorado tick fever, sandfly fever, Rift Valley fever, and Ross River
fever (see Chapter 314). Colorado tick fever occurs sporadically among
campers and hunters in the western United States; sandfly fever in the
Mediterranean region, the Middle East, southern Russia, and parts of
the Indian subcontinent; and Rift Valley fever in North, East, Central,
and South Africa. Ross River fever is endemic in much of eastern Australia, with epidemic extension to Fiji. In adults, Ross River fever often
produces protracted and crippling arthralgia involving weight-­bearing
joints.
Because meningococcemia, yellow fever (see Chapter 316), other
viral hemorrhagic fevers (see Chapter 317), many rickettsial diseases,
and other severe illnesses caused by a variety of agents may produce a
clinical picture similar to that of dengue hemorrhagic fever, the etiologic diagnosis should be made only when epidemiologic or serologic
evidence suggests the possibility of a dengue infection.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

In patients with dengue fever, pancytopenia may develop after the
3-­4 days of illness. Neutropenia may persist or reappear during the
latter stage of the disease and may continue into convalescence, with
white blood cell counts <2,000/μL. Platelet counts rarely fall below
100,000/μL. Venous clotting, bleeding and prothrombin times, and
plasma fibrinogen values are within normal ranges. The tourniquet test
result may be positive. Mild acidosis, hemoconcentration, increased
transaminase values, and hypoproteinemia may occur during some
primary dengue virus infections. The electrocardiogram may show
sinus bradycardia, ectopic ventricular foci, flattened T waves, and prolongation of the P-­R interval.
In dengue hemorrhagic fever, dengue shock syndrome, and
severe dengue, the most common hematologic abnormalities are
hemoconcentration with an increase of >20% in the hematocrit,
thrombocytopenia, a prolonged bleeding time, and a moderately
decreased prothrombin time that is seldom <40% of control. Fibrinogen levels may be subnormal, and fibrin split-­product values are
elevated. Other abnormalities include moderate elevations of serum
transaminase levels, depressed complement levels, mild metabolic
acidosis with hyponatremia, occasional hypochloremia, slight elevation of blood urea nitrogen, and hypoalbuminemia. Chest x-­ray
reveals pleural effusions (right > left) in nearly all patients with dengue shock syndrome. Ultrasonography can be used to detect serosal
effusions of the thorax or abdomen. Thickening of the gallbladder
wall and the presence of perivesicular fluid, ascites, or pleural effusions are characteristic signs of increased vascular permeability.

TREATMENT
Dengue

Treatment of uncomplicated dengue fever is supportive. Bed rest is
advised during the febrile period. Antipyretics should be used to keep
the body temperature <40°C (104°F). Analgesics or mild sedation may
be required to control pain. Aspirin is contraindicated and should
not be used because of its effects on hemostasis. Fluid and electrolyte
replacement is required for deficits caused by sweating, fasting, thirsting, vomiting, and diarrhea.

Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever and Dengue Shock
Syndrome

Shock syndrome is a medical emergency that may occur in any child
who lives in or has a recent travel history to a tropical destination.
Management begins with diagnostic suspicion and the understanding that shock often accompanies defervescence. Detailed instructions for case management are available at the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention web site: https://www.cdc.gov/dengue/heal
thcare-providers/index.html. Management of dengue hemorrhagic
fever and dengue shock syndrome includes immediate evaluation of
vital signs and degrees of hemoconcentration, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance. Close monitoring is essential for at least 48 hours
because shock may occur or recur precipitously, usually several days
after the onset of fever. Patients who are cyanotic or have labored
breathing should be given oxygen. Rapid intravenous replacement of
fluids and electrolytes can frequently sustain patients until spontaneous recovery occurs. Normal saline is more effective than the more
expensive Ringer lactated saline in treating shock. When the pulse
pressure is ≤10 mm Hg or when elevation of the hematocrit persists
after the replacement of fluids, plasma or colloid preparations are
indicated. Oral rehydration of children who are being monitored is
useful. Prophylactic platelet transfusions have not been shown to
reduce the risk of hemorrhaging or improve low platelet counts and
may be associated with adverse effects.
Care must be taken to avoid overhydration, which may contribute
to cardiac failure. Transfusions of fresh blood may be required to control bleeding but should not be given during hemoconcentration and
should be administered only after evaluation of hemoglobin or hematocrit values. Salicylates are contraindicated because of their effect on
blood clotting.
Sedation may be required for children who are markedly agitated.
Use of vasopressors has not resulted in a significant reduction of
mortality rates over that observed with simple supportive therapy.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation may require treatment (see
Chapter 532). Corticosteroids do not shorten the duration of disease or improve the prognosis in children receiving careful supportive therapy.

COMPLICATIONS

Hypervolemia during the fluid reabsorptive phase may be life-­
threatening and is heralded by a decrease in hematocrit with wide
pulse pressure. Diuretics and digitalization may be necessary.
Primary infections with dengue fever and dengue-­like diseases
are usually self-­limited and benign. Fluid and electrolyte losses,
hyperpyrexia, and febrile convulsions are the most frequent complications in infants and young children. Epistaxis, petechiae, and
purpuric lesions are uncommon but may occur at any stage. Blood
from epistaxis that is swallowed, vomited, or passed by rectum may
be erroneously interpreted as gastrointestinal bleeding. In adults
and possibly in children, underlying conditions may lead to clinically significant bleeding. Convulsions may occur during a high
temperature. Infrequently, after the febrile stage, prolonged asthenia, mental depression, bradycardia, and ventricular extrasystoles
may occur in children.
In endemic areas, dengue hemorrhagic fever should be suspected in
children with a febrile illness suggestive of dengue fever who experience hemoconcentration and thrombocytopenia.

PROGNOSIS
Dengue Fever

The prognosis for dengue fever is good. Care should be taken to avoid
the use of drugs that suppress platelet activity.

Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever

The prognosis of dengue hemorrhagic fever is adversely affected
by a late diagnosis and delayed or improper treatment. Death has
occurred in 40–50% of patients with shock, but with adequate intensive care, deaths should occur in <1% of cases. Infrequently, there

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 316 u Yellow Fever
is residual brain damage as a consequence of prolonged shock or
occasionally of intracranial hemorrhage. Many fatalities are caused
by overhydration.

PREVENTION

Dengue vaccines have been under development continuously since
the 1970s. One such vaccine, Dengvaxia, developed by Sanofi Pasteur, is a mixture of four chimeras, dengue virus structural genes
coupled with nonstructural genes of yellow fever 17D. Dengvaxia
completed phase III per protocol analyses on 32,568 children, vaccinated and controls, age 2-­16 years. These studies revealed poor
protection and sensitization of seronegative vaccinated children to
severe breakthrough dengue but moderate protection of children
vaccinated when seropositive, who experienced a reduction of hospitalization and severe disease. Based on these data, the vaccine
was endorsed by the WHO, United States, and European regulatory
agencies for targeted use in individuals 9 years of age and older who
have laboratory-­based evidence of a prior dengue infection. The
vaccine has been licensed for use in 20 countries. Other dengue type
1-­4 vaccines are under development. The Takeda dengue 2 chimeric
tetravalent vaccine has completed phase III testing with follow-­up
data for 2 years demonstrating strong protection against dengue 2
infection but modest protection against the other three viruses. A
tetravalent dengue vaccine composed of mutagenized dengue 1, 3,
and 4 and a chimeric dengue 2 virus developed by the U.S. National
Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and Instituto Butantan
in São Paulo, Brazil, is in the fourth year of phase III testing. Phase
IIb live dengue virus human challenge data suggest this vaccine will
provide solid protective immunity.
Prophylaxis in the absence of vaccine consists of avoiding daytime
household-­based mosquito bites through the use of insecticides,
repellents, body covering with clothing, screening of houses, and
destruction of A. aegypti breeding sites. If water storage is mandatory, a tight-­fitting lid or a thin layer of oil may prevent egg laying
or hatching. A larvicide, such as Abate (O,O′-­[thiodi-­p-­phenylene]
O,O,O,O′-­tetramethyl phosphorothioate), available as a 1% sand-­
granule formation and effective at a concentration of 1 ppm, may be
added safely to drinking water. Ultra-­low-­volume spray equipment
effectively dispenses the adulticide malathion from trucks or airplanes for rapid intervention during an epidemic. Mosquito repellants and other personal anti-­mosquito measures are effective in
preventing mosquito bites in the field, forest, or jungle.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 316

Yellow Fever
Scott B. Halstead
Yellow fever is an acute infection characterized in its most severe
form by fever, jaundice, proteinuria, and hemorrhage. The virus is
mosquito-­borne and occurs as urban epidemic, endemic, or jungle
enzootic forms in South America and Africa. Until 1900, seasonal
urban epidemics occurred in cities in temperate areas of Europe and
the Americas. Urban and jungle yellow fever continues to be active in
West, Central, and East Africa.

ETIOLOGY

Yellow fever is the prototype of the Flavivirus genus of the family Flaviviridae, which are enveloped, single-­stranded RNA viruses 35-­50 nm
in diameter.

2071

Yellow fever circulates zoonotically as five genotypes: type IA
in West Central Africa, type IB in South America, type II in West
Africa, type III in East Central Africa, and type IV in East Africa.
Types IA and IB are capable of urban transmission between human
beings by Aedes aegypti. Sometime in the 1600s, A. aegypti, together
with yellow fever virus, were brought to the American tropics
through the African slave trade. Subsequently, yellow fever caused
enormous coastal and riverine epidemics in the Atlantic and Caribbean basins until the 20th century, when the virus and its urban and
sylvan mosquito cycles were identified, mosquito control methods
were perfected, and a vaccine was developed. The East and East/
Central African genotypes have not fully entered the urban cycle
and have not spread to the east coast of Africa or to the countries
of Asia.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Human and nonhuman primate hosts acquire the yellow fever
infection by the bite of infected mosquitoes. After an incubation
period of 3-­6 days, virus appears in the blood and may serve as a
source of infection for other mosquitoes. The virus must replicate
in the gut of the mosquito and pass to the salivary gland before the
mosquito can transmit the virus. Yellow fever virus is transmitted
in an urban cycle—human to A. aegypti to human—and a jungle
cycle—monkey to jungle mosquitoes to monkey. Classic yellow
fever epidemics in the United States, South America, the Caribbean,
and parts of Europe were of the urban variety. Since 2000, West
Africa has experienced five urban epidemics, including in the capital cities of Abidjan (Cote d’Ivoire), Conakry (Guinea), and Dakar
(Senegal). In 2012–2013, large outbreaks of East and East/Central
yellow fever occurred across a large, predominantly rural area of
war-­ravaged Darfur in southwestern Sudan and in adjacent areas of
northern Uganda. Beginning in 2015 and continuing to mid-­2016,
there were sharp outbreaks of yellow fever in and around Rwanda,
Angola, and the bordering Democratic Republic of Congo, where
there were 7,000 reported cases and 500 deaths. Eleven cases were
imported into China by workers in Angola. In South America, all
of the approximately 200 cases reported each year are jungle yellow fever. In late 2016 and continuing through 2019, a widespread
zoonosis resulted in an estimated 2,237 yellow fever cases in natives
and visitors to Brazil. In colonial times, urban yellow fever attack
rates in White adults were very high, suggesting that subclinical
infections are uncommon in this age-­group. Yellow fever may be
less severe in children, with subclinical infection:clinical case ratios
≥2:1. In areas where outbreaks of urban yellow fever are common,
most cases involve children because many adults are immune.
Transmission in West Africa is highest during the rainy season,
from July to November.
In tropical forests, yellow fever virus is maintained in a transmission
cycle involving monkeys and tree hole–breeding mosquitoes (Haemagogus in Central and South America; the Aedes africanus complex in
Africa). In the Americas, most cases involve tourists, campers, those
who work in forested areas, and vacationers exposed to infected mosquitoes. In Africa, enzootic virus is prevalent in moist savanna and
savanna transition areas, where other tree hole–breeding Aedes vectors transmit the virus between monkeys and humans and between
humans.

PATHOGENESIS

Pathologic changes seen in the liver include (1) coagulative necrosis of hepatocytes in the midzone of the liver lobule, with sparing
of cells around the portal areas and central veins, (2) eosinophilic
degeneration of hepatocytes (Councilman bodies), (3) microvacuolar fatty change, and (4) minimal inflammation. The kidneys show
acute tubular necrosis. In the heart, myocardial fiber degeneration
and fatty infiltration are seen. The brain may show edema and petechial hemorrhages. Direct viral injury to the liver results in impaired
ability to perform functions of biosynthesis and detoxification; this
is the central pathogenic event of yellow fever. Hemorrhage is postulated to result from decreased synthesis of vitamin K–dependent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2072 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
clotting factors and, in some cases, disseminated intravascular clotting. The shock that occurs in patients with yellow fever appears
similar to the shock associated with dengue shock syndrome and
other viral hemorrhagic fevers and results at least in part from
viral damage to endothelial cells. Death and severe disease rates are
lower in susceptible sub-­Saharan African Black people than in other
racial groups, suggesting existence of a resistance gene.
Renal dysfunction has been attributed to hemodynamic factors (prerenal failure progressing to acute tubular necrosis).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In Africa, inapparent, abortive, or clinically mild infections are frequent. Some studies suggest that children experience a milder disease than do adults. Abortive infections, characterized by fever and
headache, may be unrecognized except during epidemics.
In its classic form, yellow fever begins with a sudden onset of
fever, headache, myalgia, lumbosacral pain, anorexia, nausea, and
vomiting. Physical findings during the early phase of illness, when
virus is present in the blood, include prostration, conjunctival injection, flushing of the face and neck, reddening of the tongue at the
tip and edges, and relative bradycardia. After 2-­3 days, there may be
a brief period of remission, followed in 6-­24 hours by the reappearance of fever with vomiting, epigastric pain, jaundice, dehydration,
gastrointestinal and other hemorrhages, albuminuria, hypotension,
renal failure, delirium, convulsions, and coma. Death may occur
after 7-­10 days, with a fatality rate in severe cases approaching 50%.
Some patients who survive the acute phase of illness later succumb
to renal failure or myocardial damage. Laboratory abnormalities
include leukopenia; prolonged clotting, prothrombin, and partial
thromboplastin times; thrombocytopenia; hyperbilirubinemia;
elevated serum transaminase values; albuminuria; and azotemia.
Hypoglycemia may be present in severe cases. Electrocardiogram
abnormalities such as bradycardia and ST-­T changes are described.

DIAGNOSIS

Yellow fever should be suspected when fever, headache, vomiting,
myalgia, and jaundice appear in residents of enzootic areas or in
unimmunized visitors who have recently traveled (within 2 weeks
before the onset of symptoms) to endemic areas. There are clinical
similarities between yellow fever and dengue hemorrhagic fever. In
contrast to the gradual onset of acute viral hepatitis resulting from
hepatitis A, B, C, D, or E virus, jaundice in yellow fever appears
after 3-­5 days of high temperature and is often accompanied by
severe prostration. Mild yellow fever is dengue-­like and cannot be
distinguished from a wide variety of other infections. Jaundice and
fever may occur in any of several other tropical diseases, including
malaria, viral hepatitis, louse-­borne relapsing fever, leptospirosis,
typhoid fever, rickettsial infections, certain systemic bacterial infections, sickle cell crisis, Rift Valley fever, Crimean-­C ongo hemorrhagic fever, and other viral hemorrhagic fevers. Outbreaks of yellow
fever always include cases with severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
The specific diagnosis depends on the detection of the virus or
viral antigen in acute-­phase blood samples or antibody assays. The
immunoglobulin M enzyme immunoassay is particularly useful.
Sera obtained during the first 10 days after the onset of symptoms
should be kept in an ultra-­low-­temperature freezer (−70°C [−94°F])
and shipped on dry ice for virus testing. Convalescent-­phase samples
for antibody tests are managed by conventional means. In handling
acute-­phase blood specimens, medical personnel must take care to
avoid contaminating themselves or others on the evacuation trail
(laboratory personnel and others). The postmortem diagnosis is
based on virus isolation from liver or blood, identification of Councilman bodies in liver tissue, or detection of antigen or viral genome
in liver tissue.

TREATMENT

It is customary to keep patients with yellow fever in a mosquito-­free area,
with use of mosquito nets if necessary. Patients are viremic during the
febrile phase of the illness. Although there is no specific treatment for yellow fever, medical care is directed at maintaining the physiologic status
with the following measures: (1) sponging and acetaminophen to reduce
a high temperature, (2) vigorous fluid replacement of losses resulting
from fasting, thirsting, vomiting, or plasma leakage, (3) correcting an
acid-­base imbalance, (4) maintaining nutritional intake to lessen the
severity of hypoglycemia, and (5) avoiding drugs that are either metabolized by the liver or toxic to the liver, kidney, or central nervous system.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications of acute yellow fever include severe hemorrhage, liver
failure, and acute renal failure. Bleeding should be managed by transfusion of fresh whole blood or fresh plasma with platelet concentrates if
necessary. Renal failure may require peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis.

PREVENTION

Yellow fever 17D is a live-­attenuated vaccine with a long record
of safety and efficacy. It is administered as a single 0.5-­mL subcutaneous injection at least 10 days before arrival in a yellow fever–
endemic area. YF-­VAX, manufactured by Sanofi Pasteur, is licensed
for use in the United States. With the exceptions noted later, individuals traveling to endemic areas in South America and Africa
should be considered for vaccination, but the length of stay, exact
locations to be visited, and environmental or occupational exposure may determine the specific risk and individual need for vaccination. Persons traveling from yellow fever–endemic to yellow
fever–receptive countries may be required by national authorities
to obtain a yellow fever vaccine (e.g., from South America or Africa
to India). Usually, countries that require travelers to obtain a yellow
fever immunization do not issue a visa without a valid immunization certificate. Vaccination is valid for 10 years for international
travel certification, although immunity lasts at least 40 years and
probably for life. Immunoglobulin M antibodies circulate for years
after administration of yellow fever vaccine.
Since 1996, there have been a number of reports of yellow fever
vaccine–associated viscerotropic disease with a higher risk in elderly
vaccine recipients and a few cases in persons with previous thymectomies. Yellow fever vaccine should not be administered to persons who have symptomatic immunodeficiency diseases, are taking
immunosuppressant drugs, have HIV, or have a history of thymectomy. A recent study has shown that individuals taking maintenance
corticosteroids may be successfully vaccinated. Although the vaccine is not known to harm fetuses, its administration during pregnancy is not advised. The vaccine virus may be rarely transmitted
through breastfeeding. In very young children, there is a small risk
of encephalitis and death after yellow fever 17D vaccination. The
17D vaccine should not be administered to infants younger than
6 months. Residence in or travel to areas of known or anticipated
yellow fever activity (e.g., forested areas in the Amazon basin),
which puts an individual at high risk, warrants immunization of
infants 6-­8 months of age. Immunization of children 9 months of
age and older is routinely recommended before entry into endemic
areas. Immunization of persons older than 60 years of age should be
weighed against their risk for sylvatic yellow fever in the American
tropics and for urban or sylvatic yellow fever in Africa. Vaccination
should be avoided in persons with a history of egg allergy. Alternatively, a skin test can be performed to determine whether a serious
allergy exists that would preclude vaccination.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 317 u Ebola and Other Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers

and Bolivian hemorrhagic fevers are reportedly milder in children than
in adults.

Chapter 317

Crimean-­Congo Hemorrhagic Fever

Ebola and Other Viral
Hemorrhagic Fevers
Scott B. Halstead
Viral hemorrhagic fevers are a loosely defined group of clinical syndromes in which hemorrhagic manifestations are either common or
especially notable during severe illness. Both the etiologic agents and
the clinical features of the syndromes differ, but coagulopathy may be a
common pathogenetic feature.

ETIOLOGY

Six of the viral hemorrhagic fevers are caused by arthropod-­borne
viruses (arboviruses) (Table 317.1). Four are caused by togaviruses
of the family Flaviviridae: Kyasanur Forest disease, Omsk hemorrhagic fever, dengue (see Chapter 315), and yellow fever (see Chapter
316) viruses. Three are caused by viruses of the family Bunyaviridae:
Congo fever, Hantaan fever, and Rift Valley fever (RVF) viruses. Four
are caused by viruses of the family Arenaviridae: Junin fever, Machupo
fever, Guanarito fever, and Lassa fever. Two are caused by viruses in
the family Filoviridae: Ebola virus and Marburg virus, enveloped, filamentous RNA viruses that are sometimes branched, unlike any other
known virus.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

With some exceptions, the viruses causing viral hemorrhagic fevers are
transmitted to humans via a nonhuman entity. The specific ecosystem
required for viral survival determines the geographic distribution of
disease. Although it is commonly thought that all viral hemorrhagic
fevers are arthropod borne, seven may be contracted from environmental contamination caused by animals or animal cells or from
infected humans (see Table 317.1). Laboratory and hospital infections
have occurred with many of these agents. Lassa fever and Argentine

Table 317.1  Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers
MODE OF
TRANSMISSION
Tick-­borne

Mosquito-­borne†

Infected animals
or materials to
humans

2073

Sporadic human infection with Crimean-­Congo hemorrhagic fever
in Africa provided the original virus isolation. Natural foci are recognized in Bulgaria, western Crimea, and the Rostov-­on-­Don and
Astrakhan regions; disease occurs in Central Asia from Kazakhstan
to Pakistan. Index cases were followed by nosocomial transmission in
Pakistan and Afghanistan in 1976, in the Arabian Peninsula in 1983,
and in South Africa in 1984. In the Russian Federation, the vectors are
ticks of the species Hyalomma marginatum and Hyalomma anatolicum, which, along with hares and birds, may serve as viral reservoirs.
Disease occurs from June to September, largely among farmers and
dairy workers.

Kyasanur Forest Disease

Human cases of Kyasanur Forest disease occur chiefly in adults in an
area of Mysore State, India. The main vectors are two Ixodidae ticks,
Haemaphysalis turturis and Haemaphysalis spinigera. Monkeys and
forest rodents may be amplifying hosts. Laboratory infections are
common.

Omsk Hemorrhagic Fever

Omsk hemorrhagic fever occurs throughout south-­central Russia and
northern Romania. Vectors may include Dermacentor pictus and Dermacentor marginatus, but direct transmission from moles and muskrats to humans seems well established. Human disease occurs in a
spring–summer–autumn pattern, paralleling the activity of the vectors.
This infection occurs most frequently in persons with outdoor occupational exposure. Laboratory infections are common.

Rift Valley Fever

The virus causing RVF is responsible for epizootics involving sheep,
cattle, buffalo, certain antelopes, and rodents in North, Central, East,
and South Africa. The virus is transmitted to domestic animals by Culex
theileri and several Aedes species. Mosquitoes may serve as reservoirs
by transovarial transmission. An epizootic in Egypt in 1977–1978 was
accompanied by thousands of human infections, principally among
veterinarians, farmers, and farm laborers. Smaller outbreaks occurred
in Senegal in 1987, Madagascar in 1990, and Saudi Arabia and Yemen
in 2000–2001. Humans are most often infected during the slaughter
or skinning of sick or dead animals. Laboratory infection is common.

Argentine Hemorrhagic Fever
DISEASE

VIRUS

Before the introduction of vaccine, hundreds to thousands of cases of
Argentine hemorrhagic fever occurred annually from April through
July in the maize-­producing area northwest of Buenos Aires that
reaches to the eastern margin of the Province of Cordoba. Junin virus
has been isolated from the rodents Mus musculus, Akodon arenicola,
and Calomys laucha. It infects migrant laborers who harvest the maize
and who inhabit rodent-­contaminated shelters.

Crimean-­Congo
hemorrhagic fever (HF)*

Congo

Kyasanur Forest disease

Kyasanur Forest
disease

Omsk HF

Omsk

Dengue HF

Dengue (4 types)

Rift Valley fever

Rift Valley fever

Yellow fever

Yellow fever

Argentine HF

Junin

Bolivian HF

Machupo

Lassa fever*

Lassa

The recognized endemic area of Bolivian hemorrhagic fever consists
of the sparsely populated province of Beni in Amazonian Bolivia. Sporadic cases occur in farm families who raise maize, rice, yucca, and
beans. In the town of San Joaquin, a disturbance in the domestic rodent
ecosystem may have led to an outbreak of household infection caused
by Machupo virus transmitted by chronically infected Calomys callosus, ordinarily a field rodent. Mortality rates are high in young children.

Marburg disease*

Marburg

Venezuelan Hemorrhagic Fever

Ebola HF*

Ebola

HF with renal syndrome

Hantaan

*Patients may be contagious; nosocomial infections are common.
†Chikungunya virus is associated infrequently with petechiae and epistaxis. Severe

hemorrhagic manifestations have been reported in some cases.

Bolivian Hemorrhagic Fever

In 1989, an outbreak of hemorrhagic illness occurred in the farming
community of Guanarito, Venezuela, 200 miles south of Caracas. Subsequently, in 1990–1991, there were 104 cases reported with 26 deaths
caused by Guanarito virus. Cotton rats (Sigmodon alstoni) and cane
rats (Zygodontomys brevicauda) have been implicated as likely reservoirs of Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2074 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Lassa Fever

Lassa virus has an unusual potential for human-­to-­human spread,
resulting in many small epidemics in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and Liberia.
In 2012, an outbreak of more than 1,000 cases of Lassa fever occurred
in east-­central Nigeria. Medical workers in Africa and the United States
have also contracted the disease. Patients with acute Lassa fever have
been transported by international aircraft, necessitating extensive surveillance among passengers and crews. The virus is probably maintained in nature in a species of African peridomestic rodent, Mastomys
natalensis. Rodent-­to-­rodent transmission and infection of humans
probably operate via mechanisms established for other arenaviruses.

Marburg Disease

Previously, the world experience of human infections caused by Marburgvirus had been limited to 26 primary and 5 secondary laboratory-­
based cases in Germany and Yugoslavia in 1967 and to small outbreaks
in Zimbabwe in 1975, Kenya in 1980 and 1988, and South Africa in
1983. However, in 1999 a large outbreak occurred in the Republic of
Congo, and in 2005 a still larger outbreak occurred in Uige Province,
Angola, with 252 cases and 227 deaths. In laboratory and clinical settings, transmission occurs by direct contact with tissues of the African
green monkey or with infected human blood or semen. A reservoir in
the African fruit bat, Rousettus aegyptiacus, has been demonstrated.
Fruit bats infected with Marburg virus do not show obvious signs of
illness. It appears that the virus is transmitted by close contact with
fructivorous bats and by aerosol from bats.

Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever

Ebola virus was isolated in 1976 from a devastating epidemic involving
small villages in northern Zaire and southern Sudan; smaller outbreaks
have occurred subsequently. Outbreaks have initially been nosocomial.
Attack rates have been highest in children from birth to 1 year of age
and in persons from 15-­50 years of age. The virus is in the Filovirus
family and closely related to viruses in the genus Marburg virus. An
Ebola virus epidemic occurred in Kikwit, Zaire, in 1995, followed by
scattered outbreaks in Uganda and Central and West Africa. The virus
has been recovered from chimpanzees, and antibodies have been found
in other subhuman primates, which apparently acquire infection from
a zoonotic reservoir in bats. The natural reservoir of Ebola is thought
to be fruit bats. Reston virus, related to Ebola virus, has been recovered
from Philippine monkeys and pigs and has caused subclinical infections in humans working in monkey colonies in the United States.
In 2014, West Africa experienced the largest outbreak of Ebola virus
disease (EVD) in history and the first transmission in a large urban
area (Fig. 317.1). Countries primarily affected were Liberia, Sierra

Leone, and Guinea, with imported cases reported in Nigeria, Mali,
and Senegal, as well as Europe and the United States. The outbreak
was caused by the Zaire Ebola virus (species of Ebola virus include
the Zaire, Sudan, Bundibugyo, Reston, and Tai Forest species), which
has a mortality rate of approximately 55–65%. As of 8 May 2016, the
World Health Organization (WHO) and respective governments
reported a total of 28,616 suspected cases and 11,310 deaths (39.5%),
though the WHO thinks that this substantially understates the magnitude of the outbreak. The outbreak had largely subsided by the end of
2015. In 2018–2020, an outbreak occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, affecting more than 500 people (age 8-­80 years), with
a case fatality of approximately 50% (Fig. 317.2). In 2021 the Ministry
of Health (MOH) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)
announced that a case of EVD had been confirmed in Biena Health
Zone, North Kivu Province. Sequencing of samples suggests that this
outbreak was linked to the 2018–2020 outbreak, likely caused by a
persistent infection in a survivor that led to either a relapse or sexual
transmission of the virus.
EVD may occur after exposure to fruit bats or bushmeat but most
often occurs through exposure to body fluids of infected individuals
(blood, sweat, saliva, vomitus, diarrhea, and less often human milk or
semen) (Table 317.2). Persistent infection after recovery from acute
EVD has been well documented, with virus particles present in body
fluids such as semen for many months in apparently healthy survivors. Patients are infectious once they are symptomatic; the incubation
period is 2-­21 days (mean: 11 days). The age range in the West African
epidemic was broad, but most patients were between 15 and 44 years
old.

Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome

The endemic area of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS),
also known as epidemic hemorrhagic fever and Korean hemorrhagic
fever, includes Japan, Korea, far eastern Siberia, north and central
China, European and Asian Russia, Scandinavia, Czechoslovakia,
Romania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Greece. Although the incidence
and severity of hemorrhagic manifestations and the mortality rates are
lower in Europe than in northeastern Asia, the renal lesions are the
same. Disease in Scandinavia, nephropathia epidemica, is caused by
a different although antigenically related virus, Puumala virus, associated with the bank vole, Clethrionomys glareolus. Cases occur predominantly in the spring and summer. There appears to be no age
factor in susceptibility, but because of occupational hazards, young
adult men are most frequently attacked. Rodent plagues and evidence
of rodent infestation have accompanied endemic and epidemic occurrences. Hantaan virus has been detected in the lung tissue and excreta

8,000

No. of reported cases

7,000

Liberia*
Sierra Leone
Guinea

6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49
Epidemiologic week

Fig. 317.1 Cumulative number of Ebola virus disease cases reported—three countries, West Africa, April 13, 2016. Reported from Sierra Leone
(14,124 cases) and Liberia (10,678), followed by Guinea (3,814). (Data from the number of cases and deaths in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone
during the 2014–2016 West Africa Ebola Outbreak. https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-­west-­africa/case-­counts.html)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 317 u Ebola and Other Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers
of Apodemus agrarius coreae. Antigenically related agents have been
detected in laboratory rats and in urban rat populations around the

LILANGA
BOBANGI

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Dengue hemorrhagic fever (see Chapter 315) and yellow fever (see
Chapter 316) cause similar syndromes in children in endemic areas.

BOLOMBA

WANGATA

Mbandaka

Crimean-­Congo Hemorrhagic Fever

BOLENGE

BIKORO
INGENDE

Bikoro
IREBU
IBOKO
NTONDO
PENDJUA
LUKOLELA

N
INONGO

KIRI

W

E
S

Democratic
Republic
of the
Congo

BANDJAU

Kinshasa
MUSHIE
10

20

world, including Prospect Hill virus in the wild rodent Microtus pennsylvanicus in North America and sin nombre virus in the deer mouse in
the southern and southwestern United States; these viruses are causes
of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (see Chapter 319). Rodent-­to-­
rodent and rodent-­to-­human transmission presumably occurs via the
respiratory route.

MBANDAKA

Republic
of the
Congo

0

2075

30

40

Miles

Affected health zones
Unaffected health zones

Lakes and rivers
City

Fig. 317.2 Map of Ebola-­affected health zones in the Democratic Re-

public of the Congo (DRC), 2018. (Courtesy the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2018. https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbrea
ks/drc/drc-­map.html)

The incubation period of 3-­12 days is followed by a febrile period of
5-­12 days and a prolonged convalescence. Illness begins suddenly with
fever, severe headache, myalgia, abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, and
vomiting. After 1-­2 days, the fever may subside until the patient experiences an erythematous facial or truncal flush and injected conjunctivae.
A second febrile period of 2-­6 days then develops, with a hemorrhagic
enanthem on the soft palate and a fine petechial rash on the chest and
abdomen. Less frequently, there are large areas of purpura and bleeding from the gums, nose, intestines, lungs, or uterus. Hematuria and
proteinuria are relatively rare. During the hemorrhagic stage, there is
usually tachycardia with diminished heart sounds and occasionally
hypotension. The liver is usually enlarged, but there is no icterus. In
protracted cases, central nervous system signs include delirium, somnolence, and progressive clouding of the consciousness. Early in the disease, leukopenia with relative lymphocytosis, progressively worsening
thrombocytopenia, and gradually increasing anemia occur. In convalescence there may be hearing and memory loss. The mortality rate is
2–50%.

Kyasanur Forest Disease and Omsk Hemorrhagic
Fever

After an incubation period of 3-­8 days, both Kyasanur Forest disease
and Omsk hemorrhagic fever begin with the sudden onset of fever
and headache. Kyasanur Forest disease is characterized by severe
myalgia, prostration, and bronchiolar involvement; it often manifests
without hemorrhage but occasionally involves severe gastrointestinal
bleeding. In Omsk hemorrhagic fever, there is moderate epistaxis,
hematemesis, and a hemorrhagic enanthem but no profuse hemorrhage; bronchopneumonia is common. In both diseases, severe leukopenia and thrombocytopenia, vascular dilation, increased vascular
permeability, gastrointestinal hemorrhages, and subserosal and interstitial petechial hemorrhages occur. Kyasanur Forest disease may be
complicated by acute degeneration of the renal tubules and focal liver
damage. In many patients, recurrent febrile illness may follow an

Table 317.2  Clinical Recommendations for Ebola Virus Infection
RECOMMENDATION

POPULATION

INTERVENTION

1

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease

Oral rehydration

2

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease
who are unable to drink or who have inadequate oral intake

Parenteral administration of fluids

3

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease

Systematic monitoring and charting of vital
signs and volume status

4

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease

Serum biochemistry

5

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease

Staffing ratio

6

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease

Communication with family and friends

7

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease
who are in pain

Analgesic therapy

8

Patients with suspected, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease
with high severity of illness

Antibiotics

Modified from Lamontagne F, Fowler RA, Adhikari NK, et al. Evidence-­based guidelines for supportive care of patients with Ebola virus disease. Lancet. 2018;391:700–708. Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2076 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 317.3  Clinical Stages of Lassa Fever
STAGE

SYMPTOMS

1 (days 1-­3)

General weakness and malaise; high fever
>39°C (102.2°F), constant with peaks of
40–41°C (104–105.8°F)

2 (days 4-­7)

Sore throat (with white exudative patches)
very common; headache; back, chest,
side, or abdominal pain; conjunctivitis;
nausea and vomiting; diarrhea; productive
cough; proteinuria; low blood pressure
(systolic <100 mm Hg); anemia

3 (after 7 days)

Facial edema; convulsions; mucosal
bleeding (mouth, nose, eyes); internal
bleeding; confusion or disorientation

4 (after 14 days)

Coma and death

From Richmond JK, Baglole DJ. Lassa fever: epidemiology, clinical features, and social
consequences. BMJ. 2003;327:1271–1275.

afebrile period of 7-­15 days. This second phase takes the form of a
meningoencephalitis.

Rift Valley Fever

Most RVF infections have occurred in adults with signs and symptoms resembling those of dengue fever (see Chapter 315). The onset
is acute, with fever, headache, prostration, myalgia, anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, conjunctivitis, and lymphadenopathy. The fever lasts 3-­6
days and is often biphasic. The convalescence is often prolonged. In
the 1977–1978 outbreak, many patients died after showing signs that
included purpura, epistaxis, hematemesis, and melena. RVF affects
the uvea and posterior chorioretina; macular scarring, vascular occlusion, and optic atrophy occur, resulting in permanent visual loss in
a high proportion of patients with mild to severe RVF. At autopsy,
extensive eosinophilic degeneration of the parenchymal cells of the
liver has been observed.

Argentine, Venezuelan, and Bolivian Hemorrhagic
Fevers and Lassa Fever

The incubation period in Argentine, Venezuelan, and Bolivian hemorrhagic fevers and Lassa fever is commonly 7-­14 days; the acute illness
lasts for 2-­4 weeks. Clinical illnesses range from undifferentiated fever
to the characteristic severe illness. Lassa fever is most often clinically
severe in White persons. The onset is usually gradual, with increasing fever, headache, diffuse myalgia, and anorexia (Table 317.3). During the first week, signs frequently include a sore throat, dysphagia,
cough, oropharyngeal ulcers, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and pains in
the chest and abdomen. Pleuritic chest pain may persist for 2-­3 weeks.
In Argentine and Bolivian hemorrhagic fevers and less frequently in
Lassa fever, a petechial enanthem appears on the soft palate 3-­5 days
after onset and at about the same time on the trunk. The tourniquet test
may be positive. The clinical course of Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever
has not been well described.
In 35–50% of patients, these diseases may become severe, with persistent high temperature, increasing toxicity, swelling of the face or
neck, microscopic hematuria, and frank hemorrhages from the stomach, intestines, nose, gums, and uterus. A syndrome of hypovolemic
shock is accompanied by pleural effusion and renal failure. Respiratory distress resulting from airway obstruction, pleural effusion,
or congestive heart failure may occur. A total of 10–20% of patients
experience late neurologic involvement, characterized by intention
tremor of the tongue and associated speech abnormalities. In severe
cases, there may be intention tremors of the extremities, seizures, and
delirium. The cerebrospinal fluid is normal. In Lassa fever, nerve deafness occurs in early convalescence in 25% of cases. Prolonged convalescence is accompanied by alopecia and, in Argentine and Bolivian

hemorrhagic fevers, by signs of autonomic nervous system lability,
such as postural hypotension, spontaneous flushing or blanching of the
skin, and intermittent diaphoresis.
Laboratory studies reveal marked leukopenia, mild to moderate thrombocytopenia, proteinuria, and, in Argentine hemorrhagic
fever, moderate abnormalities in blood clotting, decreased fibrinogen,
increased fibrinogen split products, and elevated serum transaminases.
There is focal, often extensive eosinophilic necrosis of the liver parenchyma, focal interstitial pneumonitis, focal necrosis of the distal and
collecting tubules, and partial replacement of splenic follicles by amorphous eosinophilic material. Usually, bleeding occurs by diapedesis
with little inflammatory reaction. The mortality rate is 10–40%.

Marburg Disease and Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever

After an incubation period of 4-­7 days, the illness begins abruptly,
with severe frontal headache, malaise, drowsiness, lumbar myalgia,
vomiting, nausea, and diarrhea. A maculopapular eruption begins
5-­7 days later on the trunk and upper arms. It becomes generalized
and often hemorrhagic and exfoliates during convalescence. The
exanthem is accompanied by a dark red enanthem on the hard palate,
conjunctivitis, and scrotal or labial edema. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage occurs as the severity of illness increases. Late in the illness,
the patient may become tearfully depressed, with marked hyperalgesia
to tactile stimuli. In fatal cases, patients become hypotensive, restless,
and confused and lapse into coma. Convalescent patients may experience alopecia and may have paresthesias of the back and trunk. There
is a marked leukopenia with necrosis of granulocytes. Dysfunction in
bleeding and clotting and thrombocytopenia are universal and correlated with the severity of disease; there are moderate abnormalities in
concentrations of clotting proteins and elevations of serum transaminases and amylase. Pregnant women and young children are at high
risk of severe disease with a fatal outcome. The mortality rate of Marburg disease is 25–85%, and the mortality rate of Ebola hemorrhagic
fever 50–90%. High viral loads in acute-­phase blood samples convey
a poor prognosis. Viral RNA persists in tissues long after symptoms
subside, and the virus has been excreted in semen more than 1 year
after recovery.
Manifestations of EVD may come in stages, but most EVD begins
with the sudden onset of fever accompanied by fatigue, weakness,
myalgias, headache, and sore throat. This is followed by gastrointestinal involvement, including anorexia, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. Hemorrhage (defined by any evidence of bleeding) is
seen in more than 50% and is a serious later phase, often accompanied
by vascular leakage, multiorgan failure, and death. Those who survive
improve on approximately days 6-­11 of EVD. One late relapse producing meningoencephalitis has been reported.

Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome

In most cases, HFRS is characterized by fever, petechiae, mild hemorrhagic phenomena, and mild proteinuria, followed by a relatively
uneventful recovery. In 20% of recognized cases, the disease may
progress through four distinct phases. The febrile phase is ushered in
with fever, malaise, and facial and truncal flushing. It lasts 3-­8 days
and ends with thrombocytopenia, petechiae, and proteinuria. The
hypotensive phase of 1-­3 days follows defervescence. Loss of fluid
from the intravascular compartment may result in marked hemoconcentration. Proteinuria and ecchymoses increase. The oliguric phase,
usually 3-­5 days in duration, is characterized by a low output of
protein-­rich urine, increasing nitrogen retention, nausea, vomiting,
and dehydration. Confusion, extreme restlessness, and hypertension
are common. The diuretic phase, which may last for days or weeks,
usually initiates clinical improvement. The kidneys show little concentrating ability, and rapid loss of fluid may result in severe dehydration and shock. Potassium and sodium depletion may be severe.
Fatal cases manifest as abundant protein-­rich retroperitoneal edema
and marked hemorrhagic necrosis of the renal medulla. The mortality
rate is 5–10%.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 317 u Ebola and Other Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers
DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of these viral hemorrhagic fevers depends on a high
index of suspicion in endemic areas. In nonendemic areas, histories of
recent travel, recent laboratory exposure, or exposure to an earlier case
should evoke suspicion of a viral hemorrhagic fever.
In all viral hemorrhagic fevers, the viral agent circulates in the
blood at least transiently during the early febrile stage. Togaviruses
and bunyaviruses can be recovered from acute-­phase serum samples
by inoculation into a tissue culture or living mosquitoes. Argentine,
Bolivian, and Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever viruses can be isolated
from acute-­phase blood or throat washings by intracerebral inoculation into guinea pigs, infant hamsters, or infant mice. Lassa virus may
be isolated from acute-­phase blood or throat washings by inoculation
into tissue cultures. For Marburg disease and Ebola hemorrhagic fever,
acute-­phase throat washings, blood, and urine may be inoculated into
a tissue culture, guinea pigs, or monkeys. The viruses are readily identified on electron microscopy, with a filamentous structure differentiating them from all other known agents. Specific complement-­fixing
and immunofluorescent antibodies appear during convalescence.
The virus of HFRS is recovered from acute-­phase serum or urine by
inoculation into a tissue culture. A variety of antibody tests using viral
subunits is becoming available. The serologic diagnosis depends on
the demonstration of seroconversion or a fourfold or greater increase
in immunoglobulin G antibody titer in acute and convalescent serum
specimens collected 3-­4 weeks apart. Viral RNA may also be detected
in blood or tissues with the use of reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction analysis.
The diagnosis of EVD is confirmed by enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay immunoglobulin M and polymerase chain reaction
(which may need to be repeated if initially negative) testing. Criteria
to aid in the diagnosis of EVD include temperature >38.6°C (101.5°F)
plus symptoms; contact with an affected patient, the patient’s body
fluids, or the funeral; residence in or travel to an endemic region;
or a history of handling bats, rodents, or primates from an endemic
area.
Handling blood and other biologic specimens is hazardous and must
be performed by specially trained personnel. Blood and autopsy specimens should be placed in tightly sealed metal containers, wrapped in
absorbent material inside a sealed plastic bag, and shipped on dry ice
to laboratories with biocontainment safety level 4 facilities. Even routine hematologic and biochemical tests should be done with extreme
caution.

Differential Diagnosis

Mild cases of hemorrhagic fever may be confused with almost any
self-­limited systemic bacterial or viral infection. More severe cases
may suggest typhoid fever; epidemic, murine, or scrub typhus; leptospirosis; or a rickettsial spotted fever, for which effective chemotherapeutic agents are available. Many of these disorders may be acquired
in geographic or ecologic locations endemic for a viral hemorrhagic
fever.
The differential diagnosis of EVD includes malaria, typhoid, Lassa
fever, influenza infection, and meningococcemia.

TREATMENT

Ribavirin administered intravenously is effective in reducing mortality rates in Lassa fever and HFRS. Further information and advice
about the management, control measures, diagnosis, and collection of biohazardous specimens can be obtained from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Atlanta, Georgia 30333
(470-­312-­0094).
The therapeutic principle involved in all of these diseases, especially HFRS, is the reversal of dehydration, hemoconcentration, renal
failure, and protein, electrolyte, or blood losses (see Table 317.2).
The contribution of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy to the

2077

hemorrhagic manifestations is unknown, and the management of
hemorrhage should be individualized. Transfusions of fresh blood
and platelets are frequently given. Good results have been reported
in a few patients after the administration of clotting factor concentrates. The efficacy of corticosteroids, ε-­aminocaproic acid, pressor
amines, and α-­adrenergic blocking agents has not been established.
Sedatives should be selected with regard to the possibility of kidney
or liver damage. The successful management of HFRS may require
renal dialysis.
Whole-­blood transfusions from Ebola virus–immune donors and
administration of Ebola monoclonal antibodies have been shown to be
effective in lowering case fatality rates.
Patients suspected of having Lassa fever, Ebola fever, Marburg
fever, or Congo-­Crimean hemorrhagic fever should be placed in a
private room on standard contact and droplet precautions. Caretakers should use barrier precautions to prevent skin or mucous
membrane exposure. All persons entering the patient’s room should
wear gloves, gowns, and face shields. Before exiting the patient’s
room, caretakers should safely remove and dispose of all protective gear and should clean and disinfect shoes. Protocols require
two-­person clinical care teams, one observer and one caregiver
(see Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] website:
https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola).
Treatment of EVD often requires an intensive care unit and management of multiorgan system dysfunction, including correction of
hypovolemia, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypocalcemia, and hypoxia, often with renal replacement therapy as well as
ventilation support (see Table 317.2). Convalescent serum and monoclonal antibodies have been employed on an experimental basis. Strict
isolation and appropriate barrier protection of healthcare workers is
mandatory. Several vaccines have been shown to be immunogenic, and
one used late in the epidemic was protective. Epidemic control measures, isolation, and quarantine have been used to attempt to decrease
the spread of the West African epidemic.

PREVENTION

A live-­attenuated vaccine (Candid-­I) for Argentine hemorrhagic fever
(Junin virus) is highly efficacious. A form of inactivated mouse brain
vaccine is reported to be effective in preventing Omsk hemorrhagic
fever. Inactivated RVF vaccines are widely used to protect domestic
animals and laboratory workers. HFRS inactivated vaccine is licensed
in Korea, and killed and live-­attenuated vaccines are widely used in
China. A vaccinia-­vector glycoprotein vaccine provides protection
against Lassa fever in monkeys. Single doses of recombinant vesicular
stomatitis virus or adenovirus type 3 vaccines containing surface glycoproteins from Ebola and Marburg viruses have been shown to protect
monkeys against Ebola virus and Marburg virus disease. The vesicular
stomatitis-­vectored Ebola vaccine was shown to be effective in preventing Ebola cases in a ring vaccination trial in Guinea and has been used
widely in outbreaks since 2018.
Prevention of mosquito-­borne and tick-­borne infections includes
use of repellents, wearing of tight-­fitting clothing that fully covers the
extremities, and careful examination of the skin after exposure, with
removal of any vectors found. Diseases transmitted from a rodent-­
infected environment can be prevented through methods of rodent
control; elimination of refuse and breeding sites is particularly successful in urban and suburban areas.
Patients should be isolated until they are virus-­free or for 3 weeks
after illness. Patient urine, sputum, blood, clothing, and bedding
should be disinfected. Disposable syringes and needles should be used.
Prompt and strict enforcement of barrier nursing may be lifesaving.
The mortality rate among medical workers contracting these diseases
is 50%. A few entirely asymptomatic Ebola infections result in strong
antibody production.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2078 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 318

Lymphocytic
Choriomeningitis Virus
Daniel J. Bonthius
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) is a prevalent human
pathogen and an important cause of meningitis in children and adults.
Capable of crossing the placenta and infecting the fetus, LCMV is also
an important cause of neurologic birth defects and encephalopathy in
the newborn.

ETIOLOGY

LCMV is a member of the family Arenaviridae, which are enveloped,
negative-­sense, single-­stranded RNA viruses. The name of the arenaviruses is derived from arenosus, the Latin word for “sandy,” because of
the fine granularities observed within the virion on ultra-­thin electron
microscopic sections.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Like all arenaviruses, LCMV uses rodents as its reservoir. The common
house mouse, Mus musculus, is both the natural host and primary reservoir for the virus, which is transferred vertically from one generation
of mice to the next via intrauterine infection. Hamsters and guinea pigs
are also potential reservoirs. Although heavily infected with LCMV,
rodents that acquire the virus transplacentally often remain asymptomatic because congenital infection provides rodents with immunologic
tolerance for the virus. Infected rodents shed the virus in large quantities
in nasal secretions, urine, feces, saliva, and milk throughout their lives.
Humans typically acquire LCMV by contacting fomites contaminated with infectious virus or by inhaling aerosolized virus. Most
human infections occur during the fall and early winter, when mice
move into human habitations. Humans can also acquire the virus via
organ transplantation. Congenital LCMV infection occurs when a
woman acquires a primary LCMV infection during pregnancy. The
virus passes through the placenta to the fetus during maternal viremia.
The fetus may also acquire the virus during passage through the birth
canal from exposure to infected vaginal secretions. Outside of organ
transplantation and vertical transmission during pregnancy, there have
been no cases of human-­to-­human transmission of LCMV.
LCMV is prevalent in the environment, has a great geographic range,
and infects large numbers of humans. The virus is found throughout
the world’s temperate regions and probably occurs wherever the genus
Mus has been introduced (which is every continent but Antarctica). An
epidemiologic study found that 9% of house mice are infected and that
substantial clustering occurs, where the prevalence is higher. Serologic
studies demonstrate that approximately 5% of adult humans possess
antibodies to LCMV, indicating prior exposure and infection.

PATHOGENESIS

LCMV is not a cytolytic virus. Thus unlike many other nervous system
pathogens that directly damage the brain by killing host brain cells,
LCMV pathogenesis involves other underlying mechanisms. Furthermore, the pathogenic mechanisms are different in postnatal (acquired)
infection compared with prenatal (congenital) infection. A critical difference in the pathogenesis of postnatal versus prenatal infection is that
the virus infects brain parenchyma in the case of prenatal infection but
is restricted to the meninges and choroid plexus in postnatal cases.
In postnatal infections, LCMV replicates to high titers in the choroid plexus and meninges. Viral antigen within these tissues becomes
the target of an acute mononuclear cell infiltration driven by CD8+ T
lymphocytes. The presence of lymphocytes in large numbers within

the meninges and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leads to the symptoms of
meningitis that mark acquired LCMV infection. As the lymphocytes
clear the virus from the meninges and CSF, the density of lymphocytes
declines and the symptoms of meningitis resolve. Thus symptoms of
acquired (postnatal) LCMV infection are immune mediated and are a
result of the presence of large numbers of lymphocytes.
Prenatal infection likewise inflames the tissues surrounding the
brain parenchyma, and this inflammation leads to some of the signs
of congenital LCMV. In particular, within the ventricular system,
congenital LCMV infection often leads to ependymal inflammation,
which may block the egress of CSF at the cerebral aqueduct and lead
to hydrocephalus. However, unlike postnatal cases, prenatal infection
with LCMV includes infection of the substance of the brain rather than
just the meninges or ependyma. This infection of brain parenchyma
leads to the substantial neuropathologic changes typically accompanying congenital LCMV infection. In particular, LCMV infects the
mitotically active neuroblasts, located at periventricular sites. Through
an unknown mechanism, the presence of the virus kills these periventricular cells, leading to periventricular calcifications, a radiographic
hallmark of this disorder. Within the fetal brain, LCMV infection of
neurons and glial cells also disrupts neuronal migration, leading to
abnormal gyral patterns, and interferes with neuronal mitosis, leading
to microcephaly and cerebellar hypoplasia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of LCMV infection depend on whether the
infection occurs prenatally or postnatally. Congenital infection with
LCMV is unique, as it involves both the postnatal infection of a pregnant woman and the prenatal infection of a fetus.

Acquired (Postnatal) Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis
Virus Infection

LCMV infection during postnatal life (during childhood or adulthood)
typically consists of a brief febrile illness from which the patient fully
recovers. The illness classically consists of two clinical phases. In the
first phase, the symptoms are those of a nonspecific viral syndrome
and include fever, myalgia, malaise, nausea, anorexia, and vomiting.
These symptoms usually resolve after several days but are followed by a
second phase, consisting of central nervous system disease. The symptoms of this second phase are those of aseptic meningitis, including
headache, fever, nuchal rigidity, photophobia, and vomiting. The entire
course of the biphasic disease is typically 1-­3 weeks.
The clinical spectrum of LCMV infection is broad. One third of
postnatal infections are asymptomatic. Other patients develop extraneural disease that extends beyond the usual symptoms and may
include orchitis, pneumonitis, myocarditis, parotitis, dermatitis, alopecia, and pharyngitis. In others, the neurologic disease may be considerably more severe than usual and may include transverse myelitis,
Guillain-­Barré syndrome, hydrocephalus, and encephalitis. Recovery
from acquired LCMV infection is usually complete, but fatalities occasionally occur.
LCMV infections acquired via solid organ transplantation always
induce severe disease. Several weeks after the transplantation, recipients of infected organs develop fever, leukopenia, and lethargy. After
these nonspecific symptoms, the course of the disease rapidly progresses to multiorgan system failure and shock. These cases are almost
always fatal.

Congenital Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus
Infection

LCMV infection during pregnancy can kill the fetus and induce spontaneous abortion. Among surviving fetuses, the two clinical hallmarks of congenital LCMV infection are vision impairment and brain
dysfunction.
The vision impairment in congenital LCMV infection is a result of
chorioretinitis and the formation of chorioretinal scars. The scarring
is usually bilateral and most commonly located in the periphery of the
fundus, but involvement of the macula also occurs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 318 u Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus
Although the retinal injuries from congenital LCMV infection are
often severe, it is the brain effects that cause the greatest disability. Prenatal infection with LCMV commonly induces either macrocephaly or
microcephaly. Macrocephaly after LCMV infection is almost invariably caused by noncommunicating hydrocephalus, stemming from
inflammation within the ventricular system. Microcephaly is a result
of the virus-­induced failure of brain growth. In addition to disturbances of head size, periventricular calcifications are also cardinal features of congenital LCMV infection.
Although hydrocephalus, microencephaly, and periventricular calcifications are by far the most commonly observed abnormalities of
the brain in congenital LCMV, other forms of neuropathology, alone
or in combination, can also occur. These include periventricular cysts,
porencephalic cysts, encephalomalacia, intraparenchymal calcifications, cerebellar hypoplasia, and neuronal migration disturbances.
Infants with congenital LCMV infection typically present during the
newborn period with evidence of brain dysfunction. The most common signs are lethargy, seizures, irritability, and jitteriness.
Within the fetus, LCMV has a specific tropism for the brain. Thus
unlike many other congenital infections, LCMV usually does not induce
systemic manifestations. Birthweight is typically appropriate for gestational age. Skin rashes and thrombocytopenia, which are common in
several other prominent congenital infections, are unusual in congenital
LCMV infection. Hepatosplenomegaly is only rarely observed, and serum
liver enzyme levels are usually normal. Auditory deficits are unusual.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

In acquired (postnatal) LCMV infection, the hallmark laboratory
abnormality occurs during the second (central nervous system) phase
of the disease and is CSF pleocytosis. The CSF typically contains hundreds to thousands of white blood cells, almost all of which are lymphocytes. However, CSF eosinophilia may also occur. Mild elevations
of CSF protein and hypoglycorrhachia are common.
In congenital LCMV infection, laboratory findings in the newborn
depend on whether the infant is still infected or not. If the infant still
harbors the infection, then examination of the CSF may reveal a lymphocytic pleocytosis. Unlike many other congenital infections, LCMV
does not typically induce elevations in liver enzymes, thrombocytopenia, or anemia. In many cases, the most reliably abnormal test is the
head CT scan, which typically reveals a combination of microencephaly, hydrocephalus, and periventricular calcifications (Fig. 318.1).

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Acute LCMV infections can be diagnosed by isolating the virus from
CSF. Polymerase chain reaction has also been used to detect LCMV
RNA in patients with active infections. However, by the time of birth,
a baby prenatally infected with LCMV may no longer harbor the virus.
Thus congenital LCMV infection is more commonly diagnosed by
serologic testing. The immunofluorescent antibody test detects both
immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG and has greater sensitivity than the
more widely available complement fixation method. The immunofluorescent antibody test is commercially available, and its specificity and
sensitivity make it an acceptable diagnostic tool. A more sensitive test
for detecting congenital LCMV infection is the enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay, which measures titers of LCMV IgG and IgM and is
performed at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
For acquired (postnatal) LCMV infection, the principal items in the
differential diagnosis are the other infectious agents that can induce
meningitis. These include bacteria, fungi, viruses, and some other forms
of pathogens. The most common viral causes of meningitis are the
enteroviruses, including coxsackieviruses and echoviruses, and the arboviruses, including La Crosse encephalitis virus and equine encephalitis
virus. Unlike LCMV, which is most common in winter, the enteroviruses
and arboviruses are most commonly acquired in summer and early fall.
The principal items in the differential diagnosis of congenital LCMV
infection are the other infectious pathogens that can cross the placenta
and damage the developing fetus. These infectious agents are linked by
the acronym TORCHS and include Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus,
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, and syphilis. Toxoplasmosis,

2079

Zika virus infection, and cytomegalovirus infection are particularly
difficult to differentiate from LCMV, because all of these infectious
agents can produce microcephaly, intracerebral calcifications, and chorioretinitis. Although clinical clues may aid in distinguishing one congenital infection from another, definitive identification of the causative
infectious agent usually requires laboratory data, including cultures
and serologic studies.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications in children with congenital LCMV infection are nonspecific and include the medical problems that commonly arise in scenarios
involving ventriculoperitoneal shunts, severe seizure disorders, and static
encephalopathy. These complications include shunt failure or infection,
aspiration pneumonia, injuries from falls, and joint contractures.

TREATMENT

There is no specific treatment for acquired or congenital LCMV
infection. An effective antiviral therapy for LCMV infection has not
yet been developed. Ribavirin is active against LCMV and other arenaviruses in vitro, but its utility in vivo is unproven. Immunosuppressive
therapy, if present, should be reduced.

Supportive Care

Children with hydrocephalus from congenital LCMV infection often
require placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt during infancy for
treatment of hydrocephalus. Seizures often begin during early postnatal life, are often difficult to control, and require administration of
multiple antiepileptic medications. The mental retardation induced by
congenital LCMV infection is often profound. In most cases, affected
children should be referred for educational intervention during early
life. The spasticity accompanying congenital LCMV infection is often
severe. Although physical therapy can help to maintain the range of
motion and minimize painful spasms and contractures, implantation
of a baclofen pump is often helpful.

PROGNOSIS

The great majority of patients with postnatally acquired LCMV infection have a full recovery with no permanent sequelae. Rarely, postnatal
infections induce hydrocephalus and require shunting. Rarer yet, postnatal LCMV infection is fatal.
In contrast to the usual benign outcome of postnatal infections,
prenatal infections typically lead to severe and permanent disability.

Fig. 318.1 Head CT scan from a 2-­mo-­old microcephalic baby with
congenital lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection. The scan reveals enlargement of the lateral ventricles (LV) and periventricular calcifications (arrows).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2080 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
In children with congenital LCMV infection, brain function is nearly
always impaired and chorioretinitis is invariably present. Mental retardation, cerebral palsy, ataxia, epilepsy, and blindness are common neurologic sequelae. However, children with congenital LCMV infection
have diverse outcomes. All children with the combination of microencephaly and periventricular calcifications are profoundly neurologically
impaired. Blindness, medically refractory epilepsy, spastic quadriparesis,
and mental retardation are typical of this group. However, other children with congenital LCMV infection who do not have the combination
of microencephaly and periventricular calcifications often have a more
favorable outcome, with less severe motor, mental, and vision impairments. Children with isolated cerebellar hypoplasia may be ataxic but
have only mild or moderate mental retardation and vision loss.

PREVENTION

No vaccine exists to prevent LCMV infection. However, measures can
be taken to reduce the risk of infection. Because rodents, especially
house mice, are the principal reservoir of LCMV, people can reduce
their risk of contracting the virus by minimizing their exposure to the
secretions and excretions of mice. This can be accomplished most effectively by eliminating cohabitation with mice. Congenital LCMV infection will not occur unless a woman contracts a primary infection with
LCMV during pregnancy. Thus women should be especially careful to
avoid contact or cohabitation with mice during pregnancy. Pregnant
women should also avoid contact with pet rodents, especially mice and
hamsters. These facts should be stressed during prenatal visits.
Acquisition of LCMV from solid organ transplantation represents
a substantial risk to organ recipients. Prospective donors with LCMV
meningitis or encephalitis pose a clear risk for transmitting a fatal
infection to recipients. Healthcare providers, transplantation centers,
and organ procurement organizations should be aware of the risks
posed by LCMV and should consider LCMV in any potential donor
with signs of aseptic meningitis but no identified infectious agent. The
risks and benefits of offering and receiving organs from donors with
possible LCMV infection should be carefully considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 319

Hantavirus Pulmonary
Syndrome

severe disease; hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS), seen
primarily in mainland Asia (see Chapter 317); Dobrava virus, the cause
of a form of HFRS seen primarily in the Balkans; Puumala virus, which
causes a milder disease with a high proportion of subclinical infections
prevalent in northern Europe; and Seoul virus, which results in moderate HFRS and is transmitted predominantly in Asia by urban rats
or worldwide by laboratory rats. Prospect Hill virus, a hantavirus that
is widely disseminated in meadow voles in the United States, is not
known to cause human disease. There are an increasing number of case
reports of European hantaviruses causing HPS.
HPS is associated with sin nombre virus, isolated from deer mice, Peromyscus maniculatus, in New Mexico. The multiple HPS-­like agents in the
Northern Hemisphere isolated to date belong to a single genetic group of
hantaviruses and are associated with rodents of the family Muridae, subfamily Sigmodontinae. These rodent species are restricted to the Americas, suggesting that HPS may be a Western Hemisphere disease.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Persons acquiring HPS generally have a history of recent outdoor exposure or live in an area with large populations of deer mice. Clusters of
cases have occurred among individuals who have cleaned houses that
were rodent infested. P. maniculatus is one of the most common North
American mammals and, where found, is frequently the dominant
member of the rodent community. About half of the average of 30+ cases
seen annually occurs between the months of May and July. Patients are
almost exclusively 12-­70 years of age; 60% of patients are 20-­39 years of
age. Rare cases are reported in children younger than 12 years of age.
Two thirds of patients are male, probably reflecting their greater outdoor
activities. It is not known whether almost complete absence of disease in
young children is a reflection of innate resistance or simply lack of exposure. Evidence of human-­to-­human transmission has been reported in
Argentine outbreaks. As of January 2017, 728 cases of hantavirus disease
have been reported in the United States since surveillance began in 1993.
Hantaviruses do not cause apparent illness in their reservoir hosts,
which remain asymptomatically infected for life. Infected rodents shed
virus in saliva, urine, and feces for many weeks, but the duration of
shedding and the period of maximum infectivity are unknown. The
presence of infectious virus in saliva, the sensitivity of these animals
to parenteral inoculation with hantaviruses, and field observations of
infected rodents indicate that biting is important for rodent-­to-­rodent
transmission. Aerosols from infective saliva or excreta of rodents are
implicated in the transmission of hantaviruses to humans. Persons
visiting animal care areas housing infected rodents have been infected

Scott B. Halstead
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is caused by multiple closely
related hantaviruses that have been identified from the western United
States, with sporadic cases reported from the eastern United States
(Fig. 319.1) and Canada and important foci of disease in several countries in South America. HPS is characterized by a febrile prodrome
followed by the rapid onset of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema and
hypotension or shock. Sporadic cases in the United States caused by
related viruses may manifest with renal involvement. Cases in Argentina and Chile sometimes include severe gastrointestinal hemorrhaging; nosocomial transmission has been documented in this geographic
region only.

ETIOLOGY

Cases of hantavirus disease
per State of reporting
0 - 15
16 - 50
> 50

Hantaviruses are a genus in the family Bunyaviridae, which are lipid-­
enveloped viruses with a negative-­sense RNA genome composed of
three unique segments. Several pathogenic viruses that have been
recognized within the genus include Hantaan virus, which causes the

Fig. 319.1 Total number of confirmed cases of hantavirus pulmonary
syndrome, by state reporting, United States, 1993-­2016. N = 728 as of
January 2017. (From Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/hantavirus/surveillance/
reporting-­state.html)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 320 u Rabies
after exposure for as little as 5 minutes. It is possible that hantaviruses
are spread through contaminated food and breaks in skin or mucous
membranes; transmission to humans has occurred by rodent bites.
Person-­to-­person transmission is distinctly uncommon but has been
documented in Argentina.

2081

PATHOGENESIS

HPS is characterized by sudden and catastrophic pulmonary edema,
resulting in anoxia and acute heart failure. The virus is detected in
pulmonary capillaries, suggesting that pulmonary edema is the consequence of a T-­cell attack on virus-­infected capillaries. The disease
severity is predicted by the level of acute-­phase viremia titer. A useful
hamster model of HPS is available.

of cardiovascular function. The pathophysiology of HPS somewhat
resembles that of dengue shock syndrome (see Chapter 315). Pressor
or inotropic agents, such as dobutamine, should be administered in
combination with judicious volume replacement to treat symptomatic
hypotension or shock while avoiding exacerbation of the pulmonary
edema. Intravenous ribavirin, which is lifesaving if given early in the
course of HFRS and is effective in preventing death in the hamster
model, has not yet been demonstrated to be of value in HPS.
Further information and advice about management, control measures, diagnosis, and collection of biohazardous specimens can be
obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Viral Special Pathogens
Branch, Atlanta, Georgia 30333 (470-­312-­0094).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

PROGNOSIS

HPS is characterized by a prodrome and a cardiopulmonary phase.
The mean duration after the onset of prodromal symptoms to hospitalization is 5.4 days. The mean duration of symptoms to death is 8
days (median: 7 days; range: 2-­16 days). The most common prodromal
symptoms are fever and myalgia (100%); cough or dyspnea (76%); gastrointestinal symptoms, including vomiting, diarrhea, and midabdominal pain (76%); and headache (71%). The cardiopulmonary phase is
heralded by progressive cough and shortness of breath. The most common initial physical findings are tachypnea (100%), tachycardia (94%),
and hypotension (50%). Rapidly progressive acute pulmonary edema,
hypoxia, and shock develop in most severely ill patients. Pulmonary
vascular permeability is complicated by cardiogenic shock associated
with increased vascular resistance. The clinical course of the illness in
patients who die is characterized by pulmonary edema accompanied
by severe hypotension, frequently terminating in sinus bradycardia,
electromechanical dissociation, ventricular tachycardia, or fibrillation.
Hypotension may be progressive even with adequate oxygenation. HPS
virus is excreted in the urine during the acute illness phase, and survivors may demonstrate evidence of chronic renal damage.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of HPS should be considered in a previously healthy
patient presenting with a febrile prodrome, acute respiratory distress, and
thrombocytopenia who has had outdoor exposure in the spring and summer months. A specific diagnosis of HPS is made by serologic tests that
detect hantavirus immunoglobulin M antibodies. The early appearance
of immunoglobulin G antibodies signals probable recovery. Hantavirus
antigen can be detected in tissue by immunohistochemistry and amplification of hantavirus nucleotide sequences detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. The state health department or the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention should be consulted to assist
in the diagnosis, epidemiologic investigations, and outbreak control.

In some geographic areas, fatality rates for HPS have been 50%. Severe
abnormalities in hematocrit, white blood cell count, lactate dehydrogenase value, and partial thromboplastin time and a high viral load
predict death with high specificity and sensitivity. The early appearance
of immunoglobulin G antibodies may signal a hopeful prognosis.

PREVENTION

Avoiding contact with rodents is the only preventive strategy against
HPS. Rodent control in and around the home is important. Barrier nursing is advised, and biosafety level 3 facilities and practices are recommended for laboratory handling of blood, body fluids, and tissues from
suspect patients or rodents, because the virus may be aerosolized. However, to date, there are no cases of person-­to-­person transmission of HPS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 320

Rabies
Rodney E. Willoughby Jr.

Laboratory findings include leukocytosis (median: 26,000 cells/μL),
an elevated hematocrit resulting from hemoconcentration, thrombocytopenia (median: 64,000 cells/μL), prolonged prothrombin and
partial thromboplastin times, elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase
concentration, decreased serum protein concentrations, proteinuria,
and microscopic hematuria. Patients who die often experience disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, including frank hemorrhage
and exceptionally high leukocyte counts.

Rabies virus is a bullet-­
shaped, negative-­
sense, single-­
stranded,
enveloped RNA virus from the family Rhabdoviridae, genus Lyssavirus. There are 17 species of Lyssavirus, divided into three antigenic
phylogroups. Rabies vaccines and immunoglobulins are active against
phylogroup I viruses. The classic rabies virus (phylogroup I, genotype
1) is distributed worldwide and naturally infects a large variety of animals. The other genotypes are more geographically confined, with
none found in the Americas. Six Lyssavirus genotypes are associated
with rabies in humans, although genotype 1 accounts for the great
majority of cases. Within genotype 1, different lineages are specific
to animal reservoirs, although cross-­species transmission can occur.
Cosmopolitan dog, vampire bat, and insectivorous bat lineages in the
Americas cause overlapping but distinct clinical syndromes and vary in
immunogenicity, affecting survival.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Laboratory Findings

The differential diagnosis includes adult respiratory distress syndrome,
pneumonic plague, psittacosis, severe mycoplasmal pneumonia, influenza, leptospirosis, inhalation anthrax, rickettsial infections, pulmonary tularemia, atypical bacterial and viral pneumonia, legionellosis,
meningococcemia, and other sepsis syndromes. The key determinant
in the diagnosis of HPS is throm­­bocyt­openia.

TREATMENT

Management of patients with hantavirus infection requires maintenance of adequate oxygenation and careful monitoring and support

Rabies is present on all continents except Antarctica. Rabies predominantly afflicts underaged, poor, and geographically isolated populations. Approximately 59,000 cases of human rabies occur in Africa
and Asia annually. Rabies virus can infect any mammal or bird, but
true animal reservoirs that maintain the presence of rabies virus in the
population are limited to terrestrial carnivores and bats. Worldwide,
transmission from dogs accounts for >90% of human cases. In Africa
and Asia, other animals serve as prominent reservoirs, such as jackals,
mongooses, and raccoon dogs. In the United States, raccoons are the
most infected wild animal along the eastern seaboard. Three lineages

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2082 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
of skunk rabies are endemic in the Midwest (north and south) and
California, gray foxes harbor rabies in Arizona and Texas, red foxes
and arctic foxes harbor rabies in Alaska, and mongooses carry rabies
in Puerto Rico. Rabies occurs infrequently in livestock. Among American domestic pets, infected cats outnumber infected dogs, probably
because cats frequently prowl unsupervised and are not uniformly subject to vaccine laws. Rabies is rare in small mammals, including mice,
squirrels, and rabbits; to date, no animal-­to-­human transmission from
these animals has been documented.
The epidemiology of human rabies in the United States is dominated
by cryptogenic bat rabies. Bats are migratory in the spring and fall;
rabid bats are identified in every state of the union except Hawaii. In
almost all cases of bat-­associated human rabies in the United States,
there was no history of a bat bite. Among inhabitants of the Peruvian Amazon region who have exposure to rabies-­infected vampire
bats, there are some who have rabies virus–neutralizing antibodies.
Antibody-­positive patients remember bat bites but do not recall symptoms of rabies.
In the United States, 30,000 episodes of rabies postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) occur annually. Between one and three endemic
human cases are diagnosed annually, half postmortem. There have
been five outbreaks of rabies associated with solid organ and corneal
transplantation.

TRANSMISSION

Rabies virus is found in large quantities in the saliva of infected animals, and transmission occurs almost exclusively through inoculation
of the infected saliva through a bite or scratch from a rabid mammal.
Approximately 35–50% of people who are bitten by a known rabies-­
infected animal and receive no PEP contract rabies. The transmission
rate is increased if the victim has suffered multiple bites and if the
inoculation occurs in highly innervated parts of the body such as the
face and the hands. Infection does not occur after exposure of intact
skin to infected secretions, but virus may enter the body through intact
mucous membranes. Claims that spelunkers may experience rabies
after inhaling bat excreta have come under doubt, although inhalational exposure can occur during laboratory accidents.
No case of nosocomial transmission to a healthcare worker has been
documented to date, but caregivers of a patient with rabies are advised
to use full barrier precautions. The virus is rapidly inactivated in the
environment, and contamination of fomites is not a mechanism of
spread.

PATHOGENESIS

After inoculation, rabies virus replicates slowly and at low levels in muscle or skin. This slow initial step likely accounts for the disease’s long
incubation period. The virus then enters the peripheral motor nerve,
using the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and possibly other receptors
for entry. Once in the nerve, the virus travels by fast axonal transport,
crossing synapses roughly every 12 hours. Rapid dissemination occurs
throughout the brain and spinal cord before symptoms appear. Infection of the dorsal root ganglia is apparently futile but causes characteristic radiculitis. Infection concentrates in the brainstem, accounting
for autonomic dysfunction and relative sparing of cognition. Despite
severe neurologic dysfunction with rabies, histopathology reveals limited damage, inflammation, or apoptosis. The pathologic hallmark of
rabies, the Negri body, is composed of clumped viral nucleocapsids
that create cytoplasmic inclusions on routine histology. Negri bodies
can be absent in documented rabies virus infection. Rabies may be a
metabolic disorder of neurotransmission; tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency in human rabies causes severe deficiencies in dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin.
After infection of the central nervous system, the virus travels
anterograde through the peripheral nervous system to virtually all
innervated organs, further exacerbating dysautonomia. It is through
this route that the virus infects the salivary glands. Many victims of
rabies die from uncontrolled cardiac dysrhythmia in the first week of
objective signs of rabies.

Deficiency of tetrahydrobiopterin, an essential cofactor for neuronal
nitric oxide synthase, is predicted to lead to spasm of the basilar arteries. Onset of vasospasm has been confirmed in a few patients within
5-­8 days of the first hospitalization, at about the time coma supervenes
in the natural history. Metabolites in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) consistent with ketogenesis are associated with demise. Immune response
to rabies is delayed, usually evident 4-­14 days after onset of clinical
signs. Immune response to rabies varies by lineage; antibody responses
in CSF are often inferior to those in serum. Common complications
include complete heart block in dog rabies and cerebral edema in bat
rabies.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period for rabies is 1-­3 months. In severe wounds to
the head, symptoms may occur within 5 days after exposure, and occasionally the incubation period can extend to 8 years. Rabies has two
principal clinical forms, but these overlap in practice. Encephalitic or
furious rabies is extrapolated from carnivores and begins with nonspecific symptoms, including fever, sore throat, malaise, headache,
nausea and vomiting, and weakness. Symptoms are often accompanied
by paresthesia and pruritus at or near the site of the bite. The patient
begins to demonstrate symptoms of encephalitis, with agitation, sleep
disturbance, or depressed mentation. Characteristically, patients with
rabies encephalitis initially have periods of lucidity alternating with
periods of profound encephalopathy. Hydrophobia and aerophobia
are the cardinal signs of rabies; they are unique to humans and are
not universal or specific. Phobic spasms are manifested by agitation
and fear created by being offered a drink or fanning of air in the face,
which in turn produce choking and aspiration through spasms of the
pharynx, neck, and diaphragm. Seizures are rare and should point to
an alternative diagnosis; orofacial dyskinesias and myoclonus may be
confused with seizures. Severe dysautonomia is common, and cardiac
arrests occur in 25% of patients in the first week of hospitalization. The
illness is relentlessly progressive. There is a dissociation of brain electrical activity with findings of brainstem coma caused by anterograde
denervation. Death almost always occurs within 1-­2 days of hospitalization in developing countries and by 18 days of hospitalization with
intensive care.
Paralytic or dumb rabies, extrapolated from herbivores, is seen
much less frequently and is characterized principally by fevers and
ascending motor weakness affecting both the limbs and the cranial
nerves. Most patients with paralytic rabies also have some element of
encephalopathy as the disease progresses subacutely.
Case reports suggest that milder forms of rabies encephalitis may
exist, and 45 rabies survivors are known. Rabies should be considered
earlier and more frequently than current practice to improve outcomes.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of rabies encephalitis includes all forms
of severe cerebral infections, tetanus, and some intoxications and
envenomations. Rabies can be confused with autoimmune (anti–N-­
methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor, NMDAR) encephalitis, other infectious
forms of encephalitis, psychiatric illness, drug abuse, and conversion
disorders. Paralytic rabies is frequently confused with Guillain-­Barré
syndrome. The diagnosis of rabies is frequently delayed in Western
countries because of the unfamiliarity of the medical staff with the
infection. These considerations highlight the need to pursue a history of contact with an animal belonging to one of the known reservoirs for rabies or to establish a travel history to a rabies-­endemic
region.

DIAGNOSIS

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) require
complementary tests to confirm a clinically suspected case of rabies.
The virus can be grown both in cell culture and after animal injection, but these methods are slow. Pan-­lyssavirus reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction is 90% sensitive for the diagnosis of rabies
when done on skin and iteratively in saliva. Rabies antigen is detected

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 320 u Rabies
through immunofluorescence of saliva or biopsies of hairy skin or
brain. Corneal impressions are not recommended. Rabies-­
specific
antibody can be detected in serum or CSF samples, but most patients
die while seronegative. Antirabies antibodies are present in the sera
of patients who have received an incomplete course of the rabies
vaccine, precluding a meaningful interpretation in this setting.
Recent treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin may result in
a false-­positive antibody test. Antibody in CSF is rarely detected
after vaccination and is considered diagnostic of rabies regardless
of immunization status. CSF abnormalities in cell count, glucose,
and protein content are minimal and not diagnostic. MRI findings
in the brain are late.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Rabies is generally fatal. Conventional critical care yielded 6 survivors
from 79 attempts since 1990. Seventeen of 103 patients survived with
use of the Milwaukee Protocol (MP) (http://www.mcw.edu/rabies);
neurologic outcomes are poor in half of patients. Neither rabies immunoglobulin (RIG) nor rabies vaccine provides benefit once symptoms
have appeared. Among 10 survivors of rabies after use of rabies vaccine, 7 had poor neurologic outcomes. Among seven vaccine-­naïve
survivors, two had poor outcomes. Antiviral treatments have not been
effective; favipiravir has been administered to eight patients with modest clinical effect. Ribavirin and RIG delay the immune response and
should be avoided. In contrast, appearance of the normal antibody
response by 7 days is associated with clearance of salivary viral load
and survival.

PREVENTION

Primary prevention of rabies infection includes vaccination of domestic animals and education to avoid wild animals, stray animals, and
animals with unusual behavior.

Immunization and Fertility Control of Animal
Reservoirs

The introduction of routine rabies immunization for domestic pets in
the United States and Europe during the middle of the 20th century
virtually eliminated infection in dogs. Dog rabies has now been almost
eliminated from the Americas; residual cases concentrate in the Caribbean and Bolivia. In the 1990s, control efforts in Europe and North
America shifted to immunization of wildlife reservoirs of rabies, where
rabies was newly emerging. These programs employed bait laced with
either an attenuated rabies vaccine or a recombinant rabies surface glycoprotein inserted into vaccinia, distributed by air or hand into areas
inhabited by rabid animals. Human contact with vaccine-­laden bait has
been infrequent. Adverse events after such contact have been rare, but
the vaccinia vector poses a threat to the same population at risk for vaccinia itself, namely, pregnant women, immunocompromised patients,
and people with atopic dermatitis. Mass culling of endemic reservoirs
has never worked; vaccination and fertility control stop outbreaks. Bats
are ubiquitous and very important for insect control. Less than 1% of
free-­flying bats but >8% of downed bats and bats found in dwellings
are rabid.

Postexposure Prophylaxis

Only one case of rabies has been documented in a person in the United
States receiving the recommended schedule of PEP since introduction
of modern cellular vaccines in the 1970s.
Given the incubation period for rabies, PEP is a medical urgency,
not emergency. The relevance of rabies for most pediatricians centers
on evaluating whether an animal exposure warrants PEP (Fig. 320.1).
The decision to proceed ultimately depends on the local epidemiology of animal rabies as determined by active surveillance programs,
information that can be obtained from local and state health departments. In general, bats, raccoons, skunks, coyotes, and foxes should
be considered rabid unless proven otherwise through euthanasia and
testing of brain tissue, whereas bites from small herbivorous animals
(squirrels, hamsters, gerbils, chipmunks, rats, mice, and rabbits) can
be discounted. The response to bites from a pet, particularly a dog, cat,

2083

or ferret, depends on local surveillance statistics and on whether the
animal is vaccinated and available for observation. Areas free of canine
lineage of rabies virus may still have rabid dogs and cats through wildlife transmission.
The approach to nonbite bat exposures is controversial. In response
to the observation that most cases of rabies in the United States have
been caused by bat variants and that most affected patients had no recollection of a bat bite, the CDC has recommended that rabies PEP be
considered after any physical contact with bats and when a bat is
found in the same room as persons who may not be able to accurately
report a bite, assuming that the animal is unavailable for testing. Such
people include young children, the mentally disabled, and intoxicated
individuals. Other nonbite contacts (e.g., handling a carcass, exposure
to an animal playing with a carcass, or coming into contact with blood
or excreta from a potentially rabid animal) usually do not require PEP.
In all instances of a legitimate exposure, effort should be made to
recover the animal for quarantine and observation or brain examination after euthanasia. Testing obviates the need for PEP more than half
the time. In most instances, PEP can be deferred until the results of
observation or brain histology are known. In dogs, cats, and ferrets,
symptoms of rabies always occur within several days of viral shedding;
therefore in these animals a 10-­day observation period is sufficient to
eliminate the possibility of rabies.
No duration of time between exposure and onset of symptoms
should preclude rabies prophylaxis. Rabies PEP is most effective when
applied expeditiously. Nevertheless, the series should be initiated in the
asymptomatic person as soon as possible, regardless of the length of
time since the bite. Rabies vaccine and RIG are contraindicated once
symptoms develop.
The first step in rabies PEP is to cleanse the wound thoroughly. Soapy
water is sufficient to inactivate an enveloped virus, and its effectiveness
is supported by broad experience. Other commonly used disinfectants,
such as iodine-­containing preparations, are virucidal and should be
used in addition to soap when available. Probably the most important
aspect of this component is that the wound is cleansed with copious
volumes of disinfectant. Primary closure is avoided; wounds may be
bacterially infected as well, so cosmetic repair should follow. Antibiotics and tetanus prophylaxis (see Chapter 257) should be applied with
the use of usual wound care criteria.
Schedules and indications for administration of rabies vaccine
and human-­derived rabies immunoglobulin (HRIG) are available at
the CDC website (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/vacc-­
specific/rabies.html). These do not harmonize fully with international
recommendations by the World Health Organization that seek greater
efficiencies in PEP and use of RIG after dog bites.
The second component of rabies PEP consists of passive immunization with RIG. Most failures of PEP are attributed to not using RIG.
HRIG, the formulation used in industrialized countries, is administered at a dose of 20 IU/kg. Globally, the World Health Organization
recommends that as much of the dose is infused around the wound as
possible. In the United States, where bat rabies dominates, the remainder is injected intramuscularly in a limb distant from the one injected
with the killed vaccine. Like other immunoglobulin preparations, RIG
interferes with the take of live viral vaccines for at least 4 months after
administration of the RIG dose. A more concentrated formulation of
HRIG is available, which may be more suitable for bites on the face
and digits to minimize risk of compartment syndrome after injection.
HRIG is not available in many parts of the developing world. Modern
preparations of equine RIG are associated with fewer side effects than
prior products composed of crude horse serum. Regrettably, for a large
segment of the world’s population, no passive immunization product
is available at all, so preexposure prophylaxis (PreRP) should be considered. Monoclonal antibody products are in clinical trials and may
alleviate this deficiency.
The third component of rabies PEP is immunization with inactivated vaccine. In most of the world, cell-­based vaccines have replaced
previous preparations. Two formulations currently are available in the
United States, namely, RabAvert (Chiron Behring Vaccines, Maharashtra, India), a purified chick embryo cell–cultivated vaccine, and Imovax

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2084 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Bite, scratch, or mucous membrane
contact from a mammal
No

Yes
Yes

No
PEP

No

Squirrels, hamsters, gerbils,
chipmunks, rat, mice, rabbits
No

Domestic animals: dogs, cats, ferrets
Wildlife: bats, raccoons, skunks, foxes, coyotes
In some locations: livestock
Yes

Consult local
health officials.
Quarantine animal
for 10 days.
Signs of rabies?

Yes

Animal
available for
observation?

Yes

Dog, cat,
ferret

PEP

Contact health
department for
testing.
Testing positive?

No
No
PEP

Animal available
for testing?
Yes

No
Yes

No

Consult local
health officials

Yes

No
PEP

No

PEP

No
PEP

Fig. 320.1 Algorithm for evaluating a child for rabies postexposure prophylaxis. This and any other algorithm should be used in concert with local
epidemiologic information regarding the incidence of animal rabies in any given location.

Rabies (Aventis Pasteur, Bridgewater, NJ), cultivated in human diploid
cell cultures. In both children and adults, both vaccines are administered intramuscularly in a 1-­mL volume in the deltoid or anterolateral
thigh on days 0, 3, 7, and 14 after presentation. Injection into the gluteal
area is associated with a blunted antibody response, so this area should
not be used. The rabies vaccines can be safely administered during
pregnancy. In most persons the vaccine is well tolerated; most adverse
effects are related to booster doses. Pain and erythema at the injection
site occur commonly, and local adenopathy, headache, and myalgias
occur in 10–20% of patients. Approximately 5% of patients who receive
the human diploid cell vaccine experience an immune complex–mediated allergic reaction, including rash, edema, and arthralgias, several
days after a booster dose. The World Health Organization has approved
schedules using smaller amounts of vaccine, administered intradermally, that are immunogenic and protective, but none is approved
for use in the United States. Other cell culture–derived rabies virus
vaccines are available in the developing world. A few countries still
produce nerve tissue–derived vaccines; these preparations are poorly
immunogenic, and cross reactivity with human nervous tissue may
occur, producing severe neurologic symptoms even in the absence of
rabies infection. Prompt travel to a clinic or country to obtain modern
rabies vaccine is advised instead.

Preexposure Prophylaxis

The killed rabies vaccine can be given to prevent rabies in persons at
high risk for exposure to wild-­type virus, including laboratory personnel working with rabies virus, veterinarians, and others likely to be
exposed to rabid animals as part of their occupation. PreEP should
be considered for persons traveling to a rabies-­endemic region where
there is a credible risk for a bite or scratch from a rabies-­infected animal, particularly if there is likely to be a shortage of RIG or cell culture–based vaccine. Rabies vaccine as part of the routine vaccine series
is under investigation in some countries. The schedule for PreEP consists of two intramuscular injections on days 0, and 7; other schedules
are available globally. PEP in the patient who has received PreEP or a
prior three doses of PEP consists of two doses of vaccine (one each on
days 0 and 3) and does not require RIG. Immunity from PreEP wanes
after several years and requires boosting if the potential for exposure to
rabid animals recurs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 321

Polyomaviruses
Bijal A. Parikh
Human polyomaviruses (PyV) comprise a unique group of viruses
that cause disease in immunocompromised individuals but not in the
healthy immune-­competent host. The two best-­studied human PyV,
BK PyV and JC PyV, are acquired relatively early in life and generally cause no clinical disease, despite occasional bouts of asymptomatic
viral shedding. PyV-­associated sequelae become especially relevant
in the setting of posttransplant renal graft failure and hemorrhagic
cystitis in the case of BK PyV and neurologic disease for JC PyV reactivation. The number of human PyV has expanded dramatically, with
discovery of up to 12 additional viruses. Two PyV, designated KI virus
and WU virus, can be detected in respiratory samples from children;
however, their disease associations are not as well established outside
of a few case reports. Exceptions include Merkel cell or MC PyV and
trichodysplasia spinulosa-­associated or TS PyV, yet their relevance
in the pediatric population is limited. Current knowledge regarding BK
PyV and JC PyV epidemiology and disease associations with special
emphasis on diagnostic and clinical management of pediatric populations is summarized next.

GENOMIC ORGANIZATION

PyV are nonenveloped, icosahedral virions of 40-­45 nm in diameter. The
genomes are circular double-­stranded DNA composed of approximately
5,000 base pairs. The type member of the parent family, Polyomaviridae,
is simian virus 40 (SV40). Translation of proteins occurs from both early
and late transcripts, transcribed in opposite directions from the noncoding
control region (NCCR). The host range of PyV is very broad, having been
isolated from a variety of mammals, birds, and even fish. However, PyV are
strictly species specific; thus human PyV only infect humans.

PyV EPIDEMIOLOGY

Almost 90% of adults have been infected with BK PyV by their third
decade; only 20% of children are seropositive for BK PyV by age 3,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 321 u Polyomaviruses
climbing to 80% by age 7. Approximately 50–70% of adults are seropositive for JC PyV, and children show even lower seroprevalence rates,
with less than 30% positive by age 7. Both BK PyV and JC PyV are primarily respiratory tract infections with subsequent spread to the kidneys and the central nervous system (CNS), respectively. Tropism for
BK PyV has been demonstrated to be the bladder urothelium and renal
tubular cells, where lifelong latency is likely established. In contrast, the
primary tropism for JC PyV includes the CNS and lymphoid and renal
tissue. MC PyV is found and shed from skin, although little is known
about its acquisition.

BK PyV

BK PyV was first detected in the urine from a renal allograft recipient
suffering from ureteral stenosis with the initials “BK.” In the immunocompetent host, BK PyV may never result in any observable clinical
disease. However, in the immunocompromised, BK PyV reactivation
can lead to serious consequences. Immune suppression can either be
iatrogenic after transplantation or constitutional, such as with inherited immune-­
deficiency syndromes. In renal transplant recipients,
interstitial nephritis, renal dysfunction, and ultimately graft failure can
develop. In hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients,
reactivation can lead to hemorrhagic cystitis. Although the incidence
of such symptomatic complications is rare, BK PyV must be proactively managed through careful monitoring and alteration of immunosuppressive regimens.
Although the most common complication after pediatric kidney
transplantation continues to be graft failure caused by chronic rejection, infections of the transplanted organ can also promote graft
dysfunction. Common infectious complications placing pediatric
recipients at risk for graft failure include EBV, CMV, BK PyV, and JC
PyV. Fortunately, with current monitoring and interventions, the incidence of pediatric transplants that will fail as a result of nephropathy
correlating with BK PyV infection is very low.
Nearly two thirds of pediatric renal transplant recipients show evidence of BK viruria (virus in the urine), with one fifth showing viremia
(virus in the blood). BK virus–associated nephropathy (BKVAN) can
initially manifest as rising creatinine and is diagnosed definitively
through core renal biopsies. However, because the nephropathy can
be focal, a single unaffected core specimen does not exclude disease. In
the core biopsy, BKVAN is characterized by tubular injury with cellular enlargement, epithelial necrosis, erosion of tubular basement
membranes, and intranuclear inclusion bodies in epithelial cells. If
untreated, tubular necrosis and sclerosing allograft nephropathy can lead
to irreversible renal impairment and rejection. Importantly, reduction
of immunosuppression in viremic patients has been highly effective in
limiting rejection caused by BKVAN. Rates of BKVAN in the pediatric
population have been estimated at around 5%, and approximately 0.5%
of renal transplant recipients will lose their graft because of BKVAN.
Laboratory evidence of BK PyV infection is best achieved through
a microscopic urine examination, followed by molecular (polymerase chain reaction [PCR]–based) quantitative analysis of urine
and plasma (Table 321.1). Depending on the method and analyte, a
wide range of sensitivity and specificity has been reported. Detection
of “haufen,” which are viral aggregates that can be detected only by
electron microscopy, is nearly 100% sensitive and specific but requires
special equipment. An alternative diagnostic approach includes

2085

microscopic examination for the presence of decoy cells (urothelial
cells containing abundant viral particles) in the urine; however, sensitivity is poor, and thus examination for decoy cells is not the preferred
screening method. More commonly, PCR testing for BK genomic
DNA from urine and plasma is employed. Although highly sensitive for BK PyV, the specificity of single-­time-­point molecular tests for
predicting renal nephropathy is low, as asymptomatic individuals can
intermittently shed virus without progression to renal disease. Therefore the presence of isolated BK viruria is not sufficient to diagnose
infection leading to renal impairment.
Accurate quantification of BK PyV in plasma and urine is essential
for standardized care across transplant centers with broadly applied
thresholds for intervention. The first WHO international standard for
BK PyV was made available to enable interassay comparisons in 2016.
In 2020, the first molecular platform to obtain FDA clearance for quantitative BK PyV testing included plasma and urine for monitoring renal
transplant recipients based on the use of the WHO standard.
No single guideline exists for routine monitoring for BKVAN in
either pediatric or adult populations, and thus transplant centers
need to design strategies that best fit their local prevalence rates. One
proposed guideline suggests urine screening monthly in the first
months after transplant, then every 3 months for 2 years, and then
annually in years 3, 4, and 5. If viruria exceeds 1 × 107 copies/mL,
then biopsy should be performed with a concomitant reduction in
immunosuppression. In addition, plasma levels exceeding 1 × 104
copies/mL should also prompt a biopsy and reduction in immunosuppression. Centers may include routine renal biopsies to monitor
for overall graft health, and these may also be used to evaluate for
BKVAN.
Although there are no direct antiviral treatments for BK PyV,
the primary clinical parameter shown to have the greatest effect on
preventing long-­term kidney damage and rejection is careful adjustment of the dose of immunosuppression. This adjustment allows
the body’s natural immunity, specifically the T-­cell compartment,
to effectively reduce the viral burden. However, decreasing immunosuppression comes at a risk of graft rejection if not cautiously
approached. A growing body of literature is beginning to emerge that
reevaluates the anecdotal successes of specific treatments, including
cidofovir (CDV) and leflunomide. These two drugs have shown efficacy in culture conditions, yet clinical utility remains unproven. The
antibiotic class of fluoroquinolones has also demonstrated in vitro
activity without a subsequent sustained clinical effect. Finally, both
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and cyclosporine A have
shown equally limited effects in clinical trials. In summary, the current treatment options rely heavily on early and accurate detection
of infection followed by an appropriately titered dose reduction in
immunosuppressive drugs.
In pediatric HSCT recipients, a common association between BK
PyV shedding and hemorrhagic cystitis (HC) has been clinically
observed. HC can occur in one fifth to one third of pediatric patients
after HSCT; however, it rarely results in death. Unfortunately, the long-­
term sequelae of fibrosis and bladder contracture can lead to significant
morbidity. After HSCT, either early-­onset (within 1 week) or late-­
onset (2-­8 weeks) HC may occur, with the timing providing insight
into the pathogenic process. Early-­onset HC appears to be a result of
direct urothelial damage from conditioning agents (cyclophosphamide,

Table 321.1  Recommendations for Patients with BK PyV–Associated Nephropathy
SCREENING

DIAGNOSIS

MONITORING

Cytology

Poor sensitivity

Decoy cells, Haufen

Poor sensitivity

Molecular

Routine BK PyV PCR after renal transplant

BK viremia >10,000 copies/mL

Follow until viral loads trend lower

Pathology

Institution specific for the frequency of
kidney biopsy

Kidney allograft biopsy with characteristic
changes and positive immunohistochemistry
(IHC) demonstrating viral antigen

Institution specific for the
frequency of kidney biopsy

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2086 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
busulfan, radiation) before transplant, independent of any infectious
process, whereas the more commonly observed late-­onset HC occurs
around the time of engraftment. Although primarily associated with
BK PyV, the differential diagnosis for late-­onset HC also includes JC
PyV, CMV, and adenovirus. All causes of HC must be carefully considered for effective clinical management.
Diagnosis of HC requires a triad of findings: cystitis, gross hematuria, and urine BK PyV loads >7 log10 copies/mL (Table 321.2). Current guidelines do not recommend screening for BK PyV after HSCT,
citing a lack of effective prophylactic treatment. However, long-­term
sequelae of renal impairment greater than 2 years after transplant have
been described, and therefore routine monitoring may need to eventually be considered.
The presence of BK PyV in the urine occurs in the majority of
HSCT recipients and is therefore neither specific nor predictive of BK
PyV-­HC. Although not as sensitive, the presence of virus in plasma
of >3 log10 copies/mL is seen in two thirds of recipients with BK
PyV-­HC, and diminution of viremia correlates strongly with resolution of HC.
For individuals with severe HC, standard treatment includes
hyperhydration and diuretics. Bladder irrigation may be necessary
to avoid renal damage and clotting. Less severe cases will spontaneously
resolve in a few weeks. Unlike with renal transplantation, reduction of
immunosuppression carries a large risk for potentially life-­threatening
graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD) and so is not considered to be the
initial treatment approach. Additionally, if thrombocytopenia and
anemia are present, appropriate transfusions should be initiated to
maintain adequate blood counts. The role of CDV in treating or preventing HC in the context of HSCT remains controversial, and thus
professional society guidelines currently do not recommend its routine
use.

JC PyV

JC PyV was first detected in the brain of a patient with Hodgkin lymphoma with the initials “JC.” JC PyV can be acquired by the respiratory route and through ingestion from contaminated surfaces, food,
and water and ultimately establishes latency in the kidneys, brain, and
various lymphoid organs. In renal transplant recipients, JC PyV can
be shed in the urine but only rarely causes nephropathy. After HSCT,
HC from BK PyV is far more likely than from JC PyV. Conversely, only
JC PyV infects the oligodendrocytes of the CNS and is responsible for

progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). PML is a fatal
demyelinating disease that results from the lysis of specific glial cells
in afflicted immunocompromised individuals. In patients with hematologic malignancy, autoimmune disorders, or HIV infection leading
to decreased cellular immunity, JC PyV reactivation can lead to PML.
In immunocompetent adults, PML is a feared consequence of monoclonal antibody treatments for multiple sclerosis. However, the literature for JC PyV infection in the pediatric population is sparse, with
the majority of studies provided as case reports. As a result, many of
the clinical guidelines for screening, diagnosis, and therapy must be
extended from the adult literature.
The more common clinical manifestations of PML in children are
similar to what has been observed in adults and includes hemiparesis, ataxia, dysarthria, and seizures. Evaluation for PML is primarily
through radiologic imaging, with primary findings consistent with
characteristic asymmetric white matter lesions. The diagnosis of PML
is established through molecular detection of viral DNA in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or viral proteins on a brain biopsy (Table 321.3).
Unlike with BK PyV, there are no quantitative thresholds because any
amount of virus in the CSF is considered abnormal. Although the
sensitivity for detection in pediatric cases is under 60%, the specificity is near 100%; therefore a positive PCR result can be considered
diagnostic. Remarkably, the CSF cell counts and protein and glucose
levels are typically normal. Cases without molecular evidence may
still be termed “possible PML” based on neurologic and radiologic
findings.
Treatment for PML is primarily through reversing the underlying
cause of immune dysfunction. Adults with advanced HIV infection
should be treated with antiretroviral therapy (ART), but the efficacy
of ART for resolution of PML in children is not well-­documented. It
is important for the clinician to be aware of a rare but serious complication after HIV suppression promoting a paradoxical increase in
JC PyV–mediated damage. This phenomenon has been termed PML-­
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome and can often be
treated with steroids. Unfortunately, the prognosis for PML in children is grim, with most patients succumbing to the disease within 6
months. It remains to be seen if absolute viral load or specific radiologic and clinical findings might be used to better predict outcomes
in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 321.2  Recommendations for Patients with BK PyV–Associated Hemorrhagic Cystitis
SCREENING

DIAGNOSIS

MONITORING

Clinical

Suspect with anemia, thrombocytopenia, dysuria, or
urinary obstruction after HSCT

Cystitis/lower abdominal pain

Follow clinical resolution

Cytology

Gross hematuria

Gross hematuria

No recommendations

Molecular

No recommendations

BK viruria >10,000,000 copies/mL

Table 321.3  Recommendations for Patients with JCV PyV/Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy
SCREENING

DIAGNOSIS

Clinical

Suspect in an
immunosuppressed patient
with subacute neurologic
findings

Imaging

No recommendations

Characteristic MRI findings

Molecular

No recommendations

Positive CSF PCR for JC PyV

Pathology

No recommendations

Brain biopsy with characteristic lesions and
positive IHC demonstrating viral antigen

MONITORING

No recommendations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

Chapter 322

Human Immunodeficiency
Virus and Acquired
Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
Ericka V. Hayes
Advances in research and major improvements in the treatment
and management of HIV infection have brought about a substantial
decrease in the incidence of new HIV infections and AIDS in children.
Globally, from 2000–2015, there has been an estimated 70% decline in
new infections in children age 0-­14 years, largely the result of antiretroviral treatment (ART) of HIV-­infected pregnant individuals for the
prevention of vertical transmission. Of adults and children with HIV
infection, 70% live in sub-­Saharan Africa, where the disease continues
to have a devastating impact (Fig. 322.1). Children experience more
rapid disease progression than adults, with up to half of untreated children dying within the first 2 years of life. This rapid progression is correlated with a higher viral burden and faster depletion of infected CD4
lymphocytes in infants and children than in adults. Accurate diagnostic tests and the early initiation of potent drugs to inhibit HIV replication have dramatically increased the ability to prevent progression and
control this disease.

2087

ETIOLOGY

HIV-­1 and HIV-­2 are members of the Retroviridae family and belong
to the Lentivirus genus, which includes cytopathic viruses causing
diverse diseases in several animal species. The HIV-­1 genome contains two copies of single-­stranded RNA that is 9.2 kb in size. At both
ends of the genome there are identical regions, called long terminal
repeats, which contain the regulation and expression genes of HIV.
The remainder of the genome includes three major sections: the GAG
region, which encodes the viral core proteins (p24 [capsid protein:
CA], p17 [matrix protein: MA], p9, and p6, which are derived from the
precursor p55); the POL region, which encodes the viral enzymes (i.e.,
reverse transcriptase [p51], protease [p10], and integrase [p32]); and
the ENV region, which encodes the viral envelope proteins (gp120 and
gp41, which are derived from the precursor gp160). Other regulatory
proteins, such as transactivator of transcription (tat: p14), regulator of
virion (rev: p19), negative regulatory factor (nef: p27), viral protein
r (vpr: p15), viral infectivity factor (vif: p23), viral protein u (vpu in
HIV-­1: P16), and viral protein x (vpx in HIV-­2: P15), are involved in
transactivation, viral messenger RNA expression, viral replication,
induction of cell cycle arrest, promotion of nuclear import of viral
reverse transcription complexes, downregulation of the CD4 receptors
and class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC), proviral DNA
synthesis, and virus release and infectivity (Fig. 322.2).
The HIV tropism to the target cell is determined by its envelope glycoprotein (Env). Env consists of two components: the surface, heavily
glycosylated subunit, gp120 protein and the associated transmembrane
subunit glycoprotein gp41. Both gp120 and gp41 are produced from
the precursor protein gp160. The glycoprotein gp41 is very immunogenic and is used to detect HIV-­1 antibodies in diagnostic assays;
gp120 is a complex molecule that includes the highly variable V3
loop. This region is immunodominant for neutralizing antibodies.
The heterogeneity of gp120 presents major obstacles in establishing an

Fig. 322.1 Estimated number of people living with HIV in 2016 by WHO region. Data from WHO 2017 report. (Courtesy World Health Organization, 2017. Global Health Observatory (GHO) data. http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/epidemic_status/cases_all/en/)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2088 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
effective HIV vaccine. The gp120 glycoprotein also carries the binding
site for the CD4 molecule, the most common host cell surface receptor of T lymphocytes. This tropism for CD4+ T cells is beneficial to
the virus because of the resulting reduction in the effectiveness of the
host immune system. Other CD4-­bearing cells include macrophages
and microglial cells. The observations that CD4− cells are also infected
by HIV and that some CD4+ T cells are resistant to such infections
suggests that other cellular attachment sites are needed for the interaction between HIV and human cells. Several chemokines serve as co-­
receptors for the envelope glycoproteins, permitting membrane fusion
and entry into the cell. Most HIV strains have a specific tropism for one
of the chemokines, including the fusion-­inducing molecule CXCR-­4,
which acts as a co-­receptor for HIV attachment to lymphocytes, and
CCR-­5, a β chemokine receptor that facilitates HIV entry into macrophages. Several other chemokine receptors (CCR-­3) have also been
shown in vitro to serve as virus co-­receptors. Other mechanisms of
attachment of HIV to cells use nonneutralizing antiviral antibodies and
complement receptors. The Fab portion of these antibodies attaches
to the virus surface, and the Fc portion binds to cells that express Fc
Protein

Function

p10

RNA

Lipid bilayer

p15

Protease, processes the
gag and pol polyproteins
Viral replication

p17
p24

Capsid structural protein

p32
gp41
p51/ p66
gp120

Viral cDNA integration
Transmembrane protein
Reverse transcriptase
Surface protein

Matrix protein

Fig. 322.2 The human immunodeficiency virus and associated proteins and their functions.

receptors (macrophages, fibroblasts), thus facilitating virus transfer
into the cell. Other cell-­surface receptors, such as the mannose-­binding
protein on macrophages or the DC-­specific, C-­type lectin (DC-­SIGN)
on dendritic cells, also bind to the HIV-­1 envelope glycoprotein and
increase the efficiency of viral infectivity. Cell-­to-­cell transfer of HIV
without formation of fully formed particles is a more rapid mechanism
of spreading the infection to new cells than is direct infection by the
virus.
After viral attachment, gp120 and the CD4 molecule undergo conformational changes, and gp41 interacts with the fusion receptor on
the cell surface (Fig. 322.3). Viral fusion with the cell membrane allows
entry of viral RNA into the cell cytoplasm. This process involves accessory viral proteins (nef, vif) and binding of cyclophilin A (a host cellular protein) to the capsid protein (p24). A number of HIV drugs that
target the viral fusion/cell entry of the virus have been developed. The
p24 protein is involved in virus uncoating, recognition by restriction
factors, and nuclear importation and integration of the newly created
viral DNA. Viral DNA copies are then transcribed from the virion
RNA through viral reverse transcriptase enzyme activity, which builds
the first DNA strand from the viral RNA and then destroys the viral
RNA and builds a second DNA strand to produce double-­stranded circular DNA (see Fig. 322.3). The HIV-­1 reverse transcriptase is error
prone and lacks error-­correcting mechanisms. Thus many mutations
arise, creating a wide genetic variation in HIV-­1 isolates even within
an individual patient. Many of the drugs used to fight HIV infection
were designed to block the reverse transcriptase action. The circular
DNA is transported into the cell nucleus, using viral accessory proteins
such as vpr, where it is integrated (with the help of the virus integrase)
into the host chromosomal DNA and referred to as the provirus (see
Fig. 322.3). Drugs have been developed that block this integration step.
The provirus has the advantage of latency, because it can remain dormant for extended periods, making it extremely difficult to eradicate.
The infected CD4+ T cells that survive long enough to revert to resting
memory state become the HIV latent reservoir where the virus persists

Fig. 322.3 HIV life cycle showing the sites of action and different classes of antiretroviral drugs. (Adapted from Ralston SH, Penman ID, Strachan
MWJ, Hobson R, eds. Davidson’s Principles and Practice of Medicine, 23rd ed. London: Elsevier, 2018.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
indefinitely even in patients who respond favorably to potent ART. The
molecular mechanisms of this latency are complex and involve unique
biologic properties of the latent provirus (e.g., absence of tat, epigenetic
changes inhibiting HIV gene expression) and the nature of the cellular host (e.g., absence of transcription factors such as nuclear factor
κB). Integration usually occurs near active genes, which allow a high
level of viral production in response to various external factors such as
an increase in inflammatory cytokines (by infection with other pathogens) and cellular activation. Depending on the relative expression of
the viral regulatory genes (tat, rev, nef), the proviral DNA may encode
production of the viral RNA genome, which, in turn, leads to production of viral proteins necessary for viral assembly.
HIV-­1 transcription is followed by translation (see Fig. 322.3). A
capsid polyprotein is cleaved to produce the virus-­specific protease
(p10), among other products. This enzyme is critical for HIV-­1 assembly because it cleaves the long polyproteins into the proper functional
pieces. Several HIV-­1 antiprotease drugs have been developed, targeting the increased sensitivity of the viral protease, which differs from the
cellular proteases. The regulatory protein vif is active in virus assembly
and Gag processing. The RNA genome is then incorporated into the
newly formed viral capsid that requires zinc finger domains (p7) and
the matrix protein (MA: p17). The matrix protein forms a coat on the
inner surface of the viral membrane, which is essential for the budding
of the new virus from the host cell’s surface. As new virus is formed,
it buds through specialized membrane areas, known as lipid rafts, and
is released. The virus release is facilitated by the viroporin vpu, which
induces rapid degradation of newly synthesized CD4 molecules that
impede viral budding. In addition, vpu counteracts host innate immunity (e.g., hampering natural killer T-­cell activity).
Full-­length sequencing of the HIV-­1 genome demonstrated three
different groups (M [main], O [outlier], and N [non-­M, non-­O]), probably occurring from multiple zoonotic infections from primates in different geographic regions. The same technique identified eight groups
of HIV-­2 isolates. Group M diversified to nine subtypes (or clades A
to D, F to H, J, and K). In each region of the world, certain clades predominate, for example, clade A in Central Africa, clade B in the United
States and South America, clade C in South Africa, clade E in Thailand,
and clade F in Brazil. Although some subtypes were identified within
group O, none was found in any of the HIV-­2 groups. Clades are mixed
in some patients as a result of HIV recombination, and some crossing
between groups (i.e., M and O) has been reported.
HIV-­2 has a similar life cycle to HIV-­1 and is known to cause infection in several monkey species. Subtypes A and B are the major causes
of infection in humans, but rarely cause infection in children. HIV-­2
differs from HIV-­1 in its accessory genes (e.g., it has no vpu gene but
contains the vpx gene, which is not found in HIV-­1). It is most prevalent in western Africa, but increasing numbers of cases are reported
from Europe and southern Asia. The diagnosis of HIV-­2 infection is
more difficult because of major differences in the genetic sequences
between HIV-­1 and HIV-­2. Thus several of the standard confirmatory
assays (immunoblot), which are HIV-­1 specific, may give indeterminate results with HIV-­2 infection. If HIV-­2 infection is suspected, a
combination screening test that detects antibody to HIV-­1 and HIV-­2
peptides should be used. In addition, the rapid HIV detection tests
have been less reliable in patients suspected to be dually infected with
HIV-­1 and HIV-­2, because of lower antibody concentrations against
HIV-­2. HIV-­2 viral loads also have limited availability. Notably, HIV-­2
infection demonstrates a longer asymptomatic stage of infection and
slower declines of CD4+ T-­cell counts and is less efficiently transmitted vertically than HIV-­1, likely related to lower levels of viremia with
HIV-­2.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

In 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that 2.6
million children younger than 19 years of age worldwide were living
with HIV-­1 infection, with 270,000 new infections annually. Nearly
90% of these children 0-­9 years of age live in sub-­Saharan Africa. From
2010-2022, there has been a 58% reduction in infection in children 0-­9
years of age, reflecting steady expansion of services to prevent perinatal

2089

transmission of HIV to infants globally. Over the same period there has
been a 46% reduction in new cases 10-­19 years of age. Notably, there
were still 100,000 deaths worldwide of children <19 years of age with
HIV in 2020. As of 2022, an estimated 13.9 million children have been
orphaned by AIDS (i.e., having at least one parent die from AIDS).
Globally, the vast majority of HIV infections in early childhood are
the result of vertical transmission. In the United States, approximately
11,700 children, adolescents, or young adults were reported to be living
with perinatally acquired HIV infection in 2014. The number of U.S.
children with AIDS diagnosed each year increased from 1984–1992
but then declined by more than 95% to <100 cases annually by 2003,
largely from the success of prenatal screening and perinatal combination antiretroviral treatment (cART) of HIV-­infected pregnant individuals and infants. From 2014–2018, there were 507 infants born with
perinatally acquired HIV in the United States and Puerto Rico, declining 54% over that interval, with 65 infants being born infected in 2018.
As of 2019, the overall rate of perinatally acquired HIV infection in
the United States was 0.8 per 100,000 births. Children of racial and
ethnic minority groups are overrepresented, particularly non-­Hispanic
Blacks, who had a rate of 2.9 per 100,000 births in 2019. Race and ethnicity are not risk factors for HIV infection but more likely reflect other
social determinants of health that may be predictive of an increased risk
for HIV infection, such as lack of educational and economic opportunities as well as decreased access and barriers to healthcare. As of 2017,
Florida, Illinois, Texas, Virginia, California, Tennessee, and Maryland
are the states with the highest numbers of perinatally acquired cases of
HIV in the United States.
Adolescents (13-­24 years of age) constitute an important growing
population of newly infected individuals; in 2018, 21% of all new HIV
infections in the United States occurred in this age-­group, with 81%
of youth cases occurring in young males who have sex with males
(MSM). It is estimated that 50% of HIV-­positive youth, the highest rate
of any age group, are unaware of their diagnosis. Considering the long
latency period between the time of infection and the development of
clinical symptoms, reliance on AIDS case definition surveillance data
significantly underrepresents the impact of the disease in adolescents.
Based on a median incubation period of 8-­12 years, it is estimated that
15–20% of all patients with AIDS acquired HIV infection between 13
and 19 years of age.
Risk factors for HIV infection vary by sex in adolescents. Whereas
91–93% of males between the ages of 13 and 24 years with HIV acquire
infection through sex with other males, 91–93% of adolescent females
with HIV are infected through heterosexual contact. Adolescent racial
and ethnic minority populations are overrepresented, especially among
females. Another important group are transgender individuals. Transgender women in the United States have 49 times the odds of contracting HIV compared to the general population; transgender men have
rates that are lower than in transgender women but still significantly
higher than the rate in the general population. Transgender individuals
unfortunately have many barriers to accessing and receiving appropriate transgender sensitive care and HIV testing and treatment that must
be addressed.

Transmission

Transmission of HIV-­1 occurs via sexual contact, parenteral exposure
to blood, or vertical transmission from pregnant individual to child
via exposure to vaginal secretions during birth or via breast milk. The
primary route of infection in the pediatric population (<15 years) is
vertical transmission. Rates of vertical transmission of HIV have varied in high-­and low-­resource countries; the United States and Europe
have documented transmission rates in untreated pregnant individuals
of 12–30%, whereas transmission rates in Africa and Haiti have been
higher (25–52%), likely because of more advanced disease and the
presence of co-­infections. Perinatal treatment of HIV-­infected pregnant persons with antiretroviral drugs has dramatically decreased the
transmission rate to <2%.
Vertical transmission of HIV can occur before delivery (intrauterine), during delivery (intrapartum), or after delivery (postpartum through breastfeeding). Although intrauterine transmission

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2090 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
has been suggested by identification of HIV by culture or polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) in fetal tissue as early as 10 weeks, statistical
modeling data suggest that the majority of in utero transmissions
likely occur in late gestation, when the vascular integrity of the
placenta weakens and microtransfusions across the maternal–fetal
circulation occur. It is generally accepted that 20–30% of infected
newborns are infected in utero, because this percentage of infants
has laboratory evidence of infection (positive viral culture or PCR)
within the first week of life. Some studies have found that viral detection soon after birth is also correlated with an early onset of symptoms
and rapid progression to AIDS, consistent with more long-­standing
infection during gestation.
A higher percentage of HIV-­infected children acquire the virus
intrapartum, evidenced by the fact that 70–80% of infected infants do
not demonstrate detectable virus until after 1 week of age. The mechanism of transmission appears to be mucosal exposure to infected blood
and cervicovaginal secretions in the birth canal, and intrauterine contractions during active labor/delivery may also increase the risk of late
microtransfusions. Breastfeeding is the least-­common route of vertical
transmission in resource-­rich nations but is responsible for as much
as 40% of perinatal infections in resource-­limited countries. The risk
of an infant acquiring HIV through breastfeeding is 15–20% over 2
years without parental cART or infant prophylaxis. Both free and cell-­
associated viruses have been detected in breast milk from HIV-­infected
individuals. The risk for transmission through breastfeeding for individuals not on suppressive cART is approximately 9–16% in individuals with established infection but is 29–53% in those who acquire HIV
postnatally, suggesting that the viremia experienced by the breastfeeding individual during primary infection at least triples the risk for
transmission. Where replacement feeding is readily available and safe,
it is recommended that the parent substitute infant formula for breast
milk if they are known to be HIV infected and not on suppressive cART
or are at risk for ongoing sexual or parenteral exposure to HIV. However, the WHO recommends that in resource-­limited countries where
other diseases (diarrhea, pneumonia, malnutrition) substantially
contribute to a high infant mortality rate, the benefit of breastfeeding
outweighs the risk for HIV transmission, and HIV-­infected persons
in developing countries should exclusively breastfeed their infants for
at least the first 6 months of life, ideally with parent on suppressive
cART. Recently, infant feeding recommendations for breastfeeding (or
chestfeeding) persons with HIV in resource-­rich settings have evolved
as well, given that the risk of transmission via breastfeeding from an
individual on suppressive cART is very low (<1%) (see “Prevention”
for more discussion).
Several risk factors influence the rate of vertical transmission: pregnant parent viral load at delivery, preterm delivery (<34 weeks’ gestation), and low antenatal CD4 count. The most important variable is the
level of viremia; the odds of transmission may be increased more than
twofold for every log10 increase in viral load at delivery. Elective cesarean delivery has been shown to decrease transmission by 87% if used
in conjunction with zidovudine therapy in the pregnant individual and
infant. However, because these data predated the advent of cART (also
called highly active antiretroviral therapy [HAART]), the additional
benefit of cesarean section is negligible if the viral load is <1,000 copies/mL. It should be noted that rarely (≤0.1%), transmission may occur
with viral loads <50 copies/mL.
Transfusions of infected blood or blood products have historically
accounted for 3–6% of all pediatric AIDS cases. The period of highest
risk was between 1978 and 1985, before the availability of HIV antibody–screened blood products. Whereas the prevalence of HIV infection in individuals with hemophilia treated before 1985 was as high
as 70%, heat treatment of factor VIII concentrate and HIV antibody
screening of donors has virtually eliminated HIV transmission in this
population. Donor screening has dramatically reduced, but not eliminated, the risk for blood transfusion–associated HIV infection: nucleic
acid amplification testing of minipools (pools of 16-­24 donations) performed on antibody-­nonreactive blood donations (to identify donations made during the window period before seroconversion) reduced
the residual risk of transfusion-­transmitted HIV-­1 to approximately 1
in 2 million blood units. However, in many resource-­limited countries,

screening of blood is not uniform, and the risk for transmitting HIV
infection via transfusion remains in these settings.
Although HIV can be isolated rarely from saliva, it is in very low
titers (<1 infectious particle/mL) and saliva has not been implicated as
a transmission vehicle. Studies of hundreds of household contacts of
HIV-­infected individuals have found that the risk for household HIV
transmission is essentially nonexistent. Only a few cases have been
reported in which urine or feces (possibly devoid of visible blood) have
been proposed as a possible vehicle of HIV transmission, though these
cases have not been fully verified.
In the pediatric population, sexual transmission is infrequent, but a
small number of cases resulting from sexual abuse have been reported.
Sexual contact is the major route of transmission in the adolescent
population (≥13 years), accounting for the vast majority of cases. Infection via shared needles with IV drug use is seen in this population, but
much less frequently.

PATHOGENESIS

HIV infection affects most of the immune system and disrupts its
homeostasis (see Fig. 322.3). In most cases, the initial infection is
caused by low amounts of a single founder virus. Therefore disease
may be prevented by drug prophylaxis or vaccine. When the mucosa
serves as the portal of entry for HIV, the first cells to be affected are
the dendritic cells. These cells collect and process antigens introduced
from the periphery and transport them to the lymphoid tissue. HIV
does not infect the dendritic cell but binds to its DC-­SIGN surface
molecule, allowing the virus to survive until it reaches the lymphatic
tissue. In the lymphatic tissue (e.g., lamina propria, lymph nodes),
the virus selectively binds to cells expressing CD4 molecules on their
surface, primarily helper T lymphocytes (CD4+ T cells) and cells of
the monocyte-­macrophage lineage. Other cells bearing CD4, such as
microglia, astrocytes, oligodendroglia, and placental tissue containing
villous Hofbauer cells, may also be infected by HIV. Additional factors
(co-­receptors) are necessary for HIV fusion and entry into cells. These
factors include the chemokines CXCR-­4 (fusion) and CCR-­5. Other
chemokines (CCR1, CCR3) may be necessary for the fusion of certain HIV strains. Several host genetic determinants affect the susceptibility to HIV infection, the progression of disease, and the response
to treatment. These genetic variants vary in different populations. A
deletion in the CCR-­5 gene that is protective against HIV infection
(CCR-­5Δ32) is relatively common in individuals of European descent
but is rare in individuals of African descent. Several other genes that
regulate chemokine receptors, ligands, the MHC, and cytokines also
influence the outcome of HIV infection. Usually, CD4+ lymphocytes
migrate to the lymphatic tissue in response to viral antigens and then
become activated and proliferate, making them highly susceptible to
HIV infection. This antigen-­driven migration and accumulation of
CD4 cells within the lymphoid tissue may contribute to the generalized
lymphadenopathy characteristic of acute HIV infection in adults and
adolescents. HIV preferentially infects the very cells that respond to it
(HIV-­specific memory CD4 cells), accounting for the progressive loss
of these cells and the subsequent loss of control of HIV replication.
The continued destruction of memory CD4+ cells in the gastrointestinal tract (in the gut-­associated lymphoid tissue or GALT) leads to
reduced integrity of the gastrointestinal epithelium followed by leakage of bacterial particles into the blood and increased inflammatory
response, which cause further CD4+ cell loss. When HIV replication
reaches a threshold (usually within 3-­6 weeks from the time of infection), a burst of plasma viremia occurs. This intense viremia causes
acute HIV infection, formerly known as acute retroviral syndrome
which can present similar to influenza or mononucleosis (fever, rash,
pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, malaise, arthralgia, fatigue, cytopenias, elevated liver enzymes) in 50–70% of infected adolescents and
adults; this syndrome is not typically seen in infants. With establishment of a cellular and humoral immune response within 2-­4 months,
the viral load in the blood declines substantially, and patients enter a
phase characterized by a lack of symptoms and a return of CD4 cells
to only moderately decreased levels. Typically, adult patients who are
not treated eventually progress to achieve a virologic set point (steady
state), usually ranging from 10,000-­100,000 during this clinical latency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
This is in contrast to untreated infants with vertically acquired HIV
who have viral loads that are much higher, resulting in faster CD4
count declines and earlier onset of significant immunodeficiency.
HIV rapidly responds to the immune system pressure by developing a
genetically complex population (quasi-­species) that successfully evades
the immune system. In addition, inappropriate use of ART increases
the ability of the virus to diverge even further by selecting for mutants
with fitness or resistance advantages in the presence of subtherapeutic
drug levels. Early HIV-­1 replication in children has no apparent clinical manifestations. Whether tested by virus isolation or by PCR for
viral nucleic acid sequences, fewer than 40% of HIV-­1–infected infants
demonstrate evidence of the virus at birth. The viral load increases by
1-­4 months, and essentially all perinatally HIV-­infected infants have
detectable HIV-­1 in peripheral blood by 4 months of age, except for
those who may acquire infection via ongoing breastfeeding.
In adults, the long period of clinical latency (typically 8-­12 years) is
not indicative of viral latency. In fact, there is a very high turnover of
virus and CD4 lymphocytes (more than a billion cells per day), gradually causing deterioration of the immune system, marked by depletion of CD4 cells. Several mechanisms for the depletion of CD4 cells
in adults and children have been proposed, including HIV-­mediated
single cell killing, formation of multinucleated giant cells of infected
and uninfected CD4 cells (syncytia formation), virus-­specific immune
responses (natural killer cells, antibody-­dependent cellular cytotoxicity), superantigen-­mediated activation of T cells (rendering them more
susceptible to infection with HIV), autoimmunity, and programmed cell
death (apoptosis). The viral burden is greater in the lymphoid organs
than in the peripheral blood during the asymptomatic period. As the
virions and their immune complexes migrate through the lymph nodes,
they are trapped in the network of dendritic follicular cells. Because the
ability of HIV to replicate in T cells depends on the state of activation of
the cells, the immune activation that takes place within the microenvironment of the lymph nodes in HIV disease serves to promote infection
of new CD4 cells, as well as subsequent viral replication within these
cells. Monocytes and macrophages can be productively infected by HIV
yet resist the cytopathic effect of the virus and, with their long lifespan,
explain their role as reservoirs of HIV and as effectors of tissue damage
in organs such as the brain. In addition, they reside in anatomic viral
sanctuaries where current treatment agents are less effective.
The innate immune system responds almost immediately after
HIV-­1 infection by recognizing the viral nucleic acids, once the virus
fuses to the infected cell, by the toll-­like receptor 7. This engagement
leads to activation of pro-­
inflammatory cytokines and interferon
(IFN-­α), which blocks virus replication and spread. The virus uses its
Nef protein to downregulate the expression of MHC and non-­MHC
ligands to reduce the natural killer (NK) cell–mediated anti-­
HIV
activity. It also modulates NK cell differentiation and maturation, dysregulates cytokine production, and increases apoptosis. Although the
mechanism by which the innate system triggers the adaptive immune
responses is not yet fully understood, cell-­mediated and humoral
responses occur early in the infection. CD8 T cells play an important
role in containing the infection. These cells produce various ligands
(macrophage inflammatory proteins 1α and 1β, RANTES), which
suppress HIV replication by blocking the binding of the virus to the
co-­receptors (CCR-­5). HIV-­specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
develop against both the structural (ENV, POL, GAG) and regulatory
(tat) viral proteins. The CTLs appear at the end of the acute infection,
as viral replication is controlled by killing HIV-­infected cells before
new viruses are produced and by secreting potent antiviral factors that
compete with the virus for its receptors (CCR-­5). Neutralizing antibodies appear later in the infection and seem to help in the continued suppression of viral replication during clinical latency. There are at least
two possible mechanisms that control the steady-­state viral load level
during the chronic clinical latency. One mechanism may be the limited
availability of activated CD4 cells, which prevent a further increase in
the viral load. The other mechanism is the development of an active
immune response, which is influenced by the amount of viral antigen
and limits viral replication at a steady state. There is no general consensus about which of these two mechanisms is more important. The CD4
cell limitation mechanism accounts for the effect of ART, whereas the

2091

immune response mechanism emphasizes the importance of immune
modulation treatment (cytokines, vaccines) to increase the efficiency of
immune-­mediated control. A group of cytokines that includes tumor
necrosis factor-­α (TNF-­α), TNF-­β, interleukin-­1 (IL-­1), IL-­2, IL-­3, IL-­
6, IL-­8, IL-­12, IL-­15, granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor, and macrophage colony-­stimulating factor plays an integral role
in upregulating HIV expression from a state of quiescent infection to
active viral replication. Other cytokines such as IFN-­γ, IFN-­β, and
IL-­13 exert a suppressive effect on HIV replication. Certain cytokines
(IL-­4, IL-­10, IFN-­γ, transforming growth factor-­β) reduce or enhance
viral replication depending on the infected cell type. The interactions
among these cytokines influence the concentration of viral particles in
the tissues. Plasma concentrations of cytokines need not be elevated
for them to exert their effect, because they are produced and act locally
in the tissues. The activation of virtually all the cellular components of
the immune system (i.e., T and B cells, NK cells, and monocytes) plays
a significant role in the pathologic aspects of HIV infection. Further
understanding of their interactions during the infection will expand
our treatment options. Commonly, HIV isolated during the clinical latency period grows slowly in culture and produces low titers of
reverse transcriptase. These isolates from earlier in clinical latency use
CCR-­5 as their co-­receptor. By the late stages of clinical latency, the
isolated virus is phenotypically different. It grows rapidly and to high
titers in culture and uses CXCR-­4 as its co-­receptor. The switch from
CCR-­5 receptor to CXCR-­4 receptor increases the capacity of the virus
to replicate, to infect a broader range of target cells (CXCR-­4 is more
widely expressed on resting and activated immune cells), and to kill T
cells more rapidly and efficiently. As a result, the clinical latency phase
is over and progression toward AIDS is noted. The progression of
disease is related temporally to the gradual disruption of lymph node
architecture and degeneration of the follicular dendritic cell network
with loss of its ability to trap HIV particles. The virus is freed to recirculate, producing high levels of viremia and an increased disappearance of CD4 T cells during the later stages of disease.
The clinical course of HIV infection shows substantial heterogeneity. This variation is determined by both viral and host factors. HIV
viruses that use co-­receptor CXCR-­4 in the course of the infection are
associated with an accelerated deterioration of the immune system
and more rapid progression to AIDS. In addition, several known host
genetic determinants (e.g., variants in the human leukocyte antigen
region, polymorphisms in the CCR-­5 region such as CCR-­5Δ32) affect
disease course. There are likely additional host and viral factors yet to
be identified that contribute to the variable course of HIV infection in
individuals, as well. Three distinct patterns of disease are described
in children. Approximately 15–25% of HIV-­infected newborns in high
resource settings present with a rapid progression course, with onset
of AIDS and symptoms during the first few months of life and a median
survival time of 6-­9 months if untreated. In resource-­limited settings,
the majority of HIV-­infected newborns will have this rapidly progressing disease course. It has been suggested that if intrauterine infection
coincides with the period of rapid expansion of CD4 cells in the fetus,
the virus could effectively infect the majority of the body’s immunocompetent cells. The normal migration of these cells to the marrow,
spleen, and thymus would result in efficient systemic delivery of HIV,
unchecked by the immature immune system of the fetus. Thus infection would be established before the normal ontogenic development
of the immune system, causing more-­severe impairment of immunity. Most children in this group have detectable virus in the plasma
(median level: 11,000 copies/mL) in the first 48 hours of life. This early
evidence of viral presence suggests that the newborn was infected in
utero. The viral load rapidly increases, peaking by 2-­3 months of age
(median: 750,000 copies/mL) and staying high for at least the first 2
years of life.
Sixty percent to 80% of perinatally infected newborns in high-­
resource settings present with a slower progression of disease, with
a median survival time of 6 years representing the second pattern of
disease. Many patients in this group have a negative PCR result in the
first week of life and are therefore considered to be infected intrapartum. In a typical patient, the viral load rapidly increases, peaking by 2-­3
months of age (median: 100,000 copies/mL) and then slowly declines

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2092 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.1  HIV Infection Stage* Based on Age-­Specific CD4+ T-­Lymphocyte Count or CD4+ T-­Lymphocyte Percentage of
Total Lymphocytes
AGE ON DATE OF CD4+ T-­LYMPHOCYTE TEST
<1 Yr

≥6 Yr

1-­5 Yr

STAGE

CELLS/µL

%

CELLS/µL

%

CELLS/µL

%

1

≥1,500

≥34

≥1,000

≥30

≥500

≥26

2

750-­1,499

26-­33

500-­999

22-­29

200-­499

14-­25

3

<750

<26

<500

<22

<200

<14

*Stage is based primarily on the CD4+ T-­lymphocyte count. The CD4+ T-­lymphocyte count takes precedence over the CD4+ T-­lymphocyte percentage, and the percentage is
considered only if the count is missing.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Revised surveillance case definition for HIV infection—United States, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(No RR-­3):1–10.

over a period of 24 months. The slow decline in viral load is in sharp
contrast to the rapid decline after primary infection seen in adults. This
observation can be explained only partially by the immaturity of the
immune system in newborns and infants.
The third pattern of disease occurs in <5% of perinatally infected
children, referred to as long-­term survivors or long-­term nonprogressors, who have minimal or no progression of disease with relatively normal CD4 counts and very low viral loads for longer than 8
years. Mechanisms for the delay in disease progression include effective humoral immunity and/or CTL responses, host genetic factors
(e.g., human leukocyte antigen profile), and infection with an attenuated (defective-­gene) virus. A subgroup of the long-­term survivors
called elite survivors or elite suppressors has no detectable virus in the
blood and may reflect different or greater mechanisms of protection
from disease progression. Note that both groups warrant long-­term
close follow-­up because later in their course they may begin to progress
with their disease.
HIV-­infected children have changes in the immune system that are
similar to those in HIV-­infected adults. Absolute CD4 cell depletion
may be less dramatic because infants normally have a relative lymphocytosis. A value of 750 CD4 cells/μL in children younger than 1 year
of age is indicative of severe CD4 depletion and is comparable to <200
CD4 cells/μL in adults. Lymphopenia is relatively rare in perinatally
infected children and is usually only seen in older children or those with
end-­stage disease. Although cutaneous anergy is common during HIV
infection, it is also frequent in healthy children younger than 1 year of
age, and thus its interpretation is difficult in infected infants. The depletion of CD4 cells also decreases the response to soluble antigens such as
in vitro mitogens phytohemagglutinin and concanavalin A.
Polyclonal activation of B cells occurs in most children early in the
infection, as evidenced by elevation of immunoglobulins IgA, IgM,
IgE, and, particularly, IgG (hypergammaglobulinemia), with high
levels of anti–HIV-­1 antibody. This response may reflect both dysregulation of the T-­cell suppression of B-­cell antibody synthesis and
active CD4 enhancement of the B-­lymphocyte humoral response. As
a result, the antibody response to routine childhood vaccinations may
be abnormal. The B-­cell dysregulation precedes the CD4 depletion in
many children and may serve as a surrogate marker of HIV infection in
symptomatic children in whom specific diagnostic tests (PCR, culture)
are not available or are too expensive. Despite the increased levels of
immunoglobulins, some children lack specific antibodies or protective
antibodies. Hypogammaglobulinemia is very rare (<1%).
Central nervous system (CNS) involvement is more common in
pediatric patients than in adults. Macrophages and microglia play an
important role in HIV neuropathogenesis, and data show that astrocytes may also be involved. Although the specific mechanisms for
encephalopathy in children are not yet clear, the developing brain in
young infants is affected by at least two mechanisms. The virus itself
may directly infect various brain cells or cause indirect damage to
the nervous system by the release of cytokines (IL-­1α, IL-­1β, TNF-­α,
IL-­2) or reactive oxygen damage from HIV-­infected lymphocytes or
macrophages.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of HIV infection vary widely among infants,
children, and adolescents. In most infants, physical examination at birth
is normal. Initial symptoms may be subtle, such as lymphadenopathy and
hepatosplenomegaly, or nonspecific, such as failure to thrive, chronic or
recurrent diarrhea, respiratory symptoms, or oral thrush, and may be
distinguishable only by their persistence. Whereas systemic and pulmonary findings are common in the United States and Europe, chronic
diarrhea, pneumonia, wasting, and severe malnutrition predominate in
Africa. Clinical manifestations found more commonly in children than
adults with HIV infection include recurrent bacterial infections, chronic
parotid swelling, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis (LIP), and early
onset of progressive neurologic deterioration; note that chronic parotid
swelling and LIP are associated with a slower progression of disease.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Surveillance
Case Definition for HIV infection is based on the age-­specific CD4+
T-­lymphocyte count or the CD4+ T-­lymphocyte percentage of total
lymphocytes (Table 322.1), except when a stage 3–defining opportunistic illness (Table 322.2) supersedes the CD4 data. Age adjustment
of the absolute CD4 count is necessary because counts that are relatively high in normal infants decline steadily until age 6 years, when
they reach adult norms. The CD4 count takes precedence over the CD4
T-­lymphocyte percentage, and the percentage is considered only if the
count is unavailable.

Infections

Approximately 20% of AIDS-­defining illnesses in children are recurrent bacterial infections caused primarily by encapsulated organisms
such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Salmonella as a result of disturbances in humoral immunity. Other pathogens, including Staphylococcus, Enterococcus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Haemophilus
influenzae, and other gram-­positive and gram-­negative organisms may
also be seen. The most common serious infections in HIV-­infected
children are bacteremia, sepsis, and bacterial pneumonia, accounting
for more than 50% of infections in these patients. Meningitis, urinary
tract infections, deep-­seated abscesses, and bone/joint infections occur
less frequently. Milder recurrent infections, such as otitis media, sinusitis, and skin and soft tissue infections, are very common and may be
chronic with atypical presentations.
Opportunistic infections are generally seen in children with severe
depression of the CD4 count. In adults, these infections often represent reactivation of a latent infection acquired early in life. In contrast,
young children generally have primary infection and often have a more
fulminant course of disease reflecting the lack of prior immunity. In
addition, infants <1 year of age have a higher incidence of developing
stage 3–defining opportunistic infections and mortality rates compared
with older children and adults even at higher CD4 counts, reflecting that the CD4 count may overpredict the immune competence in
young infants. This principle is best illustrated by Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (formerly Pneumocystis carinii), the most common
opportunistic infection in the pediatric population (see Chapter 290).
The peak incidence of Pneumocystis pneumonia occurs at age 3-­6

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Table 322.2  Stage 3–Defining Opportunistic Illnesses in
HIV Infection
• Bacterial infections, multiple or recurrent*
• Candidiasis of bronchi, trachea, or lungs
• Candidiasis of esophagus
• Cervical cancer, invasive†
• Coccidioidomycosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
• Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary
• Cryptosporidiosis, chronic intestinal (>1 mo duration)
• Cytomegalovirus disease (other than liver, spleen, or nodes),
onset at age >1 mo
• Cytomegalovirus retinitis (with loss of vision)
• Encephalopathy attributed to HIV‡
• Herpes simplex: chronic ulcers (>1 mo duration) or bronchitis,
pneumonitis, or esophagitis (onset at age >1 mo)
• Histoplasmosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
• Isosporiasis, chronic intestinal (>1 mo duration)
• Kaposi sarcoma
• Lymphoma, Burkitt (or equivalent term)
• Lymphoma, immunoblastic (or equivalent term)
• Lymphoma, primary, of brain
• Mycobacterium avium complex or Mycobacterium kansasii,
disseminated or extrapulmonary
• Mycobacterium tuberculosis of any site, pulmonary,†
disseminated, or extrapulmonary
• Mycobacterium, other species or unidentified species,
disseminated or extrapulmonary
• Pneumocystis jiroveci (previously known as Pneumocystis carinii)
pneumonia
• Pneumonia, recurrent†
• Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
• Salmonella septicemia, recurrent
• Toxoplasmosis of brain, onset at age >1 mo
• Wasting syndrome attributed to HIV‡
*Only among children age <6 yr.

†Only among adults, adolescents, and children age ≥6 yr.

‡Suggested diagnostic criteria for these illnesses, which might be particularly important

for HIV encephalopathy and HIV wasting syndrome, are described in the following
references: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1994 Revised classification
system for human immunodeficiency virus infection in children less than 13 years
of age. MMWR Recomm Rep. 1994;43(No. RR-­12); Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. 1993 Revised classification system for HIV infection and expanded
surveillance case definition for AIDS among adolescents and adults. MMWR Recomm
Rep. 1992;41(No. RR-­17).
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Revised surveillance case definition
for HIV infection—United States, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(No
RR-­3):1–10.

months in the setting of undiagnosed perinatally acquired HIV infection, with the highest mortality rate in children younger than 1 year of
age regardless of CD4 count. Aggressive approaches to treatment have
improved the outcome substantially. Although the overall incidence of
opportunistic infections has markedly declined since the era of combination ART, opportunistic infections still occur in patients with severe
immunodepletion as the result of unchecked viral replication, which
often accompanies poor ART adherence.
The classic clinical presentation of Pneumocystis pneumonia includes
an acute onset of fever, tachypnea, dyspnea, and marked hypoxemia;
in some children, more indolent development of hypoxemia may precede other clinical or x-­ray manifestations. In some cases, fever may be
absent or low grade, particularly in more indolent cases. Chest x-­ray
findings most commonly consist of interstitial infiltrates or diffuse
alveolar disease, which rapidly progresses. Chest x-­ray in some cases
can have very subtle findings and can mimic the radiologic appearance
of viral bronchiolitis. Nodular lesions, streaky or lobar infiltrates, or
pleural effusions may occasionally be seen. The diagnosis is established
by demonstration of P. jiroveci with appropriate staining of induced
sputum or bronchoalveolar fluid lavage; rarely, an open lung biopsy
is necessary. Bronchoalveolar lavage and open lung biopsy have significantly improved sensitivity (75–95%) for Pneumocystis testing than
induced sputum (20–40%), such that if an induced sputum is negative,

2093

it does not exclude the diagnosis. PCR testing on respiratory specimens
is also available and is more sensitive than microscopy but also has less
specificity; it is also not widely available.
The first-­line therapy for Pneumocystis pneumonia is trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­
SMX) (15-­
20 mg/kg/day of the TMP
component divided every 6 hours intravenously) with adjunctive corticosteroids for moderate to severe disease, usually defined as if the Pao2
is <70 mm Hg while breathing room air. After improvement, therapy
with oral TMP-­SMX should continue for a total of 21 days while the
corticosteroids are weaned. An alternative therapy for Pneumocystis
pneumonia includes intravenous administration of pentamidine (4
mg/kg/day). Other regimens such as TMP plus dapsone, clindamycin
plus primaquine, or atovaquone are used as alternatives in adults but
have not been widely used in children to date.
Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), with Mycobacterium
avium-­intracellulare complex (MAC) being most common, may cause
disseminated disease in HIV-­infected children who are severely immunosuppressed. The incidence of MAC infection in ART–naïve children
>6 years with <100 CD4 cells/μL is estimated to be as high as 10%, but
effective cART that results in viral suppression makes MAC infections
rare. Disseminated MAC infection is characterized by fever, malaise,
weight loss, and night sweats; diarrhea, abdominal pain, and, rarely,
intestinal perforation or jaundice (a result of biliary tract obstruction
by lymphadenopathy) may also be present. Labs may be notable for significant anemia. The diagnosis is made by the isolation of MAC from
blood, bone marrow, or tissue; the isolated presence of MAC in the
stool does not confirm a diagnosis of disseminated MAC. Treatment
can reduce symptoms and prolong life but is at best only capable of suppressing the infection if severe CD4 depletion persists. Therapy should
include at least two drugs: clarithromycin or azithromycin and ethambutol. A third drug (rifabutin, rifampin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, or
amikacin) may be added to decrease the emergence of drug-­resistant
isolates. Careful consideration of possible drug interactions with antiretroviral agents is necessary before initiation of disseminated MAC
therapy. Drug susceptibilities should be ascertained, and the treatment
regimen should be adjusted accordingly in the event of an inadequate
clinical response to therapy. Because of the great potential for toxicity
with most of these medications, surveillance for adverse effects should
be ongoing. Less commonly, NTM infections, including lymphadenitis,
osteomyelitis, tenosynovitis, and pulmonary disease, can also be seen.
Oral candidiasis is the most common fungal infection seen in HIV-­
infected children. Oral nystatin suspension (2-­5 mL qid) is often effective. Clotrimazole troches or fluconazole (3-­6 mg/kg orally qd) are
effective alternatives. Oral thrush progresses to involve the esophagus
in as many as 20% of children with severe CD4 depletion, presenting with symptoms such as anorexia, dysphagia, vomiting, and fever.
Treatment with oral fluconazole for 7-­14 days generally results in rapid
improvement in symptoms. Fungemia rarely occurs, usually in the setting of indwelling venous catheters, and up to 50% of cases may be
caused by non-­albicans species. Disseminated histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and cryptococcosis are rare in pediatric patients but may
occur in endemic areas.
Parasitic infections such as intestinal cryptosporidiosis and microsporidiosis and rarely isosporiasis or giardiasis are other opportunistic
infections that cause significant morbidity. Although these intestinal
infections are usually self-­limited in healthy hosts, they cause severe
chronic diarrhea in HIV-­
infected children with low CD4 counts,
often leading to malnutrition. Nitazoxanide therapy is partially effective at improving cryptosporidia diarrhea, but immune reconstitution
with cART is the most important factor for clearance of the infection.
Albendazole has been reported to be effective against most microsporidia (excluding Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Vittaforma corneae), and
TMP-­SMX appears to be effective for isosporiasis. Systemic fumagillin
can be used to treat Enterocytozoon and Vittaforma.
Viral infections, especially with the herpesvirus group, pose significant problems for HIV-­infected children. HSV causes recurrent gingivostomatitis, which may be complicated by local and distant cutaneous
dissemination. Primary varicella-­zoster virus infection (chickenpox)
may be prolonged and complicated by bacterial superinfections or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2094 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
visceral dissemination, including pneumonitis. Recurrent, atypical,
or chronic episodes of herpes zoster are often debilitating and require
prolonged therapy with acyclovir; in rare instances, varicella-­zoster
virus has developed a resistance to acyclovir, requiring the use of foscarnet. Disseminated cytomegalovirus infection occurs in the setting
of severe CD4 depletion (<50 CD4 cells/μL for ≥6 years) and may
involve single or multiple organs. Retinitis, pneumonitis, esophagitis,
gastritis with pyloric obstruction, hepatitis, colitis, and encephalitis
have been reported, but these complications are rarely seen if cART is
given. Ganciclovir and foscarnet are the drugs of choice and are often
given together in children with sight-­
threatening cytomegalovirus
retinitis. Intraocular injections of foscarnet or intraocular ganciclovir
implants plus oral valganciclovir have also been efficacious in adults
and older children with cytomegalovirus retinitis. Measles may occur
despite immunization and may present without the typical rash. It often
disseminates to the lung or brain with a high mortality rate in these
patients. HIV-­infected children with low CD4 counts can also develop
extensive cutaneous molluscum contagiosum infection. Respiratory
viruses such as respiratory syncytial virus and adenovirus may present with prolonged symptoms and persistent viral shedding. In parallel
with the increased prevalence of genital tract human papillomavirus
infection, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and anal intraepithelial
neoplasia also occur with increased frequency among HIV-­1–infected
adult females compared with HIV-­seronegative females. The relative
risk for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia is 5-­10 times higher for HIV-­1
seropositive females. Multiple modalities are used to treat human papillomavirus (HPV) infection (see Chapter 313), although none is uniformly effective and the recurrence rate is high among HIV-­1–infected
persons. Prevention with appropriate vaccinations in patients whose
CD4 counts are above threshold is recommended, including mumps-­
measles-­rubella (MMR), varicella vaccine, and HPV vaccine (see “Supportive Care” section).
Appropriate therapy with antiretroviral agents may result in
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), which is
characterized by an increased inflammatory response from the recovered immune system to subclinical opportunistic infections (e.g.,
Mycobacterium infection, herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, Pneumocystis infection,
cryptococcal infection). This condition is more commonly observed
in patients with progressive disease and severe CD4+ T-­lymphocyte
depletion. Patients with IRIS develop fever and worsening of the clinical manifestations of the opportunistic infection or new manifestations
(e.g., enlargement of lymph nodes, pulmonary infiltrates), typically
within the first few weeks after initiation of ART. Determining whether
the symptoms represent IRIS, worsening of a current infection, a new
opportunistic infection, or drug toxicity can be challenging. If the
syndrome does represent IRIS, adding nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents or corticosteroids may alleviate the inflammatory reaction,
although the use of corticosteroids is usually reserved for severe cases.
The inflammation may take weeks or months to subside. In most cases,
continuation of cART while treating the opportunistic infection (with
or without antiinflammatory agents) is sufficient. If opportunistic
infection is suspected before the initiation of ART, appropriate antimicrobial treatment should be started before starting cART, particularly
in the case of cryptococcal meningitis.

Central Nervous System

The incidence of CNS involvement in perinatally infected children is as
high as 50–90% in resource-­limited settings but significantly lower in
resource-­rich settings, with a median onset at 19 months of age. Manifestations may range from subtle developmental delay to progressive
encephalopathy with loss or plateau of developmental milestones, cognitive deterioration, impaired brain growth resulting in acquired microcephaly, and symmetric motor dysfunction. Encephalopathy may be
the initial manifestation of the disease or may present much later when
severe immune suppression occurs. With progression, marked apathy,
spasticity, hyperreflexia, and gait disturbance may occur, as well as loss
of language and oral, fine, and/or gross motor skills. The encephalopathy may progress intermittently, with periods of deterioration followed

by transiently stable plateaus. Older children may exhibit behavioral
problems and learning disabilities. Associated abnormalities identified
by neuroimaging techniques include cerebral atrophy in up to 85% of
children with neurologic symptoms, increased ventricular size, basal
ganglia calcifications, and, less frequently, leukomalacia.
Fortunately, since the advent of cART, the incidence rate of encephalopathy has dramatically declined to as low as 0.08% in 2006. However,
as HIV-­infected children progress through adolescence and young
adulthood, other subtle manifestations of CNS disease are evident,
such as cognitive deficits, attention problems, and psychiatric disorders. Living with a chronic, often stigmatizing, disease; parental loss;
and the requirement for lifelong pristine medication adherence compounds these issues, making it challenging for these youth as they
inherit responsibility for managing their disease as adults.
Focal neurologic signs and seizures are unusual and may imply
a comorbid pathologic process such as a CNS tumor, opportunistic
infection, or stroke. CNS lymphoma may present with new-­onset
focal neurologic findings, headache, seizures, and mental status
changes. Characteristic findings on neuroimaging studies include a
hyperdense or isodense mass with variable contrast enhancement or
a diffusely infiltrating contrast-­enhancing mass. CNS toxoplasmosis is exceedingly rare in young infants but may occur in vertically
HIV-­infected adolescents and is typically associated with serum antitoxoplasma IgG as a marker of infection. Other opportunistic infections of the CNS are rare and include infection with CMV, JC virus
(progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy), HSV, Cryptococcus
neoformans, and Coccidioides immitis. Although the true incidence of
cerebrovascular disorders (both hemorrhagic and nonhemorrhagic
strokes) is unclear, 6–10% of children from large clinical series have
been affected.

Respiratory Tract

Recurrent upper respiratory tract infections such as otitis media and
sinusitis are very common. Although the typical pathogens (S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis) are most common,
unusual pathogens such as P. aeruginosa, yeast, and anaerobes may be
present in chronic infections and result in complications such as invasive sinusitis and mastoiditis.
LIP is the most common chronic lower respiratory tract abnormality reported to the CDC for HIV-­infected children; historically this
occurred in approximately 25% of HIV-­infected children, although the
incidence has declined in the cART era. LIP is a chronic process with
nodular lymphoid hyperplasia in the bronchial and bronchiolar epithelium, often leading to progressive alveolar capillary block over months
to years. It has a characteristic chronic diffuse reticulonodular pattern
on chest radiography rarely accompanied by hilar lymphadenopathy,
allowing a presumptive diagnosis to be made radiographically before
the onset of symptoms. There is an insidious onset of tachypnea, cough,
and mild to moderate hypoxemia with normal auscultatory findings
or minimal rales. Progressive disease presents with symptomatic
hypoxemia, which usually resolves with oral corticosteroid therapy,
accompanied by digital clubbing. Several studies suggest that LIP is a
lymphoproliferative response to a primary Epstein-­Barr virus infection in the setting of HIV infection. It is also associated with a slower
immunologic decline.
Most symptomatic HIV-­infected children experience at least one
episode of pneumonia during their disease. S. pneumoniae is the
most common bacterial pathogen, but P. aeruginosa and other gram-­
negative bacterial pneumonias may occur in end-­stage disease and may
produce acute respiratory failure and death. Rarely, severe recurrent
bacterial pneumonia results in bronchiectasis. Pneumocystis pneumonia is the most common opportunistic infection, but other pathogens, including CMV, Aspergillus, Histoplasma, and Cryptococcus, can
cause pulmonary disease. Infection with common respiratory viruses,
including respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, influenza, and
adenovirus, may occur simultaneously and have a protracted course
and prolonged period of viral shedding from the respiratory tract.
Infection with SARS-­CoV-­2 may also occur, without clear evidence
of increased morbidity relative to children without HIV infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis (TB) has been reported
with increasing frequency in HIV-­infected children in low-­resource
countries, although it is considerably more common in HIV-­infected
adults. Because of drug interactions between rifampin and ritonavir-­
based ART and poor tolerability of the combination of multiple drugs
required, treatment of TB/HIV co-­infection is particularly challenging
in children.

Cardiovascular System

Cardiac dysfunction, including left ventricular hypertrophy, left ventricular dilation, reduced left ventricular fractional shortening, and/
or heart failure occurred in 18–39% of HIV-­infected children in the
pre-­cART era; among those affected, a lower nadir CD4 percentage
and a higher viral load were associated with lower cardiac function.
However, a more current evaluation of HIV-­infected children taking
long-­term cART found that echocardiographic findings were closer
to normal and none had symptomatic heart disease, suggesting that
cART has a cardioprotective effect. What is still unclear is whether
an increased rate of premature cardiovascular disease that has been
seen in adults will be seen in children who have disease-­or treatment-­
related hyperlipidemia, and prospective studies are needed to assess
this risk. Because of this risk, regular monitoring of cholesterol and
lipids, as well as education regarding a heart-­healthy lifestyle and diet,
is an important part of pediatric HIV care.

Gastrointestinal and Hepatobiliary Tract

Oral manifestations of HIV disease include erythematous or pseudomembranous candidiasis, periodontal disease (e.g., ulcerative gingivitis or periodontitis), salivary gland disease (i.e., swelling, xerostomia),
and, rarely, ulcerations or oral hairy leukoplakia. Gastrointestinal tract
involvement is common in HIV-­infected children. A variety of pathogens can cause gastrointestinal disease, including bacteria (Salmonella,
Campylobacter, Shigella, MAC), protozoa (Giardia, Cryptosporidium,
Isospora, microsporidia), viruses (CMV, HSV, rotavirus), and fungi
(Candida). MAC and the protozoal infections are most severe and
protracted in patients with severe CD4 cell depletion. Infections may
be localized or disseminated and affect any part of the gastrointestinal
tract from the oropharynx to the rectum. Oral or esophageal ulcerations, either viral in origin or idiopathic, are painful and often interfere with eating. AIDS enteropathy, a syndrome of malabsorption with
partial villous atrophy not associated with a specific pathogen, has
been postulated to be a result of direct HIV infection of the gut. Disaccharide intolerance is common in HIV-­infected children with chronic
diarrhea.
The most common symptoms of gastrointestinal disease are chronic
or recurrent diarrhea with malabsorption, abdominal pain, dysphagia, and failure to thrive. Prompt recognition of weight loss or poor
growth velocity in the absence of diarrhea is critical. Linear growth
impairment is often correlated with the level of HIV viremia. Supplemental enteral feedings should be instituted, either by mouth or with
nighttime nasogastric tube feedings in cases associated with more
severe chronic growth problems; placement of a gastrostomy tube for
nutritional supplementation may be necessary in severe cases. The
wasting syndrome, defined as a loss of >10% of body weight, is not
as common as failure to thrive in pediatric patients, but the resulting
malnutrition is associated with a grave prognosis. Chronic liver inflammation evidenced by fluctuating serum levels of transaminases with or
without cholestasis is relatively common, often without identification
of an etiologic agent. Cryptosporidial cholecystitis is associated with
abdominal pain, jaundice, and elevated γ-­glutamyltransferase. In some
patients, chronic hepatitis caused by CMV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, or
MAC may lead to portal hypertension and liver failure. Several of the
antiretroviral drugs or other drugs such as didanosine, protease inhibitors (PIs), nevirapine, and dapsone may also cause reversible elevation
of transaminases.
Pancreatitis with increased pancreatic enzymes with or without
abdominal pain, vomiting, and fever may be the result of drug therapy
(e.g., with pentamidine, didanosine, or stavudine) or, rarely, opportunistic infections such as MAC or CMV.

2095

Renal Disease

Nephropathy is an unusual presenting symptom of HIV infection,
more commonly occurring in older symptomatic children. A direct
effect of HIV on renal epithelial cells has been suggested as the cause,
but immune complexes, hyperviscosity of the blood (secondary to
hyperglobulinemia), and nephrotoxic drugs are other possible factors.
A wide range of histologic abnormalities has been reported, including
focal glomerulosclerosis, mesangial hyperplasia, segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis, and minimal change disease. Focal glomerulosclerosis generally progresses to renal failure within 6-­12 months, but
other histologic abnormalities in children may remain stable without
significant renal insufficiency for prolonged periods. Nephrotic syndrome is the most common manifestation of pediatric renal disease,
with edema, hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria, and azotemia with normal blood pressure. Cases resistant to steroid therapy may benefit from
cyclosporine therapy. Polyuria, oliguria, and hematuria have also been
observed in some patients.

Skin Manifestations

Many cutaneous manifestations seen in HIV-­infected children are inflammatory or infectious disorders that are not unique to HIV infection. These
disorders tend to be more disseminated and respond less consistently to
conventional therapy than in the uninfected child. Seborrheic dermatitis
or eczema that is severe and unresponsive to treatment may be an early
nonspecific sign of HIV infection. Recurrent or chronic episodes of HSV,
herpes zoster, molluscum contagiosum, flat warts, anogenital warts, and
candidal infections are common and may be difficult to control.
Allergic drug eruptions are also common, in particular related to
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors; they generally respond
to withdrawal of the drug but also may resolve spontaneously without
drug interruption; rarely, progression to Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
has been reported. Epidermal hyperkeratosis with dry, scaling skin is
frequently observed, and sparse hair or hair loss may be seen in the
later stages of the disease.

Hematologic and Malignant Diseases

Anemia occurs in 20–70% of HIV-­infected children, more commonly
in children with AIDS. The anemia may be a result of chronic infection, poor nutrition, autoimmune factors, virus-­associated conditions
(hemophagocytic syndrome, parvovirus B19 red cell aplasia), or the
adverse effect of drugs (zidovudine).
Leukopenia occurs in almost 30% of untreated HIV-­infected children, and neutropenia often occurs. Multiple drugs used for treatment
or prophylaxis for opportunistic infections, such as Pneumocystis pneumonia (TMP-­SMX), MAC, and CMV (ganciclovir), or antiretroviral
drugs (zidovudine) may also cause leukopenia and/or neutropenia. In
cases in which therapy cannot be changed, treatment with subcutaneous granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor may be necessary.
Thrombocytopenia has been reported in 10–20% of patients. The
etiology may be immunologic (i.e., circulating immune complexes
or antiplatelet antibodies) or, less commonly, from drug toxicity, or
idiopathic. cART may also reverse thrombocytopenia in ART-­naïve
patients. In the event of sustained severe thrombocytopenia (<10,000
platelets/μL), treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin or anti­D immune globulin offers temporary improvement in most patients
already taking cART. If ineffective, a course of steroids may be an alternative, but consultation with a hematologist should be sought. Deficiency of clotting factors (factors II, VII, IX) is not rare in children with
advanced HIV disease and corrects with vitamin K.
A novel disease of the thymus has been observed in a few HIV-­
infected children. These patients were found to have characteristic
anterior mediastinal multilocular thymic cysts without clinical symptoms. Histologic examination shows focal cystic changes, follicular
hyperplasia, and diffuse plasmacytosis and multinucleated giant cells.
Treatment with cART may result in resolution, and spontaneous involution occurs in some cases.
Malignant diseases have been reported infrequently in HIV-­infected
children, representing only 2% of AIDS-­defining illnesses. Non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma (including Burkitt lymphoma), primary CNS lymphoma, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2096 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
leiomyosarcoma are the most commonly reported neoplasms among
HIV-­infected children. Epstein-­Barr virus is associated with most lymphomas and with all leiomyosarcomas (see Chapter 301). Kaposi sarcoma, which is caused by human herpesvirus 8, occurs frequently among
HIV-­infected adults but is exceedingly uncommon among HIV-­infected
children in resource-­rich settings (see Chapter 304).

DIAGNOSIS AND TESTING

All infants born to HIV-­infected individuals test antibody-­positive at
birth because of passive transfer of HIV antibody across the placenta
during gestation; therefore antibody should not be used to establish
the diagnosis of HIV in an infant. Most uninfected infants without
ongoing exposure (i.e., who are not breastfed) lose antibodies against
HIV between 6 and 18 months of age and are known as seroreverters. Because a small proportion of uninfected infants continue to test
HIV antibody-­positive for up to 24 months of age, positive IgG antibody tests, including the rapid tests, cannot be used to make a definitive diagnosis of HIV infection in infants younger than 24 months. The
presence of IgA or IgM anti-­HIV in the infant’s circulation can indicate
HIV infection, because these immunoglobulin classes do not cross the
placenta; however, IgA and IgM anti-­HIV assays have been both insensitive and nonspecific and therefore are not valuable for clinical use. In
any child older than 24 months of age, demonstration of IgG antibody
to HIV by a repeatedly reactive enzyme immunoassay and confirmatory HIV PCR establishes the diagnosis of HIV infection. Certain diseases (e.g., syphilis and autoimmune diseases) may cause false-­positive
or indeterminate results in antibody testing. In such cases, specific viral
diagnostic tests must be done.
Several rapid HIV tests are currently available with sensitivity and
specificity better than those of the standard enzyme immunoassay.
Many of these tests require only a single step that allows test results to
be reported within less than 30 minutes. Performing rapid HIV testing on individuals during delivery or immediately after birth is crucial for the care of HIV-­exposed newborns whose birth parent’s HIV
status was unknown during pregnancy. A positive rapid test must
be confirmed by a second different rapid test (testing different HIV-­
associated antibodies) or by HIV RNA PCR (viral load). Given the
earlier detection of fourth-­generation HIV enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing (p24 antigen + HIV-­1, HIV-­2 IgG and
IgM antibodies), Western blots are not appropriate to confirm testing
because the fourth-­generation assays can be positive before the Western blot becomes positive (i.e., in acute infection). In acute infection,
patients may have only a positive p24 antigen with negative antibodies on confirmatory testing; these patients should have HIV RNA PCR
performed to confirm acute infection (or establish that the p24 antigen
result was a false positive test). In infants who are at risk of exposure
to HIV-­2 infection (e.g., born to an HIV-­infected person from West
Africa or who has a partner with HIV from West Africa), a rapid test
that can detect both HIV-­1 and HIV-­2 should be used. However, if
the HIV testing is negative or the Western blot test reveals an unusual

Birth

Low risk

2 weeks

3 weeks

4 weeks

pattern, further diagnostic tests should be considered. In addition, they
should be tested with an HIV-­2–specific DNA PCR assay.
Viral diagnostic assays, such as HIV DNA or RNA PCR, are more
useful in young infants, allowing a definitive diagnosis in most infected
infants by 1-­4 months of age. By 4 months of age, HIV PCR testing
identifies all infected nonbreastfed infants. Historically, HIV DNA PCR
testing was the preferred virologic assay over HIV RNA PCR testing in
high-­resource settings for young infants because of what was thought
to be a modest advantage in detecting intrapartum acquired infection
for DNA PCR in the first month of life. An FDA-­approved HIV DNA
PCR test is no longer commercially available in the United States, but
other assays exist; however, the sensitivity and specificity of noncommercial HIV-­1 DNA tests (using individual laboratory reagents) may
differ from the sensitivity and specificity of the prior FDA-­approved
commercial test. HIV RNA PCR is recommended for non-­subtype B
viruses or group O infections, which are not common in the United
States. It should be noted that PCR results can be affected by ART in
both the birthing parent and the infant, serving as the rationale for the
recommendation for testing 2-­6 weeks after completing prophylaxis
in high-­risk newborns (Fig. 322.4) Almost 40% of infected newborns
have positive DNA PCR test results in the first 2 days of life, with >90%
testing positive by 2 weeks of age. The commercially available HIV-­1
assays are not designed for quantification of HIV-­2 RNA and thus
should not be used to monitor patients with this infection.
Viral diagnostic testing should be performed within the first 12-­24
hours of life for high-­risk infants (i.e., those born to individuals without
sustained virologic suppression, a late cART start, or a diagnosis with
acute or primary HIV during the pregnancy); the tests can identify almost
40% of intrauterine HIV-­infected children. Birth testing is optional in
low-­risk infants. Additional testing should be done at 2-­3 weeks of age,
4-­8 weeks of age, and 4-­6 months of age. For higher-­risk infants, additional virologic diagnostic testing should be done at 2 to 6 weeks after
cessation of ARV prophylaxis (i.e., at 8-­12 weeks of life) (see Fig. 322.4).
Breastfed infants should have PCR testing performed per testing schedule based on their risk through 4 months of age; an additional test should
be done between the 4-­to 8-­week test and the 4-­to 6-­month test if the
gap between tests is more than 3 months. Breastfed infants should then
be tested every 3 months while breastfeeding continues and then at 4-­6
weeks, 3 months, and 6 months after cessation of breastfeeding regardless of age to identify those who may become infected at the end of lactation by the HIV-­infected individual (see Fig. 322.4).
A positive virologic assay (i.e., detection of HIV by PCR) suggests
HIV infection and should be confirmed by a repeat test on a second
specimen as soon as possible because false-­positive tests can occur. A
confirmed diagnosis of HIV infection can be made with two positive
virologic test results obtained from different blood samples. HIV infection can be presumptively excluded in nonbreastfed infants with two
or more negative virologic tests (one at age ≥14 days and one at age
≥4 weeks), one negative virologic test (i.e., negative RNA or DNA) at
age ≥8 weeks done at least 2 weeks after discontinuation of multidrug

8 weeks

NAT

NAT

10 weeks

12 weeks

4 months

6 months

NAT

High risk

NAT*

NAT

NAT

NAT*

NAT

Breast fed

NAT*

NAT

NAT

NAT**

NAT

After cessation of breastfeeding

NAT

q 3 months

NAT

NAT
NAT

Fig. 322.4 Recommended virologic testing schedules for infants exposed to HIV by perinatal HIV transmission risk and breastfed infants. See Table

322.7 for definitions of low and high risk. *For higher-­risk infants, additional virologic diagnostic testing should be done at birth and 2-­6 wk after
cessation of ARV prophylaxis (i.e., at 8-­10 wk of life). **For breastfed infants, an additional virologic test should be performed between the 1-­to 2-­
mo and 4-­to 6-­mo time points if the gap between tests is >3 mo. NAT, Nucleic acid test. (Content adapted from Recommendations for the Use of
Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy and Interventions to Reduce Perinatal HIV Transmission in the United States. https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites
/default/files/guidelines/documents/perinatal-­hiv/guidelines-­perinatal.pdf)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
empirical therapy or prophylaxis, or one negative HIV antibody test
at age ≥6 months. Definitive exclusion of HIV infection in nonbreastfed infants is based on two or more negative virologic tests, with one
obtained at age ≥1 month (done 2-­6 weeks after the cessation of multidrug empirical therapy or prophylaxis) and one at age ≥4 months,
or two negative HIV antibody tests from separate specimens obtained
at age ≥6 months. Documentation of seroreversion (loss of antibody)
at 12-­18 month of age is no longer routinely recommended for nonbreastfed infants meeting definitive exclusion criteria who have had no
known or suspected postnatal HIV exposure. Infants <18 months who
have postnatal HIV exposure, including new HIV infection of breastfeeding parent, premasticated feedings, sexual abuse, contaminated
blood product, or percutaneous exposure, should have HIV PCR-­
based testing to determine infection status. Children ≥18 months of
age with no HIV perinatal exposure history with these postnatal exposures should be tested with HIV antibody/antigen testing. Note that
HIV antibody/antigen testing should not be used for diagnosis in the
perinatally exposed child until age ≥24 months. Any child or adolescent suspected of HIV infection should be tested with age-­appropriate
testing with the caveat that if acute infection is suspected, additional
HIV PCR testing may be required to establish the diagnosis.

TREATMENT

The currently available therapies do not eradicate the virus and cure
the patient; instead they suppress the virus for extended periods and
change the course of the disease to a chronic process. It is now recommended that all children be started on cART, regardless of viral load,
CD4 count, or clinical status at diagnosis. Treatment should be initiated within 7 days of diagnosis, with counseling and support for adherence. Because cART therapy changes as new drugs become available,
decisions regarding therapy should be made in consultation with an
expert in pediatric HIV infection. The following principles form the
basis for cART:
1.	Uninterrupted HIV replication causes destruction of the immune
system and progression to AIDS.
2.	The magnitude of the viral load predicts the rate of disease progression, and the CD4 cell count reflects the risk of opportunistic infections and HIV infection complications.
3.	cART, which includes at least three drugs with at least two different
mechanisms of action, should be the initial treatment. Potent combination therapy that suppresses HIV replication to an undetectable
level restricts the selection of ART-­resistant mutants; drug-­resistant
strains are the major factor limiting successful viral suppression and
delay of disease progression.
4.	
The goal of sustainable suppression of HIV replication is best
achieved by the simultaneous initiation of combinations of antiretroviral drugs to which the patient has not been exposed previously
and to which the patient’s virus does not have cross resistance.
5.	Drug-­related interactions and toxicities should be minimized as
much as possible.
6.	Adherence to the complex drug regimens is crucial for a successful
outcome.
Very rarely, treatment may need to be deferred on a case-­by-­case
basis based on clinical or psychosocial factors that may affect adherence with the caregivers and child. In these children, virologic, immunologic, and clinical status should be closely monitored at least every
3-­4 months.

Combination Therapy

As of February 2023, 21 individual ART drugs, 22 co-­formulated combination tablets, one injectable long-­acting combination regimen, as
well as two pharmacokinetic boosters were approved by the FDA for
use in HIV-­infected adults and adolescents. Of the 21 individual drugs,
19 were approved for at least some portion of the pediatric population (0-­12 years of age), with many but not all of them available as a
liquid, powder, or small tablet/capsule (Table 322.3). ART drugs are
categorized by their mechanism of action, such as preventing viral
entrance into CD4+ T cells, inhibiting the HIV reverse-­transcriptase
or protease enzymes, or inhibiting integration of the virus into the

2097

human DNA (see Fig. 322.3). Within the reverse-­transcriptase inhibitors, a further subdivision can be made: nucleoside (or nucleotide)
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) (see Fig. 322.3). The NRTIs have a
structure similar to that of the building blocks of DNA (e.g., thymidine,
cytosine). When incorporated into DNA, they act as chain terminators
and block further incorporation of nucleosides, preventing viral DNA
synthesis. Among the NRTIs, thymidine analogs (e.g., zidovudine) are
found in higher concentrations in activated or dividing cells, producing >99% of the HIV virion population, and nonthymidine analogs
(e.g., lamivudine and emtricitabine) have more activity in resting cells,
which account for <1% of the HIV virions but may serve as a reservoir
for HIV. Suppression of replication in both populations is important
for long-­term viral control. NNRTIs (i.e., nevirapine, efavirenz, etravirine, rilpivirine, doravirine) act differently than NRTIs. They attach
to the reverse transcriptase and cause a conformational change, reducing the activity of the enzyme (see Fig. 322.3). The PIs are potent agents
that act farther along the viral replicative cycle. They bind to the site
where the viral long polypeptides are cut into individual, mature, and
functional core proteins that produce the infectious virions before they
leave the cell (see Fig. 322.3). The virus entry into the cell is a complex process that involves several cellular receptors and fusion. Several drugs have been developed to prevent this process (see Fig. 322.3).
The fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide (T-­20), which binds to viral gp41,
causes conformational changes that prevent fusion of the virus with
the CD4+ cell and entry into the cell; with the common use of integrase
inhibitors, this medication is now used very rarely. Two entry inhibiting drugs are now approved for use only in treatment-­experienced
adult patients with multidrug-­resistant HIV infection. Fostemsavir is
an attachment inhibitor prodrug of temsavir that works by blocking
CD4 binding to gp120; ibalizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) that acts as a postattachment inhibitor and prevents the
HIV connection to co-­receptors CCR-­5 or CXCR-­4. Maraviroc is an
example of a selective CCR-­5 co-­receptor antagonist that blocks the
attachment of the virus to this chemokine (an essential process in the
viral binding and fusion to the CD4+ cells). Integrase inhibitors (INSTIs) (i.e., raltegravir, dolutegravir, elvitegravir, bictegravir) block the
enzyme that catalyzes the incorporation of the viral genome into the
host’s DNA (see Fig. 322.3).
By targeting different points in the viral life cycle and stages of cell
activation and by delivering drug to all tissue sites, maximal viral suppression is achievable. Combinations of three drugs consisting of a
two-­NRTI backbone of (1) a guanosine or thymidine analog NRTI
(abacavir or zidovudine) or tenofovir and (2) a nonthymidine analog NRTI (lamivudine or emtricitabine) to suppress replication
in both active and resting cells added to (3) a ritonavir-­boosted
PI (lopinavir, atazanavir, or darunavir), an NNRTI (efavirenz,
nevirapine, rilpivirine, or etravirine), or an INSTI (raltegravir,
dolutegravir, elvitegravir, or bictegravir) can produce prolonged
suppression of the virus. The use of three drugs from three different
classes generally should be avoided but may be necessary in children
with highly resistant viruses; these regimens should be chosen only
by an HIV specialist with expert pharmacist input. For adult patients
with established virologic suppression, some combination therapies
pare down to just two drugs. Combination treatment increases the
rate of toxicities (see Table 322.3), and complex drug-­drug interactions occur among many of the antiretroviral drugs, particularly with
the pharmacokinetic boosters ritonavir and cobicistat. Many PIs are
inducers or inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 system and are therefore likely to have serious interactions with multiple drug classes,
including nonsedating antihistamines and psychotropic, vasoconstrictor, antimycobacterial, cardiovascular, anesthetic, analgesic, and
gastrointestinal drugs (cisapride). Whenever new medications are
added to an ART regimen, especially a PI-­or cobicistat-­containing
regimen, a pharmacist and/or HIV specialist should be consulted to
address possible drug interactions. The inhibitory effect of ritonavir
(a PI) on the cytochrome P450 system is exploited, and small doses
of the drug are added to several other PIs (e.g., lopinavir, atazanavir, darunavir) to slow their metabolism by the P450 system and to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2098 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

NUCLEOSIDE/NUCLEOTIDE REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE INHIBITORS

Class adverse effects: Lactic
acidosis with hepatic steatosis,
particularly for older members of
the class

Abacavir
(Ziagen, ABC): tablet: 300 mg; oral
solution: 20 mg/mL
Epzicom: combination of
lamivudine, ABC (300, 600 mg)
Triumeq: combination of ABC,
lamivudine, dolutegravir (600,
300, 50 mg)
Triumeq PD: combination of ABC,
lamivudine, dolutegravir (60, 30,
5 mg)

Children: Full term <1 mo: 2 mg/
kg/dose bid
Full term ≥1 mo to <3 mo: 4 mg/
kg/dose bid
≥3 mo to 13 yr: 8 mg/kg/dose bid
(max: 300 mg bid)
>25 kg: 300 mg bid
Children with stable CD4 counts
and undetectable viral load
>6 mo while taking ABC can
transition to 16 mg/kg once daily
(max: 600 mg)
Children ≥25 kg, adolescents and
adults: 300 mg bid or 600 mg qd
Epzicom (>25 kg): 1 tablet qd
Triumeq: 1 tablet qd
Triumeq PD (≥10 kg to <25 kg):
Must be dispersed in 20 mL of
water, not swallowed whole, cut,
or chewed
10 kg to <14 kg: 4 tablets qd
14 kg to <20 kg: 5 tablets qd
20 kg to <25 kg: 6 tablets qd

Common: nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, fever, headache,
diarrhea, rash
Less common: hypersensitivity
reactions, which can be fatal
Rare: lactic acidosis with hepatic
steatosis, pancreatitis, elevated
triglycerides, myocardial
infarction

Genetic screening for HLAB*5701
must be done before initiation
of ABC-­containing treatment.
If test is positive, avoid
ABC. Once-­daily dosing is
not preferred with liquid
formulations.
Can be given with or without food
Do not restart ABC in patients
who had hypersensitivity-­like
symptoms (e.g., flulike symptoms).
Oral solution does not require
refrigeration.
Abacavir should never be used for
postexposure prophylaxis (PEP).

Emtricitabine
(Emtriva, FTC): capsule: 200 mg;
oral solution: 10 mg/mL
Truvada: combination of FTC,
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
(TDF) (200, 300 mg)
Truvada Low Strength:
combinations of FTC/TDF (100,
150 mg); (133, 200 mg); (167,
250 mg)
Descovy: combinations of FTC,
tenofovir alafenamide (TAF) (200,
25 mg); (120, 15 mg)
Atripla: combination of FTC, TDF,
efavirenz (EFV) (200, 300, 600
mg)
Biktarvy: combinations of FTC,
TAF, bictegravir (BIC) (200, 25, 50
mg); (120, 15, 30 mg)
Complera: combination of FTC,
TDF, rilpivirine (RPV) (200, 300,
25 mg)
Odefsey: combination of FTC,
TAF, RPV (200, 25, 25 mg)
Stribild: combination of FTC, TDF,
elvitegravir (EVG), cobicistat
(COBI) (200, 300, 150, 150 mg)
Genvoya: combination of FTC,
TAF, EVG, COBI (200, 10, 150,
150 mg)
Symtuza: combination of FTC,
TAF, darunavir (DRV), COBI (200,
10, 800, 150 mg)

Infants: 0-­<3 mo: 3 mg/kg qd
Common: headache,
Children ≥3 mo to 17 yr, oral
insomnia, diarrhea,
solution: 6 mg/kg (max: 240 mg)
nausea, skin discoloration
qd
(hyperpigmentation of palms,
>33 kg, adolescents and adults:
soles)
200 mg capsule or 240 mg
Less common: lactic acidosis with
solution qd
hepatic steatosis, neutropenia
≥14 to <25 kg: Biktarvy (120, 15,
30 mg), Descovy (120, 15 mg): 1
tablet qd
≥25 kg:
Biktarvy (200, 25, 50 mg), Genvoya:
1 tablet qd
>25 kg to 35 kg:
Descovy (200 mg, 25 mg) but
cannot pair with boosted PI or
COBI: 1 tablet qd
≥35 kg:
Complera, Odefsey,
Descovy (200, 25 mg): 1 tablet qd
≥35 kg, SMR* 4 or 5: Stribild: 1
tablet qd
≥40 kg
Atripla, Symtuza: 1 tablet qd
*SMR = Sexual maturity rating

Patient should be tested
for hepatitis B virus (HBV)
before starting because HBV
exacerbation can occur when
emtricitabine is discontinued.
Some combination drugs may
have food requirements. Oral
solution should be refrigerated
if temperature above 25°C (77°F)
and for long-­term storage.
COBI is a pharmacokinetic
enhancer (boosting agent) used
to optimize drug levels; it is not
interchangeable with ritonavir. It
can alter renal tubular secretion
of Cr, resulting in elevated Cr
with normal GFR.
Note FTC oral solution is less
bioavailable and has a max dose
of 240 mg, whereas the max
dose for capsules is 200 mg.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

2099

Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

Lamivudine
(Epivir, Epivir HBV, 3TC): tablet:
150 (scored), 300 mg (Epivir,
generic), 100 mg (Epivir HBV);
Solution: 5 mg/mL (Epivir HBV), 10
mg/mL (Epivir)
Combivir: combination of ZDV,
lamivudine (300, 150 mg)
Cimduo: combination of 3TC, TDF
(300 mg, 300 mg)
Delstrigo: combination of 3TC,
TDF, doravirine (DOR) (300, 300,
100 mg)
Dovato: combination of 3TC, DTG
(300, 50 mg)
Symfi: combination of 3TC, TDF,
EFV (300, 300, 600 mg)
Symfi Lo: combination of 3TC,
TDF, EFV (300, 300, 400 mg)
Temixys: combination of 3TC, TDF
(300, 300 mg)
Epzicom and Triumeq, Triumeq
PD combination (see abacavir)

Neonates (≥32 wk gestational age
through 4 wk of age for term
infants): 2 mg/kg/dose bid
≥4 wk to <3 mo: 4 mg/kg/dose
bid
≥3 mo to <3 yr: 5 mg/kg/dose bid
(max: 150 mg)
≥3 yr: 5 mg/kg/dose bid (max: 150
mg) or 10 mg/kg/dose qd (max:
300 mg)
For ≥14 kg with scored tablet (150
mg)
14 to <20 kg: 75 mg bid or 150 mg
qd (if >3 yr)
≥20 to <25 kg: 75 mg qAM and
150 mg qPM or 225 mg qd (if
>3 yr)
≥25 kg: 150 mg bid or 300 mg qd
Children should be switched to
once-­daily dosing of lamivudine
(oral solution or tablets) from
twice-­daily dosing at ≥3 yr if
clinically stable for 36 wk with
an undetectable viral load and
stable CD4 count
Adolescents and adults: Combivir,
(≥30 kg): 1 tablet bid
Cimduo (>35 kg): 1 tablet qd
Epzicom (≥25 kg): 1 tablet qd
Triumeq (≥25 kg): 1 tablet qd
Triumeq PD: see abacavir
Symfi (≥40 kg),
Symfi Lo (≥35 kg and SMR* 4 or 5):
1 tablet qd on empty stomach
Temixys (≥35 kg): 1 tablet qd
Dovato: 1 tablet qd in children
who meet minimum body
weight as part of a three-­drug
regimen
Child and adolescent ≥35 kg
and virologically suppressed:
Delstrigo: 1 tablet qd*
SMR = Sexual maturity rating

Common: headache, nausea
Less common: pancreatitis,
peripheral neuropathy, lactic
acidosis with hepatic steatosis,
lipodystrophy

No food restrictions for
lamivudine alone but some
restrictions with combination
drugs
Patient should be tested
for hepatitis B virus (HBV)
before starting because HBV
exacerbation can occur when
lamivudine is discontinued.
M184V mutation for this drug
decreases viral fitness and can
be advantageous to maintain
including inducing AZT
hypersusceptibility.

Tenofovir alafenamide
(Vemlidy, TAF)
Descovy: combinations of TAF,
FTC (25, 200 mg); (15, 120 mg)
Genvoya: combination of TAF,
FTC, EVG, COBI (10, 200, 150,
150 mg)
Odefsey: combination of TAF,
FTC, RPV (25, 200, 25 mg)
Biktarvy: combinations of TAF,
FTC, BIC (25, 200, 50 mg); (15,
120, 30 mg)
Symtuza: combination of TAF,
FTC, DRV, COBI (10, 200, 800,
150 mg)

≥ 2 yr
Common: headache, diarrhea,
≥14 kg to <25 kg: Biktarvy (15, 120,
nausea, asthenia, increased
30 mg): 1 tablet qd
serum lipids
Descovy (15, 120 mg): 1 tablet qd
≥25 kg:
Biktarvy (25, 200, 50 mg), Descovy
(25, 200 mg), Genvoya: 1 tablet
qd
≥25 kg but <35 kg:
Descovy but cannot pair with
boosted PI: 1 tablet qd
≥35 kg: Descovy: 1 tablet qd
≥35 kg and ≥12 yr:
Odefsey: 1 tablet qd
≥40 kg (adult dose)
Symtuza: 1 tablet qd

Newer version of TDF that has
less renal and bone toxicity.
Baseline serum creatinine still
recommended before starting.
Screen for HBV before TAF is
started, because exacerbation of
hepatitis may occur when TAF is
discontinued.
Concentrates in cells more so than
TDF

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
(Viread, TDF): tablet: 150, 200, 250,
300 mg; powder: 40 mg/1 g powder
Truvada: combination of FTC, TDF
(200, 300 mg)
Truvada Low Strength: combinations
of FTC/TDF (100, 150 mg); (133,
200 mg); (167, 250 mg)
Cimduo: combination of 3TC, TDF
(300 mg, 300 mg)
Atripla: combination of FTC, TDF,
EFV (200, 300, 600 mg)
Complera: combination of FTC,
TDF, RPV (200, 300, 25 mg)
Delstrigo: combination of 3TC, TDF,
DOR (300, 300, 100 mg)
Stribild: combination of FTC, TDF,
EVG, COBI (200, 300, 150, 150 mg)
Symfi: combination of 3TC, TDF,
EFV (300, 300, 600 mg)
Symfi Lo: combination of 3TC, TDF,
EFV (300, 300, 400 mg)
Temixys: combination of 3TC, TDF
(300, 300 mg)

≥2 yr to <12 yr and ≥10 kg: 8 mg/
kg/dose qd
Weight probands for ≥2 yr and
≥17 kg:
17 to <22 kg: 150 mg qd
22 to <28 kg: 200 mg qd
28 to <35 kg: 250 mg qd
≥35 kg: 300 mg qd (max dose)
Atripla (≥40 kg): 1 tablet qd
Cimduo (≥35 kg): 1 tablet qd
Complera (≥35 kg): 1 tablet qd
Symfi (≥40 kg),
Symfi Lo ≥ 12 yr (≥35 kg and SMR*
4 or 5): 1 tablet qd on empty
stomach
Stribild (≥35 kg, SMR* 4 or 5): 1
tablet qd
Temixys (≥35 kg): 1 tablet qd
Delstrigo: Child and adolescent
≥35 kg and virologically
suppressed: 1 tablet qd
*SMR = Sexual maturity rating

Common: nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, asthenia, flatulence
Less common: lactic acidosis with
hepatic steatosis, hepatomegaly,
decreased bone density, renal
toxicity (glomerular and proximal
tubule dysfunction)

Baseline creatinine, urinalysis for
protein and glucose should be
obtained before starting.
Screen for HBV before TDF is
given, because exacerbation of
hepatitis may occur when TDF is
discontinued.
Cautious use in SMR 1 and 2
patients with regard to bone
mineral density.

Zidovudine
(Retrovir, AZT, ZDV): capsule:
100 mg; tablet: 300 mg; syrup:
10 mg/mL; intravenous injection:
10 mg/mL (all available generic)
Combivir: combination of ZDV,
lamivudine (300, 150 mg)

Low Risk Prophylaxis:
≥35 wk gestation at birth:
Birth to age 4 wk: 4 mg/kg/dose
PO bid (or 3 mg/kg/dose IV q12h)
≥30 to <35 wk gestation at birth:
Birth to age 2 wk: 2 mg/kg/dose PO
bid (or 1.5 mg/kg/dose IV q12h)
THEN
Age 2 wk to 6 wk:
3 mg/kg/dose PO bid (or 2.3 mg/
kg/dose IV q12h)
<30 wk gestation at birth
Birth to age 4 wk: 2 mg/kg/dose PO
bid (or 1.5 mg/kg/dose IV q12h)
THEN
Age 4 wk to 6 wk:
3 mg/kg/dose bid (or 2.3 mg/kg/
dose IV q12h)
(See text and Table 322.7 for
recommended duration for low
risk prophylaxis.)

Common: bone marrow
suppression (e.g., anemia,
neutropenia), headache, nausea,
vomiting, asthenia
Less common: liver toxicity, lactic
acidosis with hepatic steatosis,
myopathy, fat redistribution,
myopathy/myositis

No food restrictions
Drug interactions: should not be
given with d4T or doxorubicin.
Only antiretroviral with an IV
formulation.

Presumptive HIV therapy for
high-­risk exposed infants and
treatment:
≥35 wk gestation at birth:
Birth to age 4 wk: 4 mg/kg/dose
PO bid THEN
Age >4 wk: 12 mg/kg/dose PO bid
≥30 to <35 wk gestation at birth:
Birth to age 2 wk: 2 mg/kg/dose
PO bid THEN
Age 2 wk to 6 wk: 3 mg/kg/dose
PO bid THEN
Age >6 wk: 12 mg/kg/dose PO bid
<30 wk gestation at birth:
Birth to age 4 wk: 2 mg/kg/dose
PO bid THEN
Age 4 wk to 8 wk: 3 mg/kg/dose
PO bid THEN
Age >8 wk: 12 mg/kg/dose PO bid
Infants >4 kg, ≥35 wk post
conception and ≥4 wk post
delivery and children:
4 kg to <9 kg: 12 mg/kg/dose PO bid
9 kg to <30 kg: 9 mg/kg/dose PO bid
>30 kg: 300 mg bid (max dose)
Alternative body surface area dosing:
180-­240 mg/m2/dose PO bid
Combivir (≥30 kg): 1 tablet bid
IV dose is 75% of PO dose, same
interval
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

2101

Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

Class adverse effects: rash is
mild to severe, usually within
first 6 wk. Discontinue the drug
if severe rash (with blistering,
desquamation, muscle
involvement, or fever)

NONNUCLEOSIDE REVERSE
TRANSCRIPTASE INHIBITORS

Doravirine
(Pifeltro, DOR)
Tablet: 100 mg
Delstrigo: combination of 3TC,
TDF, DOR (300, 300, 100 mg)

Child and adolescent ≥35 kg and
virologically suppressed:
Doravirine: 1 tablet qd
Delstrigo: 1 tablet qd

Common: nausea, abdominal
pain, diarrhea, vivid dreams,
insomnia

Not approved for use in <18 yr
Can have multiple drug
interactions; metabolized by
cytochrome P450 3A.
If co-­administered with rifabutin,
dose DOR bid

Efavirenz
(Sustiva, EFV): capsule: 50, 200 mg;
tablet: 600 mg
Atripla: combination of EFV, FTC,
TDF (600, 200, 300 mg)
Symfi Lo: combination of 3TC,
TDF, EFV (300, 300, 400 mg)
Symfi: combination of 3TC, TDF,
EFV (300, 300, 600 mg)

Children <3 yr: Consult with
expert; not recommended for
children <3 yr
Children ≥3 yr:
10 to <15 kg: 200 mg qd
15 to <20 kg: 250 mg qd
20 to <25 kg: 300 mg qd
25 to <32.5 kg: 350 mg qd
32.5 to <40 kg: 400 mg qd
≥40 kg: 600 mg qd or 367 mg/m2
body surface area (max: dose
600 mg)
Atripla (≥40 kg): 1 tablet qd on
empty stomach
Symfi Lo (≤35 kg and SMR* 4 or 5):
1 tablet qd on empty stomach
*SMR = Sexual maturity rating
For Symfi Lo consider use of
therapeutic drug monitoring for
pediatric patients ≥40 kg
Symfi (≥40 kg): 1 tablet qd

Common: transient skin rashes,
CNS symptoms (e.g., vivid
dreams, impaired concentration,
insomnia, depression,
hallucinations, depression,
suicidal ideation esp. in
adolescents and young adults),
gynecomastia
Less common: increased liver
enzymes; potentially teratogenic,
QTc prolongation (be careful
with other QT-­prolonging
medications), false positives
on some cannabinoid and
benzodiazepine tests

Capsules can be opened for
mixing in food.
Administer at bedtime on
empty stomach to minimize
CNS side effects. Taking with
food, especially fatty meal, can
increase absorption and worsen
CNS side effects.
Drug interactions: Efavirenz
induces/inhibits CYP3A4
enzymes. For some individuals
with certain CYP450
polymorphisms, Symfi Lo is
appropriate (lower EFV dose).
Increased clearance of drugs
metabolized by this pathway
(e.g., antihistamines, sedatives
and hypnotics, cisapride,
ergot derivatives, warfarin,
ethinyl estradiol) and several
other ARVs (i.e., protease
inhibitors). Drugs that induce
CYP3A4 (e.g., phenobarbital,
rifampin, rifabutin) decrease
efavirenz levels. Clarithromycin
levels decrease with EFV,
and azithromycin should be
considered.
Avoid using in individuals with
a history of past or active
psychiatric issues and use with
caution in adolescents and
young adults owing to possible
affective side effects, including
increased suicidality.

Etravirine
(ETR, Intelence): tablet: 25, 100,
200 mg

Not approved for <2 yr
10 to <20 kg:
100 mg bid
20 to <25 kg:
125 mg bid
25 to <30 kg:
150 mg bid
≥30 kg: 200 mg bid

Common: nausea, rash, diarrhea
Less common: hypersensitivity
reactions with rash, including
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome,
multiorgan dysfunction including
hepatic failure

Always administer with a meal
for absorption; taking on
empty stomach decreases
absorption by 50%. Tablets
can be dispersed in water but
swallowing is preferred because
consumption of dispersed
tablets results in lower levels.
Inducer of CYP3A4 enzymes
and inhibitor of CYP2C9 and
CYP2C19, causing multiple
interactions that should be
checked before initiating
ETR. Cobicistat-­boosted
PIs, nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors,
bictegravir, and elvitegravir/
cobicistat should not be used with
ETR. Raltegravir and dolutegravir
should only be used with ETR with
ritonavir (RTV)-­boosted atazanavir,
darunavir, or lopinavir.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2102 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)
Nevirapine
(Viramune, NVP): tablet: 200 mg;
extended-­release (XR) tablet: 100,
400 mg; suspension: 10 mg/mL

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

Presumptive HIV therapy for
high-risk exposed infants and
treatment:
32 to <34 wk gestation at birth: Birth
to age 2 wk: 2 mg/kg/dose bid
2 wk to 4 wk: 4 mg/kg/dose bid
4 wk to 6 wk: 6 mg/kg bid
>6 wk with confirmed infection:
NVP 200 mg/m2/dose bid

Common: skin rash (usually in
first 6 wk of therapy), headache,
fever, nausea, abnormal liver
function tests
Less common: hepatotoxicity
(rarely life-­threatening hepatic
necrosis), hypersensitivity
reactions, Stevens Johnson
syndrome (1.4–7.1% of pediatric
patients in large series) that can
have multiorgan involvement

No food restrictions
Drug interactions: induces hepatic
CYP450A enzymes (including
CYP3A and CYP2B6) activity and
decreases protease inhibitor
concentrations.
Rifampin decreases nevirapine
serum levels. Anticonvulsants
and psychotropic drugs using
same metabolic pathways as
NVP should be monitored. Oral
contraceptives also may be
affected. XR formulation must
be swallowed whole.
For children ≤2 yr, some experts
start with bid dosing without
the 14 day lead-­in of qd dosing.
Lead-­in dosing decreases
occurrence of rash by allowing
induction of cytochrome p450
metabolizing enzymes. If rash
develops during initial 14 days
of therapy, do not increase dose
until rash resolves.
If therapy is interrupted for >14
days, restart using lead-­in
dosing.
Nevirapine should never be used
for postexposure prophylaxis
(PEP).

34 wk to <37 wk gestation at birth:
Birth to 1 wk: 4 mg/kg/dose bid
1 wk to 4 wk: 6 mg/kg/dose bid
>4 wk and confirmed infection:
200 mg/m2/dose bid
≥37 wk gestation at birth:
Birth to age 4 wk: 6 mg/kg/dose
bid
Age >4 wk and confirmed
infection: 200 mg/m2/dose bid
≥1 mo to <8 yr: 200 mg/m2 once
daily for 14 days; then same
dose bid (max: 200 mg/dose for
immediate-release tablets)
≥8 yr: 120-­150 mg/m2 once daily
for 14 days; then bid (max: 200
mg/dose for immediate-release
tablets)
Adolescents and adults: 200 mg
once daily for 14 days; then 200
mg bid
Or
XR 400 mg qd (after 14-­day lead in)
Extended-­release tablets:
≥6 yr by BSA:
0.58 m2 to 0.83 m2: 200 mg
0.84 m2 to 1.16 m2: 300 mg
≥1.17 m2: 400 mg
Patients already on
immediate-­release
formulation can transition
to qd XR dosing without lead-­in
Note doses are never adjusted
down if patient is tolerating.
3-­dose series for high-­risk infants
(less commonly used) ≥32 wk
gestation at birth: NOTE: DOSES
ARE A FLAT DOSE, NOT PER KG
Dosing intervals: Within 48 hr of
birth, 48 hr after first dose, 96 hr
after second dose
Birth weight 1.5-­2 kg: 8 mg/dose
PO
Birth weight >2 kg: 12 mg/dose
PO

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

2103

Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)
Rilpivirine
(Edurant, RPV): tablet: 25 mg
Complera: combination of RPV,
FTC, TDF (25, 200, 300 mg)
Odefsey: combination of FTC,
TAF, RPV (25, 200, 25 mg)
Juluca: combination of RPV,
Dolutegravir (DTG) (25, 50 mg)
Co-­packaged formulation
(Cabenuva): combinations
injectable of RPV, cabotegravir:
(900, 600 mg); (600, 400 mg)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

≥12 yr and ≥35 kg: 25 mg PO qd
Complera or Odefsey: 1 tablet qd
Juluca (>18 yr): 1 tablet qd; only
for use in adults with ≥6 mo
virologic suppression with no
resistance to replace current
regimen
≥12 years and ≥35 kg with
virologic suppression and no
history of treatment failure
starting on last day of 28 day
oral lead in therapy:
Cabenuva (900, 600 mg) IM, then
Cabenuva (600, 400 mg) IM
monthly
Alternate every 2 mo dosing also
available

Headache, insomnia, rash,
depression, mood changes
Less common: hepatotoxicity

Given with food only, 500-­kcal
meal (not just liquid). Do not use
with proton pump inhibitors;
antacids have to be spaced
from dose by 2 hr before or 4 hr
after. H2 antagonists should be
administered 12 hr before or 4 hr
after RPV.
Should not be used if viral load
>100,000 copies/μL or drugs
that induce CYP3A.
Injectables can give local
site reaction, soreness.
Administration window is ±7
days for injectable regimens.
It is critical that injectable
regimens are received on
schedule, as prolonged
subtherapeutic drug levels will
lead to emergence of resistance.

Class adverse effects: GI side
effects, hyperglycemia,
hyperlipidemia (except
atazanavir and darunavir),
lipodystrophy, increased
transaminases, increased
bleeding disorders in
hemophiliacs. Can induce
metabolism of ethinyl estradiol;
use alternative contraception
(other than estrogen-­containing
oral contraceptives). All of
these drugs undergo hepatic
metabolism, mostly by CYP3A4,
with many drug interactions.
Treatment note: always
administer with boosting agent
(RTV or COBI).

PROTEASE INHIBITORS

Atazanavir
(Reyataz, ATV): powder packet:
50 mg/packet; capsule: 150, 200,
300 mg
(Note: capsules and packets are
not interchangeable)
Evotaz: combination of ATV, COBI
(300, 150 mg)

Infants and children ≥3 mo and
≥5 kg:
5 to <15 kg: ATV 200 mg (4
packets) + RTV 80 mg qd
15 to <25 kg: ATV 250 mg (5
packets) + RTV 80 mg qd
Note: Capsules are not approved
for <6 yr or <15 kg
Children ≥6 yr and ≥15 kg capsule
dosing:
15 to <35 kg: 200 mg + RTV qd
100 mg
≥35 kg: 300 mg + RTV 100 mg
qd OR
Evotaz: 1 tablet qd

Common: elevation of indirect
bilirubin; headache, arthralgia,
depression, insomnia, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, paresthesias
Less common: prolongation of PR
interval on electrocardiogram
(ECG); rash, rarely Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome, diabetes
mellitus, nephrolithiasis

Administer ATV with food to
increase absorption and
decrease GI side effects.
Do not open capsules.
Review drug interactions before
initiating because ATV inhibits
CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and
UGT1A1 enzymes. Use with
caution with cardiac conduction
disease or liver impairment.
TDF, antacids, H2-­receptor
antagonists, and proton-­
pump inhibitors decrease ATV
concentrations. PPIs should be
taken 12 hr before boosted ATV
and not coadministered.
COBI is a pharmacokinetic
enhancer (boosting agent) used
to optimize drug levels; it is not
interchangeable with ritonavir. It
can alter renal tubular secretion
of Cr, resulting in elevated Cr
with normal GFR.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2104 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)
Darunavir
(Prezista, DRV): tablets: 75,
150, 600, 800 mg; suspension:
100 mg/mL
Prezcobix: combination DRV,
COBI (800, 150 mg)
Symtuza: combination DRV, TAF,
FTC, COBI (800, 10, 200, 150 mg)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

<3 yr or <10 kg: Do not use
3 yr to <12 yr:
10 to <11 kg: DRV 200 mg + RTV
32 mg bid
11 to <12 kg: DRV 220 mg + RTV
32 mg bid
12 to <13 kg: DRV 240 mg + RTV
40 mg bid
13 to <14 kg: DRV 260 mg + RTV
40 mg bid
14 to <15 kg: DRV 280 mg + RTV
48 mg bid
15 to <30 kg: DRV 375 mg + RTV
48 mg bid
30 to <40 kg: DRV 450 mg + RTV
100 mg bid
>12 yr and ≥30 to <40 kg: DRV
450 mg + RTV 100 mg bid
≥40 kg: DRV 600 mg + RTV 100
mg bid
≥12 yr and ≥40 kg and no DRV
mutations: DRV 800 mg + RTV
100 mg qd OR Prezcobix: 1
tablet qd

Common: diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain,
fatigue, headache
Less common: skin rashes
(including Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome), lipid and liver
enzyme elevations and
hepatotoxicity, hyperglycemia,
fat maldistribution

DRV should always be given
with food for absorption and
to decrease GI side effects.
Contraindicated for concurrent
therapy with cisapride, ergot
alkaloids, benzodiazepines,
pimozide, or any major CYP3A4
substrates. Use with caution in
patients taking strong CYP3A4
inhibitors, or moderate/strong
CYP3A4 inducers.
Contains sulfa moiety: potential
for cross-­sensitivity with
sulfonamide class
DRV should not be administered
once daily to individuals <12 yr
or <40 kg.
COBI is a pharmacokinetic
enhancer (boosting agent) used
to optimize drug levels; it is not
interchangeable with ritonavir. It
can alter renal tubular secretion
of Cr, resulting in elevated Cr
with normal GFR.

Common: diarrhea, headache,
nausea and vomiting,
lipid elevation, alteration
of taste, hyperlipidemia
(hypertriglyceridemia)
Less common: fat redistribution,
hyperglycemia, diabetes
mellitus, pancreatitis, hepatitis,
PR interval prolongation, QT
interval prolongation and
torsades de pointes. Life
threatening cardiotoxicity risk in
neonates.

Do not administer before
postmenstrual age of 42 wk and
postnatal age of 14 days due to
potential severe toxicities.
If patient on concomitant NVP or
EFV, dosing must be adjusted
and it must be given bid.
No food restrictions for tablets but
has better GI tolerability when
given with or after a meal.
Oral solution should be
administered with high-­fat meal
to increase absorption.
Pills must be swallowed whole.
Poor palatability of oral solution
is difficult to mask with
flavorings or foods. Once-­daily
dosing is poorly tolerated in
most children, and plasma
concentration variability makes
qd dosing contraindicated
in children and adolescents.
Interacts with drugs using
CYP3A4, which can cause
multiple drug interactions.

Common: nausea, headache,
vomiting, abdominal pain,
diarrhea, taste aversion,
lipid abnormalities, perioral
paresthesias
Less common: fat redistribution,
hyperglycemia, diabetes
mellitus, pancreatitis, hepatitis,
PR interval prolongation, allergic
reactions

Administration with food enhances
bioavailability and reduces
gastrointestinal symptoms.
RTV solution should not be
refrigerated (store at 20–25°C).
RTV is potent inhibitor of CYP3A4
and CYP2D6 and inducer of
CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 that leads
to many drug interactions
(e.g., protease inhibitors,
antiarrhythmics, antidepressants,
cisapride). Use cautiously with
inhaled steroids (Cushing
syndrome has been reported
specifically with coadministration
with fluticasone).

≥40 kg with DRV mutation(s): DRV
600 mg + RTV 100 mg bid
>40 kg with no DRV or TDF/TAF
resistance: Symtuza: 1 tablet qd
Lopinavir/Ritonavir
(Kaletra, LPV/r): tablet: 100/25 mg,
200/50 mg; solution: 80/20 mg
per/mL (contains 42% alcohol,
15% propylene glycol)

<14 days: Not approved
14 days to 18 yr: LPV 300 mg/m2/
dose + RTV 75 mg/m2/dose bid
In treatment naïve children >1 yr a
dose of 230 mg/m2/dose bid can
be used.
>18 yr: LPV 400 mg + RTV 100
mg bid
Or
800 mg LPV + 200 mg RTV qd
>45 kg: If taken with NVP, EFV,
fosamprenavir, or nelfinavir:
LPV 600 mg + RTV 150 mg bid

Ritonavir
(Norvir, RTV): capsule: 100 mg;
tablet: 100 mg; solution: 80 mg/
mL (contains 43% alcohol)

Only use is to enhance other PIs;
dose varies (see information for
specific PI)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

2105

Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

Fostemsavir
(Rukobia, FTR):
Extended-­release tablet 600 mg

Safety and efficacy data not
established for <18 yr
Adults >18 yr: 1 tablet twice daily

QTc prolongation with higher than
recommended doses, increased
transaminases in Hep B or Hep
C co-­infection

Reserved for treatment in
experienced patients with
significant resistance.
Tablet must be swallowed whole.
Do not co-­administer with strong
P450 CYP 3A4 inducers.
Potential drug interactions.

Ibalizumab
(Trogarzo, IBA)
IV: single-­dose vial 200 mg/1.33
mL

Safety and efficacy data for <18 yr
olds not established
Adults >18 yr:
Loading dose 2000 mg IV,
maintenance dose 800 mg q2 wk

Diarrhea, nausea, rash, dizziness,
IRIS, possible development of
anti-­IBA antibodies

Reserved for treatment in
experienced patients with
significant resistance.
Used in combination with
optimized cART regimen.

Maraviroc
(Selzentry, MVC): oral solution:
20 mg/mL; tablet: 25, 75, 150,
300 mg

Given with potent CYP3A
inhibitors (all PIs):
2 to <10 kg: Not recommended
10 to <20 kg: 50 mg bid
20 to <30 kg: 75-­80 mg bid
30 to <40 kg: 100 mg bid
≤40 kg: 150 mg bid

Common: fever, upper respiratory
infection–like symptoms
including cough, nausea,
vomiting, rash, abdominal pain,
musculoskeletal symptoms,
dizziness

Testing for CCR-­5-­tropic virus
required; virus must not have
mixed tropism (i.e., CCR-­5/
CXC4) to have efficacy.
No food restrictions.
MVC is a CYP3A4 and
P-­glycoprotein (Pgp) substrate,
which may cause many drug
interactions.
Caution should be used when
given to patients with hepatic
impairment or cardiac disease or
receiving CYP3A4 or
P-­glycoprotein-­modulating
drugs.

ENTRY AND FUSION
INHIBITORS

Given with noninteracting drugs
such as NRTIs, T-­20, NVP, RAL,
or other drugs not affecting
CYP3A:
2 to <4 kg: 30 mg bid
4 to <6 kg: 40 mg bid
6 to <10 kg: 100 mg bid
10 to <14 kg: 150 mg bid
14 to <30 kg: 200 mg bid
30 to <40 kg: 300 mg bid
≥40 kg: 300 mg bid
Insufficient data for all children
and adolescents for dosing with
potent CYP3A inducer, including
EFV, ETR
Adults:
Given with noninteracting
medications: 300 mg bid
Given with potent CYP3A
inhibitors (including all PIs): 150
mg bid
Given with potent CYP3A inducers
including EFV and ETR 600 mg
bid
Class side effects: headache,
mild GI symptoms, potential
significant weight gain for some
INSTIs

INTEGRASE INHIBITORS (INSTI)

Bictegravir (BIC)
Only available as
Biktarvy: combinations of BIC,
TAF, FTC (50, 25, 200 mg); (30,
15, 120 mg)

≥2 y and ≥14 kg to <25 kg: 1 tablet
(30, 15, 120 mg) qd
≥25 kg: 1 tablet (50, 25, 200 mg)
qd

Diarrhea, nausea, headache,

No food restrictions.
Metabolized by UGT1A1 and
CYP450 (CYP) 3A.
For children unable to swallow
tablet whole, tablet can be
split and all parts swallowed
separately within 10 min.
All patients should be screened
for HBV before using FTC or
TAF.
Avoid in severe hepatic
impairment.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

Cabotegravir
(Vocabria, CAB):
Tablet: 30 mg
Single-­dose vial for IM injection
(Apretude): 600 mg (PrEP only)
Co-­packaged formulation
(Cabenuva): combinations
injectable of RPV, CAB: (900, 600
mg); (600, 400 mg)

PrEP (CAB only)
Adolescents and adults ≥35 kg
confirmed HIV negative who
meet criteria:
Optional oral lead-­in for 1 mo
(dosing below) then on last day
oral lead-­in, patient receives IM
600 mg CAB monthly for 2 mo
then every 2 mo

Injection site reactions,
Close monitoring and strong
depression, insomnia, headache,
engagement in care needed
rash (can be severe with systemic
for injectable therapies as
symptoms), hepatotoxicity,
missing doses with prolonged
weight gain, CPK elevation,
subtherapeutic levels can lead
ACTH stimulation test alteration
to emergence of resistance and
of unclear significance
for PrEP acquisition of resistant
HIV infection.
There is a ±7 day dose
administration window for the
monthly dose.
CAB and RPV are injected
separately into separate
ventrogluteal sites.

For treatment of HIV (CAB/RPV):
≥12 y and ≥35 kg and adults with
suppressed viral load and no
history of treatment failure:
Optional oral lead in with oral RPV
and CAB for 1 mo:
CAB 30 mg, RPV 25 mg PO qd
Monthly administration:
Starting on last day of oral lead in
IM CAB/RPV (600/900 mg) first
month then CAB/RPV (400/600
mg) monthly
Every 2 mo administration:
Starting on last day of oral lead
in IM CAB/RPV (600/900 mg)
monthly for 2 mo then CAB/RPV
(600/900 mg) every 2 mo.
Dolutegravir
(Tivicay, DTG): film-­coated tablet:
10, 25, 50 mg
Dispersible tablets for oral
suspension (Tivicay PD): 5 mg
Triumeq: combination of ABC,
3TC, DTG (600, 300, 50 mg)
Juluca: combination of RPV, DTG
(25, 50 mg)
Dovato: combination of DTG, 3TC
(50, 300 mg)
Triumeq PD: combination of ABC,
lamivudine, dolutegravir (60, 30,
5 mg)

Neonates: not approved
≥4 wk, ≥3 kg, dispersible tablets:
3 kg to <6 kg: 5 mg qd
6 kg to <10 kg: 15 mg qd
10 kg to <14 kg: 20 mg qd
14 to <20 kg: 25 mg qd
≥20 kg 30 mg qd

Elvitegravir
(EVG): only found in 2 co-­
formulated fixed-­dose
combination (FDC) tablets
Stribild: combination of EVG, FTC,
TDF, COBI (150, 200, 300, 150
mg)
Genvoya: combination of FTC,
TAF, EVG, COBI (200, 10, 150,
150 mg)

≥25 kg: Genvoya
1 tablet qd
>35 kg and SMR* 4 or 5: Stribild 1
tablet qd
*SMR = Sexual Maturity Rating

COMMENTS

Insomnia, headache,
neuropsychiatric illness
Rare: rash, hepatotoxicity,
hypersensitivity reactions

Film-­coated tablets and
dispersible tablets are not
bioequivalent and are not
interchangeable.
Film-­coated tablets should not be
used in <14 kg patients.
Juluca and Dovato are not
recommended as first-­line
regimens for children and
adolescents but if child meets
weight criteria and viral load
criteria could be used to reduce
pill burden).

Nausea, diarrhea, headache,
fatigue

Administer with food.
EVG is metabolized by CYP3A4
and modestly induces CYP2D6
that can cause multiple drug
interactions. Use cautiously with
nephrotoxic drugs.
Administer 4 hr before or after
antacids, multivitamins or
supplements that contain iron,
calcium, aluminum, or magnesium.
COBI is a pharmacokinetic
enhancer (boosting agent) used
to optimize drug levels; it is not
interchangeable with ritonavir. It
can alter renal tubular secretion
of Cr, resulting in elevated Cr
with normal GFR.

≥14 kg film coated tablets:
14 kg to <20 kg: 40 mg qd
≥20 kg: 50 mg qd
≥25 kg:
Triumeq: 1 tablet qd
Juluca: 1 tablet qd; only for use
in patients with ≥6 mo virologic
suppression with no resistance
to replace current regimen.
Can be used in adolescents
meeting weight requirements
for treatment simplification
Dovato: 1 tablet qd; can be used
in adolescents meeting weight
requirements for treatment
simplification
Triumeq PD (≥10 kg to <25
kg): Must be dispersed, not
swallowed whole, cut or chewed
10 kg to <14 kg: 4 tablets
14 kg to <20 kg: 5 tablets
20 kg to <25 kg: 6 tablets

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

2107

Table 322.3  Summary of Antiretroviral Therapies Available in 2023—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)
Raltegravir
(Isentress, RAL): film-­coated tablet:
400 mg; film-­coated high dose
(HD) tablet: 600 mg; chewable
tablet: 25, 100 mg (scored);
granules for oral suspension:
100 mg suspended in 10 mL of
water for final concentration of
10 mg/mL

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

Presumptive therapy for
high-risk exposed neonates and
treatment:
≥37 wk gestation at birth and ≥2
kg (oral suspension):
Birth to age 1 wk: approximately
1.5 mg/kg/dose qd
2 to <3 kg: 4 mg qd
3 to <4 kg: 5 mg qd
4 to <5 kg: 7 mg qd
If parent on raltegravir in 2-­24 hr
before delivery, delay first dose
24-­48 hr after birth. Start other
ART ASAP.
Age 1-­4 wk: approximately 3 mg/
kg/dose bid
2 to <3 kg: 8 mg bid
3 to <4 kg: 10 mg bid
4 to <5 kg: 15 mg bid
Infant and Pediatrics dosing
Oral suspension:
Children age ≥4 wk and ≥3 kg to
<20 kg: approximately 6 mg/kg/
dose bid
3 to <4 kg: 25 mg bid
4 to <6 kg: 30 mg bid
6 to <8 kg: 40 mg bid
8 to <10 kg: 60 mg bid
10 to <14 kg: 80 mg bid
14 to <20 kg: 100 mg bid
Chewable tablet:
3 kg to <6 kg: 25 mg bid
6 to <10 kg: 50 mg bid
10 to <14 kg: 75 mg bid
14 to <20 kg: 100 mg bid
20 to <28 kg: 150 mg bid
28 to <40 kg: 200 mg bid
≥40 kg: 300 mg bid
Film-­coated tablet:
≥25 kg: 400 mg bid
HD tablet:
≥40 kg HD tablet: 1200 mg qd
for treatment naïve patients or
patients virologically suppressed
on RAL 400 mg bid

Common: nausea, headache,
dizziness, diarrhea, fatigue
Less common: itching, creatine
phosphokinase elevation,
myopathy, rhabdomyolysis,
depression, hypersensitivity,
insomnia, fever
Rare: rash including Stevens-­
Johnson, TEN, hypersensitivity
reaction

Oral suspension, film-­coated
tablet and chewable tablet are
not interchangeable; chewable
tablets and suspension have
better oral bioavailability than
film-­coated tablet; hence,
higher-­dose for film-­coated
tablets.
The chewable tablet can be
crushed. Place tablet in small
clean cup, add 5 mL (1 tsp ) of
liquid (water, breast milk, juice)
and let stand for 2 min while
pill absorbs liquid. Use spoon
to crush remaining intact pill.
Administer immediately. Add 5
mL of liquid to cup, swirl, and
administer that liquid as well to
ensure full dose consumed.
Film-­coated tablets must be
swallowed whole.
RAL is metabolized by UGT1A1
glucuronidation, and inducers
of this system (e.g., rifampin)
will reduce RAL levels, whereas
inhibitors of this system (e.g.,
ATV) will increase RAL levels.
Do not administer rifampin,
ETR, or calcium carbonate with
once-­daily raltegravir (HD).
Aluminum and magnesium
containing antacids should not
be taken while on RAL. UGT1A1
metabolism is low at birth and
increases rapidly over first 4-­6
wk of life. No data for preterm
infants.

Antiretroviral drugs often have significant drug-­drug interactions, with each other and with other classes of medicines, which should be reviewed before initiating any new
medication.
The information in this table is not all-­inclusive. Updated and additional information on dosages, drug-­drug interactions, and toxicities is available and regularly updated on the
AIDSinfo website at https://www.nih.gov/research-­training/hiv/aids-­info-­center
Modified from the Guidelines for use of antiretroviral agents in pediatric HIV infection. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/pediatricguidelines.pdf.

improve their pharmacokinetic profile. This strategy provides more
effective drug levels with less toxicity and less-­frequent dosing. Cobicistat provides an alternative to ritonavir as a pharmacokinetic booster
but does not have antiviral activity against HIV. Although cobicistat
is a potent inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A, it is a weak inhibitor of
CYP2D6 and other CYP isoforms (e.g., CYP1A2), making pharmacologic interactions with many drugs more predictable than for ritonavir, which is also active against these isoforms. Studies with cobicistat
show a good tolerability profile and less effect on adipocytes (resulting
in lesser accumulations of lipid and a milder response to insulin). The
better solubility of cobicistat compared with ritonavir has helped the
development of more single-­tablet combination regimens with cobicistat. Cobicistat is used for boosting both PIs and INSTIs. However,
cobicistat is currently approved only for children ≥25 kg; it is not recommended for use in pregnancy because of a paucity of data and concern for pharmacokinetics.

Adherence

Adherence to the medication schedules and dosages is fundamental
to cART success. Therefore assessment of the likelihood of adherence
to treatment is an important factor in initiating therapy and choice of
regimen. Numerous studies show that compliance of <90% results in
less-­successful suppression of the viral load. In addition, several studies document that almost half of the pediatric patients surveyed were
nonadherent to their regimen. Poor adherence to prescribed medication
regimens results in subtherapeutic drug concentrations and enhances
the development of resistant viruses, leading to limited treatment
options. Several barriers to adherence are unique to children with HIV
infection. Combination antiretroviral regimens in liquid form are often
unpalatable and require extreme dedication on the part of the caregiver
and child; a reluctance to disclose the child’s disease to others reduces
social support; there may be a tendency to skip doses if the caregiver is
not around or when the child is in school. Adolescents have other issues

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2108 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
that reduce adherence. Denial of the diagnosis, an unstructured lifestyle,
feelings of invincibility, desires for “normalcy,” adherence fatigue to lifelong medications, affective disorders, and substance use are just a few
of the many factors that may interfere with long-­term adherence in this
growing population. These and other barriers make involving the family
in optimizing adherence essential when possible. Intensive education on
the relationship of drug adherence to viral suppression, training on drug
administration, frequent follow-­up visits, peer support, ongoing support including text messaging and other platforms from medical team
and case managers, and commitment of the caregiver and the patient
are critical for successful antiviral treatment. Multiple methods such as
the viral load response, self-­reporting of missed doses during the last 3-­7
days, and pharmacy/pill counting should be used to assess adherence.
Assessing for emergence of resistant virus on sequencing (genotype) can
also be a helpful tool in patients not achieving virologic suppression as
expected. For older children and adults, long-­acting injectable regimens
also now exist and have the potential for enormous benefit for adherence, though currently are only FDA approved for individuals with virologic suppression and no history of treatment failure.

Initiation of Therapy

The decision of when to initiate cART has evolved significantly over
the years in both adults and children. When cART was first introduced,
medication regimens had significant side effects, leading to decisions
to delay therapy until it was thought to be most beneficial, usually after
advanced immunologic suppression had developed. The Strategic Timing of Antiretroviral Treatment (START) trial demonstrated a strong
benefit in starting therapy earlier in adults, even before CD4 counts fell
into an immunosuppressed range; this became more feasible with the
development of safer, better-­tolerated medications. In adults, it has also
been found that receiving suppressive cART eliminates the risk of the
sexual transmission of HIV to others. Current adult guidelines recommend the initiation of cART in all adults with HIV. In line with the
adult guidelines, the Panel on Antiretroviral Therapy and Medical
Management of Children Living with HIV now also recommends
starting treatment for all children with HIV as soon as possible. For
children <1 year of age, the Children with HIV Early Antiretroviral
Therapy (CHER) trial has clearly demonstrated the benefit of early
immediate ART. Children younger than 1 year of age are at high risk
for disease progression, and immunologic and virologic tests to identify those likely to develop rapidly progressive disease are less predictive than in older children. Therefore all HIV-­infected infants younger
than 1 year of age should be treated with cART as soon as the diagnosis of HIV infection has been confirmed, regardless of their clinical
or immunologic status or viral load. Data suggest that HIV-­infected
infants who are treated before the age of 3 months control their HIV
infection better than infants whose cART started later than 3 months
of age. Among older children, mortality rates are lower and growth
is more normal in children who are started on immediate cART. Initiation of cART therapy should be deferred in children with active
cryptococcal meningitis, tuberculosis infection, or disseminated MAC
infection in collaboration with an HIV expert.
The pediatric HIV guidelines are updated twice yearly, and care
providers should check for revisions regularly at https://www.nih.gov/
research-­training/hiv/aids-­info-­center.

Dosages

Children are usually treated with higher doses (per kilogram weight)
than adults because of reduced absorption or increased drug metabolism. Data on ART drug dosages for neonates, especially premature
infants, are often limited. Because of the immaturity of the neonatal
liver, there often must be an increase in the dosing interval of drugs
primarily cleared through hepatic glucuronidation.
For some medications in older children, ART dosages/selections
need to factor in sexual maturity rating (SMR) (formerly known as
Tanner staging). Fortunately thanks to evolving pediatric pharmacokinetic data, many simpler regimens are now available to children ≥25
kg, including once-­daily, single-­pill (fixed-­dose combination) regimens
(see Table 322.3 for comprehensive dosing information for current

HIV drugs used in children as of February 2023). Because some ART
agents may alter the metabolism of some hormonal contraceptives and
decrease their effectiveness, interactions should be considered when
choosing contraceptive agents for adolescents. A comprehensive table
of interactions of HIV medications with hormonal contraceptives
can be found in the perinatal HIV guidelines that are updated twice
yearly at https://www.nih.gov/research-­training/hiv/aids-­info-­center.
Medroxyprogesterone (DMPA) is a reasonable choice for most cART
regimens. Alternative long-­acting contraception options, such as use of
an intrauterine device, should also be considered.

Changing Antiretroviral Therapy

A change in therapy should be strongly considered when the current
regimen is judged ineffective as evidenced by an increase in viral load,
deterioration of the CD4 cell count, or clinical progression. Development of toxicity or intolerance to drugs is another reason to consider a
change in therapy. When a change is considered, the patient and family
should be reassessed for adherence concerns. Because adherence is a
major issue in this population, resistance testing (while the patient is
taking antiretroviral medications) is important in identifying adherence issues (e.g., detectable virus sensitive to current drug regimen is
consistent with a lack of adherence) or the development of resistance
(e.g., evidence of resistance mutations to current drug regimen). In
both situations, other contributing factors, such as poor absorption, an
incorrect dose, or drug-­drug interactions, should be carefully reviewed.
While considering possible new drug choices, the potential for cross-­
resistance should be addressed. In starting a new regimen in a patient
with virologic failure, the new regimen should include at least two, but
preferably three, fully active antiretroviral medications, with assessment of the anticipated activity based on the treatment history and
resistance testing (genotype or less commonly phenotype). The goal is
to achieve and maintain virologic suppression. If virologic suppression
cannot be achieved, the goals of therapy should focus on preserving
immunologic function and preventing further disease progression, as
well as preventing the emergence of additional drug resistance (which
could limit future treatment options).

Monitoring Antiretroviral Therapy

To ensure proper monitoring, the CD4 cell count, viral load, complete blood count, chemistries, urinalysis, and serum lipids should be
obtained before an initiation of or change in cART to have a baseline
for comparisons during treatment. At entry into care, genotypic resistance testing should be done as well. Children must be seen within 1-­4
weeks after initiation of new cART to reinforce and counsel regarding
adherence and to screen for potential side effects. Ideally, telephone
or text follow-­up by the medical team for adherence and side effects
also occurs in the interval between cART start and the follow-­up visit.
Virologic and immunologic surveillance (using the quantitative HIV
RNA PCR and CD4 lymphocyte count), as well as clinical assessment,
should be performed regularly while on cART. The initial virologic
response (i.e., at least a fivefold [0.7 log10] reduction in viral load)
should be achieved within 4-­8 weeks of initiating ART. The maximum
response to therapy usually occurs within 12-­16 weeks but may be
later (24 weeks) in very young infants. Thus HIV RNA levels should
be measured at 4-­8 weeks and 12-­24 weeks after therapy initiation.
Once an optimal response has occurred, the viral load should then
be measured at least every 3-­6 months. If the response is unsatisfactory, another viral load should be determined as soon as possible to
verify the results before a change in therapy is considered. Virologic
failure is defined as a repeated plasma viral load ≥200 copies/mL after
6 months of therapy. The CD4 cells respond more slowly to successful treatment, particularly in patients with long-­standing infection and
CD4 suppression. CD4 counts should be monitored every 3-­4 months
and potentially can be done less frequently in adolescents and adults
with documented virologic suppression. Potential toxicity should be
monitored closely for the first ∼8 weeks (including complete blood
count, serum chemistries), and if no clinical or laboratory toxicity is
documented, follow-­up visits are recommended every 1-­2 months
for children <18 months to allow increases in medication doses in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
association with weight gain) and every 3-­4 months for older children
and adolescents. Monitoring for potential toxicity should be tailored to
the patient’s medication regimen. Toxicities include but are not limited
to hematologic complications (e.g., zidovudine); hypersensitivity rash
(e.g., efavirenz); lipodystrophy (e.g., redistribution of body fat seen
with NRTIs and PIs, which can take several years to emerge); hyperlipidemia (elevation of cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations);
hyperglycemia and insulin resistance (e.g., PIs); mitochondrial toxicity
leading to severe lactic acidosis; electrocardiogram abnormalities (e.g.,
atazanavir, lopinavir); abnormal bone mineral metabolism (e.g., tenofovir disoproxil fumarate but not tenofovir alafenamide); and hepatic
toxicity, including severe hepatomegaly with steatosis. After a patient
is on a stable regimen, labs outside of CD4 count and viral load can
be done every 6-­12 months. An important part of every visit is ongoing adherence counseling given the need for excellent adherence to
cART to avoid the emergence of resistance. Detailed current guidelines
for monitoring HIV-­infected children during therapy can be found at
https://www.nih.gov/research-­training/hiv/aids-­info-­center.

Resistance to Antiretroviral Therapy

Young children usually are at greater risk than adults for developing resistance because they have higher viral loads and fewer ART
options than adults (reflecting the fact that only some agents are
available in a liquid formulation and have pharmacokinetic dosing data for children). The high mutation rate of HIV (mainly as a
result of the absence of error-­correcting mechanisms in the reverse-­
transcriptase enzyme) results in the generation of viruses with multiple mutations every day in the absence of cART. Failure to reduce
the viral load to <50 copies/mL on cART because of nonadherence
resulting in subtherapeutic drug levels increases the risk for developing resistance by selecting those mutant viruses with a competitive advantage (i.e., drug resistance mutations). Even effectively
treated patients do not completely suppress all viral replication,
and persistence of HIV transcription and evolution of envelope
sequences continues in the latent cellular reservoirs, though data
show that this evolution does not appear to affect the emergence of
resistance to cART in virologically suppressed patients. Accumulation of resistance mutations, particularly in nonadherent patients,
progressively diminishes the potency of the cART and challenges
the physician to find new regimens. For some drugs (e.g., nevirapine, lamivudine), a single mutation is associated with resistance,
whereas for other drugs (e.g., zidovudine, lopinavir, darunavir,
etravirine, etc.), several mutations are needed before significant
resistance develops. Testing for drug resistance, especially when
devising a new regimen, is standard of care. Two types of tests are
available; genotype is most commonly used, but the phenotype may
be helpful in select patients with complex viral resistance as a result
of exposure to multiple cART regimens.
The phenotype measures the virus susceptibility in various concentrations of the drug. This allows calculation of the drug concentration
that will inhibit the viral replication by 50% (IC50). The ratio of the
IC50 and a reference virus IC50 is reported as the fold resistance change.
Note that this test is usually combined with a genotype when used but
is largely reserved for patients with extremely complex mutations. The
genotype predicts the virus susceptibility from mutations identified in
the HIV genome isolated from the patient and is the more commonly
used test. Several online sites (e.g., http://hivdb.stanford.edu) can assist
in interpreting the test’s results. Several studies show that the treatment
success is higher in patients whose cART was guided by genotype or
phenotype testing.
Neither method may detect drug resistance if the amount of the
resistant virus is <10% of the circulating population or if it is present
only in the latent reservoir. Note that if a patient has not been taking cART for several weeks, the absence of selective drug pressure will
make the dominant population of circulating viruses revert to the wild
type, and resistance mutations can be missed.
It is recommended to test for drug resistance before initiating therapy and before changing treatment because of virologic failure. When
changing therapy, the resistance test results should be considered in the

2109

context of previous resistance tests results, if done, and drugs used in
previous regimens.

Supportive Care

Even before cART drugs were available, a significant impact on the
quality of life and survival of HIV-­infected children was achieved when
supportive care was given. A multidisciplinary team approach is desirable for successful management. After the initiation or change of cART,
more frequent visits or contacts with the patient/caregivers for support and education will help in their acceptance and adjustment to the
new regimen and will contribute to a better adherence. Close attention
should be paid to the nutritional status, which is often delicately balanced and may require aggressive supplementation, especially in children with advanced disease. Painful oropharyngeal lesions and dental
caries may interfere with eating, and thus routine dental evaluations
and careful attention to oral hygiene are important. Paradoxically, an
increasing number of adolescents with perinatally acquired or behavioral risk–acquired disease are obese. Some teens experience cART-­
related central lipoaccumulation (usually related to older agents), but
others have poor dietary habits and inactivity as the cause of their obesity, just as others do who are obese in epidemic numbers in the United
States. Their development should be evaluated regularly, with the
provision of necessary physical, occupational, and/or speech therapy.
Recognition of pain in the young child may be difficult, and effective
nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic protocols for pain management
should be instituted when indicated.
All HIV-­exposed and HIV-­infected children should receive standard
pediatric immunizations (Table 322.4). Live oral polio vaccine should
not be given because of poor immunologic response in HIV-­infected
children and concern for live vaccination in potentially immunocompromised children. The risk and benefits of rotavirus vaccination
should be considered in HIV-­exposed infants. Because <1% of these
infants in resource-­rich settings will develop HIV infection, the vaccine should be given in infants with negative testing at 2-­3 weeks and
6-­8 weeks of age. In other situations, the considerable attenuation of the
vaccine’s strains should be considered, and unless the infant has clinical
symptoms of AIDS or a CD4 count <750, vaccination is likely appropriate; consultation with an HIV expert is recommended. Other live
bacterial vaccines (e.g., bacillus Calmette-­Guérin) should be avoided
because of the high incidence of bacillus Calmette-­Guérin–related
disease in HIV-­infected infants. Varicella and measles-­mumps-­rubella
vaccines are recommended for children who are not severely immunosuppressed (i.e., CD4 cell percentage ≥15%, absolute CD4 count >500
cells/μL for ages 1-­5 years), but these vaccines should not be given
to severely immunocompromised children (i.e., CD4 cell percentage
<15%, absolute CD4 count <500 cells/μL for age 1-­5 year). Of note,
prior immunizations do not always provide protection, as evidenced
by outbreaks of measles and pertussis in immunized HIV-­infected children. The durability of vaccine-­induced titers is often short, especially
if vaccines are administered when the child’s CD4 cell count is low, and
reimmunization when the CD4 count has increased may be indicated.
It is recommended that children with HIV receive quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine at a younger age than the routine schedule.
Adolescent vaccines are also important, including the Tdap booster and
HPV vaccine. The current recommended annotated vaccine schedule
for HIV-­infected children is found here (updated annually): https://ww
w.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/child-­adolescent.html.
Prophylactic regimens are integral for the care of HIV-­infected
children. All infants 4-­6 weeks to 1 year of age who are proved to be
HIV-­infected should receive prophylaxis to prevent P. jiroveci pneumonia regardless of the CD4 count or percentage (Tables 322.5 and
322.6). Infants exposed to HIV-­infected individuals should receive
the same prophylaxis until they are proved to be noninfected; however, prophylaxis does not have to be initiated if there is strong presumptive evidence of noninfection (i.e., nonbreastfed infant with two
negative HIV PCR tests at >14 days and 4 weeks of age, respectively).
When the HIV-­infected child is >1 year of age, prophylaxis should
be given according to the CD4 lymphocyte count (see Table 322.5).
The best prophylactic regimen is 150 mg/m2/day of TMP and 750 mg/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2110 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.4  Routine Childhood Immunization Schedule for HIV-­Infected Children
VACCINE

BIRTH

Hepatitis B

HepB

1 MO

2 MO

4 MO

6 MO

HepB

2 YR

MMR*
Varicella*
If CD4 >500

Influenza†

Annual

COVID-­19‡

Regular
schedule‡
PCV

4-­6 YR

PCV

PCV

MMR*
Varicella*
If CD4 >200

PCV

PPSV23ǁ

Pneumococcal
polysaccharide
vaccine
Haemophilus
influenzae B
vaccine

Hib

Hib

Hib

Hib

Diphtheria, tetanus
and pertussis

DTaP

DTaP

DTaP

DTaP

DTaP

Inactivated polio
vaccine

IPV

IPV

IPV

IPV

Hepatitis A vaccine

HepA

Tdap

HepA
MCV4¶
(2-­shot
series)

Meningococcal
conjugate
vaccine
HPV vaccine
Rotavirus vaccine

11-­12 YR

HepB

Measles, mumps,
and rubella*
Varicella vaccines*

Pneumococcal
conjugate
vaccine§

12-15 MO

HPV**
(3-­shot series)
RV††
(2-­ to 3-­shot
series)

Dengue‡‡

Dengue‡‡
(3-­shot series)
If CD4 >200

Note some combination vaccines may allow for fewer doses to be administered (such as for combination vaccines containing DTaP and Hib; followed recommended schedule of product)
*MMR vaccine and varicella vaccine should only be administered to children age 1-­5 yr with absolute CD4 count >500 sustained for 6 mo and children >5 yr with CD4 count >200
sustained for 6 mo (or CD4% >15% if absolute count unavailable). MMRV is contraindicated in HIV-­infected children. For immune-­reconstituted children can consider giving second
MMR and varicella vaccines 1-­3 mo after first dose as long as criteria are met.
†Inactivated influenza vaccine should be used in ages ≥6 mo.
‡COVID-­19 vaccination is recommended for HIV-­infected children and should be given per the pediatric recommendations, including boosters starting at 6 mo of age.
§PCV15 or PCV20 can be used.
ǁPPSV23 is given and boosted at 5 years; If PCV20 is given, PPSV23 optional. PPSV23 must be given 8 weeks after PCV given.
¶MCV4 (quadrivalent conjugate vaccine) should be administered starting 24 mo with 2-­dose series 8 wk apart. Must be given at least 4 wk after completion of PCV13 series. Booster
recommended at 5 years. Meningococcal B conjugate vaccine also should be considered.
**HPV vaccine should be given in a 3-­shot series at 0, 1-­2 mo, 6 mo (minimum intervals 4 wk from dose 1 to 2, 12 wk from dose 2 to 3 with minimum of 5 mo between doses 1 and 3).
HIV patients require 3 shots regardless of age series is started.
††Rotavirus vaccine has not been well studied in infants with HIV infection. It should be given to low-­risk exposed infants. For infected infants, use caution particularly in those with
significant immunosuppression. If given, series must be started before 15 wk of age and completed by 8 mo of age.
‡‡Dengue vaccination is recommended for children 9-­16 yr living in endemic areas of dengue who have laboratory confirmed dengue at 0, 6 mo, 12 mo. It should not be given if CD4
<200. It is not recommended for children traveling to dengue-­endemic areas.
Current vaccine schedule with recommendations for immunocompromised populations can be found here (updated annually): https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/downloads/
child/0-­18yrs-­child-­combined-­schedule.pdf.

m2/day of SMX (maximum: 320/1,600 mg) given as 1-­2 daily doses 3
days (consecutively or every other day) per week or daily if preferred
for ease of adherence. For severe adverse reactions to TMP-­SMX,
alternative therapies include dapsone, atovaquone, and aerosolized
pentamidine.
Prophylaxis against MAC should be offered to HIV-­infected children with advanced immunosuppression (i.e., CD4 lymphocyte count
<750 cells/μL in children <1 year of age, <500 cells/μL in children 1-­2
year of age, <75 cells/μL in children 2-­5 years of age, and <50 cells/μL
in children >6 years of age) (see Table 322.6). The drugs of choice are
azithromycin (20 mg/kg [maximum: 1,200 mg] once a week orally or
5 mg/kg [maximum: 250 mg] once daily orally) or clarithromycin (7.5

mg/kg twice daily orally). In rare situations, rifabutin 300 mg daily can
be an alternative for children >6 years of age, though efficacy data in
children is very limited.
Based on data for adults, primary prophylaxis against most opportunistic infections may be discontinued if patients have experienced sustained (>6 months’ duration) immune reconstitution with cART, even
if they had previous opportunistic infections such as Pneumocystis
pneumonia or disseminated MAC. HIV-­infected children are at higher
risk for TB and thus should have tuberculin skin testing (5 tuberculin
units purified protein derivation [PPD]) or IFN-­γ release assay (IGRA)
testing for TB annually; an induration of ≥5 mm should be considered
positive for the PPD. IGRA is preferred in children with history of BCG

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

2111

Table 322.5  Recommendations for Pneumocystis jiroveci Pneumonia Prophylaxis and CD4 Monitoring for HIV-­Exposed
Infants and HIV-­Infected Children, by Age and HIV Infection Status
AGE/HIV INFECTION STATUS

PJP PROPHYLAXIS

CD4 MONITORING

Birth to 4-­6 wk, HIV-­exposed

No prophylaxis

None

HIV infection reasonably excluded*

No prophylaxis

None

<1 yr, HIV-­infected or HIV-­indeterminate

Prophylaxis regardless of CD4 count or
percentage

According to local practice for initiation or
follow-­up of cART

1-­5 yr, HIV-­infected

Prophylaxis if CD4 <500 cells/μL or <15%†

According to local practice for initiation or
follow-­up of cART

>6 yr, HIV-­infected

Prophylaxis if CD4 <200 cells/μL or <15%†,‡

According to local practice for initiation or
follow-­up of cART

The National Perinatal HIV Hotline (1-­888-­448-­8765) provides consultation on all aspects of perinatal HIV care.
*See text.
†More frequent monitoring (e.g., monthly) is recommended for children whose CD4 counts or percentages are approaching the threshold at which prophylaxis is recommended.
‡Prophylaxis should be considered on a case-­by-­case basis for children who might otherwise be at risk for PJP, such as children with rapidly declining CD4 counts or percentages or

children with category C conditions. Children who have had PJP should receive PJP prophylaxis until their CD4 count is ≥200 cells/mm3 for patients age ≥6 yr, CD4 percentage is
≥15% or CD4 count is ≥500 cells/mm3 for patients age 1 to <6 yr for >3 consecutive mo after receiving cART for ≥6 mo.
cART, Combined antiretroviral therapy; PJP, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia.

Table 322.6  Prophylaxis to Prevent First Episode of Opportunistic Infections Among HIV-­Exposed and HIV-­Infected Infants
and Children, United States*
PREVENTIVE REGIMEN
PATHOGEN

INDICATION

STRONGLY RECOMMENDED AS STANDARD OF CARE
Pneumocystis pneumonia†
HIV-­infected or HIV-­indeterminate
infants age 1-­12 mo; HIV-­infected
children age 1-­5 yr with CD4
count of <500 cells/μL or CD4
percentage of <15%; HIV-­infected
children age 6-­12 yr with CD4
count of <200 cells/μL or CD4
percentage of <15%; >13 yr with
CD4 count <200 or <15%

Malaria

Living or traveling to area in which
malaria is endemic

FIRST CHOICE

ALTERNATIVE

TMP-­SMX, 150/750 mg/m2 body
surface area per day or 5-­10 mg/
kg/day (TMP)/25-­50 mg/kg/day
(SMX) (max: 320/1,600 mg) orally
qd or bid 3 times weekly on
consecutive days
Or
qd or bid orally 3 times weekly on
alternate days

Dapsone: age ≥ 1 mo: 2 mg/kg (max:
100 mg) orally qd; or 4 mg/kg (max:
200 mg) orally once a week
Atovaquone: age 1-­3 mo and >24
mo-­12 yr: 30 mg/kg orally qd with
food
Age 4-­24 mo: 45 mg/kg orally qd
with food; ≥13 yr 1,500 mg orally
qd with food
Aerosolized pentamidine: age
≥5 yr: 300 mg once a month
by Respirgard II (Marquest,
Englewood, CO) nebulizer

Same for HIV-­infected and HIV-­
uninfected children. Refer to
http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/
for the most recent
recommendations. Mefloquine,
5 mg/kg orally 1 time weekly
(max: 250 mg)
Atovaquone/proguanil
(Malarone) qd
11-­20 kg: 62.5 mg/25 mg (1
pediatric tablet)
21-­30 kg: 2 pediatric tablets
31-­40 kg: 3 pediatric tablets
>40 kg: 1 adult tablet
(250 mg/100 mg)

Doxycycline, 2.2 mg/kg body weight
(maximum 100 mg) orally qd for
children >8 yr
Chloroquine, 5 mg/kg base (equal
7.5 mg/kg chloroquine phosphate)
orally up to 300 mg weekly (only
for regions where the parasite is
sensitive)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2112 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.6  Prophylaxis to Prevent First Episode of Opportunistic Infections Among HIV-­Exposed and HIV-­Infected Infants
and Children, United States*—cont’d
PREVENTIVE REGIMEN
PATHOGEN

INDICATION

FIRST CHOICE

ALTERNATIVE

TST reaction ≥5 mm
Or
Prior positive TST result without
treatment
Or
Positive interferon-­γ release assay
(IGRA) result
Or
Close contact with any person who
has contagious TB. TB disease
must be excluded before start of
prophylaxis

Age ≥12 yr: 12 doses of weekly
isoniazid (15 mg/kg rounded
up to the nearest 50 or 100 mg;
max 900 mg) and rifapentine:
10–14.0 kg: 300 mg
14.1–25.0 kg: 450 mg
25.1–32.0 kg: 600 mg
32.1–49.9 kg: 750 mg
≥50.0 kg: max 900 mg

Rifampin, 15-­20 mg/kg body weight
(max: 600 mg) orally daily for 4 mo
Isoniazid 10–15 mg/kg (max 300 mg)
daily and rifampin 10–20 mg/kg
(max 300 mg/day) for 3 mo
Isoniazid 10-15 mg/kg body weight
(max 300 mg) daily for 6-9 mo

Isoniazid-­resistant

Same as previous pathogen;
increased probability of exposure
to isoniazid-­resistant TB

Rifampin, 10-­20 mg/kg body
weight (max: 600 mg) orally daily
for 4 mo

Multidrug-­resistant (isoniazid
and rifampin)

Same as previous pathogen;
increased probability of exposure
to multidrug-­resistant TB

Choice of drugs requires
consultation with public health
authorities and depends on
susceptibility of isolate from
source patient

Mycobacterium avium
complex‡

For children age ≥6 yr with CD4
count of <50 cells/μL; age 2 to
<6 yr with CD4 count of <75
cells/μL; age 1 to <2 yr with CD4
count of <500 cells/μL; age <1 yr
with CD4 count of <750 cells/μL

Clarithromycin, 7.5 mg/kg (max:
500 mg) orally bid
Or
Azithromycin, 20 mg/kg (max:
1,200 mg) orally once a week

Azithromycin, 5 mg/kg body weight
(max: 250 mg) orally qd
Or
Children age ≥5 yr
Rifabutin, 300 mg orally qd

Varicella-­zoster virus§

Exposure to varicella or shingles
with no history of varicella
Or
Zoster or seronegative status for VZV
Or
Lack of evidence for age-­
appropriate vaccination

Varicella-­zoster immunoglobulin
(VariZIG), 125 IU/10 kg (max:
625 IU) IM, administered ideally
within 96 hr after exposure;
potential benefit up to 10 days
after exposure

If VariZIG is not available and <96 hr
from exposure, acyclovir 20 mg/
kg (max: 800 mg) 4 times a day
for 7 days starting 7-10 days
postexposure
Or
IVIG, 400 mg/kg, administered once

Vaccine-­preventable
pathogens

Standard recommendations for
HIV-­exposed and HIV-­infected
children

Routine vaccinations (see
Table 322.4)

Seropositive IgG to Toxoplasma and
severe immunosuppression: age
<6 yr with CD4 percentage <15%;
age ≥6 yr with CD4 count <100
cells/μL

TMP-­SMX, 150/750 mg/m2 orally
qd or divided bid

Hypogammaglobulinemia (i.e., IgG
<400 mg/dL)

IVIG 400 mg/kg body weight
every 2-­4 wk

Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Isoniazid-­sensitive

USUALLY RECOMMENDED
Toxoplasma gondii¶

Invasive bacterial infections

12 weekly doses of isoniazid (25
mg/kg for children age 2–12 yr)
and rifapentine:
10–14.0 kg: 300 mg
14.1–25.0 kg: 450 mg
25.1–32.0 kg: 600 mg
32.1–49.9 kg: 750 mg
≥50.0 kg: max 900 mg
Or
20-­30 mg/kg body weight
(max: 900 mg) orally 2 times
weekly for 9 mo; DOT highly
recommended
Consult TB expert

Dapsone, age ≥1 mo: 2 mg/kg or
15 mg/m2 (max: 25 mg) orally qd
Plus
Pyrimethamine, 1 mg/kg (max:
25 mg) orally qd
Plus
Leucovorin, 5 mg orally every 3 days
Or
Atovaquone per PJP dosing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

2113

Table 322.6  Prophylaxis to Prevent First Episode of Opportunistic Infections Among HIV-­Exposed and HIV-­Infected Infants
and Children, United States*—cont’d
PREVENTIVE REGIMEN
PATHOGEN

INDICATION

FIRST CHOICE

ALTERNATIVE

Cytomegalovirus

CMV antibody positivity and
severe immunosuppression (CD4
count <50 cells/μL for >6 yr; CD4
percentage <5% for ≤6 yr)

Valganciclovir, 900 mg orally qd
with food for older children who
can receive adult dosing
For children age 4 mo to 16 yr,
valganciclovir oral solution 50
mg/mL at dose in milligrams =
7 × BSA × CrCl (up to maximum
CrCl of 150 mL/min/1.73 m2)
orally qd with food (maximum
dose 900 mg/day)

N/A

*Information in these guidelines might not represent FDA approval or FDA-­approved labeling for products or indications. Specifically, the terms safe and effective might not be
synonymous with the FDA-­defined legal standards for product approval.
†Daily trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) reduces the frequency of certain bacterial infections. Compared with weekly dapsone, daily dapsone is associated with a lower

incidence of PCP but higher hematologic toxicity and mortality rates. Patients receiving therapy for toxoplasmosis with sulfadiazine-­pyrimethamine are protected against PCP and
do not need TMP-­SMX. TMP-­SMX, dapsone-­pyrimethamine, and possibly atovaquone (with or without pyrimethamine), protect against toxoplasmosis; however, data have not
been prospectively collected.
‡Substantial drug interactions can occur between rifamycins (i.e., rifampin and rifabutin) and protease inhibitors and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. A specialist should
be consulted.
§Children routinely being administered intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) should receive VariZIG if the last dose of IVIG was administered more than 21 days before exposure.
¶Protection against toxoplasmosis is provided by the preferred anti-­Pneumocystis regimens and likely by atovaquone.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IM, intramuscularly; IVIG, intravenous
immunoglobulin; PCP, Pneumocystis pneumonia; TB, tuberculosis; TMP-­SMX, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole; TST, tuberculin skin test; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus.
From Panel on Opportunistic Infections in Children with and Exposed to HIV. Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in Children with and Exposed
to HIV. Department of Health and Human Services. Available at https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/pediatric-opportunistic-infection. Table 1: Primary Prophylaxis. Accessed
11/5/23.

vaccination. If the child is living in close contact with a person with
TB, the child should be tested more frequently. Of note, the sensitivity of PPD and IGRA are reduced in severely immunocompromised
patients. The Guidelines for Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections Among HIV-­Exposed and HIV-­Infected Children
(https://www.nih.gov/research-­training/hiv/aids-­info-­center) should
be consulted for these and other opportunistic infections that may
occur in these populations. To reduce the incidence of opportunistic
infections, parents should be counseled about (1) the importance of
good handwashing; (2) avoiding raw or undercooked food (Salmonella); (3) avoiding drinking or swimming in lake or river water or
being in contact with young farm animals (Cryptosporidium); and (4)
the risk of playing with or having certain pets (Toxoplasma and Bartonella from cats, Salmonella from reptiles).

PROGNOSIS

The improved understanding of the pathogenesis of HIV infection
in children and the availability of more effective antiretroviral drugs
has changed the prognosis considerably for children with HIV infection. The earlier cART is started, the better the prognosis. In settings
with ready access to early diagnosis and ART, progression of the disease to AIDS has significantly diminished. Since the advent of cART
in the mid-­1990s, mortality rates in perinatally infected children have
declined more than 90% and most children in high-income settings
survive to adolescence and adulthood. Even with only partial reduction
of the viral load, children may have significant immunologic and clinical benefits. In general, the best prognostic indicators are the sustained
suppression of the plasma viral load and the restoration of a normal
CD4+ lymphocyte count. If determinations of the viral load and CD4
lymphocytes are available, the results can be used to evaluate prognosis. It is unusual to see rapid progression in an infant with a viral load
<100,000 copies/mL. In contrast, a high viral load (>100,000 copies/
mL) over time is associated with a greater risk for disease progression
and death. CD4 count is also another prognostic indicator with mortality rate significantly higher in profoundly immunosuppressed individuals. To define the prognosis more accurately, the use of changes in
both markers (CD4 lymphocyte percentage and plasma viral load) is
recommended.
Even in resource-­limited settings where cART and molecular diagnostic tests are less available, the use of cART has had a substantial

benefit on the survival of HIV-­infected children and has reduced the
likelihood of mortality by >75%. Children with opportunistic infections
(e.g., Pneumocystis pneumonia, MAC), encephalopathy and regressing
developmental milestones, or wasting syndrome, which are all AIDS-­
defining conditions, have the worst prognosis, with 75% dying before
3 years of age. A higher risk of death was documented in children who
did not receive TMP-­SMX preventive therapy. Persistent fever and/or
oral thrush, serious bacterial infections (meningitis, pneumonia, sepsis), hepatitis, persistent anemia (<8 g/dL), and/or thrombocytopenia
(<100,000/μL) also suggest a poor outcome, with >30% of such children dying before 3 years of age. In contrast, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis, and parotitis
are associated with a slower progression of disease and a better prognosis. With sustained virologic suppression and maintained immunologic
function, life expectancy is quite good. Unfortunately, access to cART
for children in resource-­limited settings lags greatly behind access for
adults even today. For adults and adolescents acquiring HIV, effective
cART can restore life expectancy to near normal.

PREVENTION
Parental Treatment and Infant Prophylaxis

Use of ART for interruption of perinatal transmission has been one
of the greatest achievements of HIV research. cART is documented to
decrease the rate of perinatal HIV-­1 transmission to <2%, and to <1% if
the person with HIV has a viral RNA level <1,000 copies/mL at delivery.
Therefore it is recommended that all pregnant individuals be tested
for HIV, and if they are positive, be treated with a cART regimen,
irrespective of the viral load or CD4 count during pregnancy. All
infants born to HIV-­infected individuals should receive zidovudine
prophylaxis; duration is determined by risk status, with 2-­4 weeks
for low-­risk infants and 6 weeks for high-­risk infants (Table 322.7).
Additional antiretroviral drugs should be added to zidovudine if the
risk of acquiring HIV by the newborn is high. High-­risk scenarios
include infants born to individuals who received neither antepartum
nor intrapartum antiretroviral drugs or only intrapartum antiretroviral
drugs, who do not achieve a suppressed viral load near delivery despite
cART (defined as at least two consecutive tests with HIV RNA <50 copies/mL obtained at least 4 weeks apart), who have acute or primary HIV
infection during the pregnancy, who have unknown HIV status who
test positive at delivery or postpartum, or infants who have a positive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2114 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.7  Intrapartum and Neonatal Management for HIV Exposed Infants by Risk Category
RISK OF PERINATAL HIV
TRANSMISSION

INTRAPARTUM AND NEONATAL ART
MANAGEMENT

DEFINITION
Infants ≥37 weeks gestation who are born to a person with
HIV who meets ALL of the following criteria:
• Is currently receiving and has received at least 10
consecutive weeks of ART during pregnancy
• Has achieved and maintained or maintained viral
suppression† for the remainder of the pregnancy
• Has a viral load <50 copies/mL at or after 36 wk
• Did not have acute HIV infection during pregnancy
• Has reported good ART adherence, and adherence
concerns have not been identified

No IV AZT* required in labor
Vaginal delivery
Prophylaxis with zidovudine × 2 wk

Infants born to a person with HIV who do not meet the
criteria above but who have a HIV RNA <‍50 copies/mL at
or after 36 wk gestation

No IV AZT* required in labor
Vaginal delivery
ZDV for 4-­6 wk

Premature infants (<37 wk gestation) who are not at high
risk of perinatal acquisition of HIV

No IV AZT* required in labor
Vaginal delivery
ZDV for 4-­6 wk

High risk

Infants who are born to a person with HIV who meet ANY
of the following criteria:
• Did not receive cART antepartum or received only
intrapartum therapy
• Did not achieve viral suppression* within 4 wk before
delivery
• Had acute or primary HIV infection during the
pregnancy or breastfeeding (in the case of the latter,
breastfeeding should be immediately discontinued [see
text])

Parent should get IV AZT in labor if viral load >1000
or unknown
C-­section if viral load >1000 or unknown
Presumptive HIV therapy regimen × 6 wk with either
• Zidovudine, lamivudine, and nevirapine*
• Zidovudine, lamivudine and raltegravir*
for up to 6 wk
Alternate regimen:
• Zidovudine × 6 wk + 3-­dose nevirapine protocol
In all cases, duration of zidovudine should be for 6 wk
if other 2 medications are discontinued before that
time point.

Presumed newborn HIV
exposure

Infants born to a person with HIV who:
• Have unconfirmed HIV status with at least one positive
HIV test in labor or during delivery/postpartum period
• Have a newborn with positive HIV antibody test at
delivery

Same as for high risk
If supplemental testing confirms person giving birth
does not have HIV, infant ARV drugs should be
discontinued immediately.

Low risk (3 defined groups)

*Due to resistance of HIV-­2 to NNRTIs, raltegravir regimen should be considered for high-­risk infants born to individuals with HIV-­2.
†See Table 322.3 for dosing.
Adapted from Recommendations for the Use of Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy and Interventions to Reduce Perinatal HIV transmission in the United States. http://aidsinfo.nih.
gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/PerinatalGL.pdf.

HIV antibody test on screening after delivery. In these scenarios, three
regimen options can be considered: (1) a presumptive HIV therapy
regimen of zidovudine, lamivudine, and nevirapine at treatment doses;
(2) a presumptive HIV therapy regimen of zidovudine, lamivudine,
and raltegravir at treatment doses; or (3) zidovudine plus the addition
of three doses of nevirapine (at birth, 48 hours, and 144 hours of life)
(see Table 322.7). Note that treatment doses of raltegravir for neonates
are different than for older children, with an escalating dose over the 6
weeks of therapy because of evolving liver metabolism in neonates. For
infants at high risk, options 1 and 2 are now preferred, though option 3
has excellent data supporting it for select patient scenarios. Enthusiasm
and support for treatment regimens (particularly option 1) have been
driven by a case of an apparent functional cure in an infant in 2013 who
went 2 years without cART with virologic suppression before rebound
of the infection occurred (the Mississippi baby), as well as a large
cohort of high-­risk, exposed infants in Canada. For neonates, experience is greatest with zidovudine, which can cause transient anemia or
neutropenia in exposed infants. There is also a strong pool of data supporting the safety of lamivudine in neonates, including neonates born
as early as 32 weeks’ gestational age (GA). For the remaining drugs for
treatment of infants at high risk, data are most robust for nevirapine,
with dosing recommendations down to 32 weeks’ GA. Data for raltegravir are more limited, supporting use only in newborns 37 weeks’
GA and up. In infants at high risk, consultation with an experienced HIV

specialist is highly recommended. The National Perinatal HIV Hotline
(1-­888-­448-­8765) provides 24/7 support from experienced HIV specialists to help in managing high-­risk infants. Guidelines and current recommended doses for prophylaxis in newborns are updated at least yearly
and can be accessed at https://www.nih.gov/research-­training/hiv/aids-­
info-­center. A complete blood count, differential leukocyte count, and
platelet count should be performed at 4-­8 weeks of age to monitor
zidovudine toxicity. If the child is found to be HIV infected, baseline
laboratory assessment (e.g., CD4 count, HIV RNA, complete blood
count, chemistries, lipids, and genotype) should be obtained and cART
should be started as soon as possible. Cesarean section as a prevention strategy was examined in a multinational meta-­analysis, which
showed that the combination of elective C-­section and parental zidovudine treatment reduced transmission by 87%. However, these data
were obtained before the advent of cART, and the additional benefit
of elective C-­section to the cART-­treated individual whose viral load
is <1,000 copies/mL is negligible. Thus elective C-­section at 38 weeks
of gestation should be considered only for pregnant individuals whose
viral load is >1,000 copies/mL in late gestation, to further reduce the
risk of vertical transmission.
Because perinatal transmission can be reduced dramatically by
treating pregnant individuals, prenatal testing and identification of
HIV-­1 infection as early as possible is extremely important. The benefit
of therapy both for the individual’s health and to prevent transmission

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 322 u Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
to the infant cannot be overemphasized. The recommended universal
prenatal HIV counseling and testing for all pregnant individuals has
reduced the number of new infections dramatically in many areas of
the United States and Europe. For those not tested during pregnancy,
the use of rapid HIV antibody testing during labor or shortly after the
infant’s birth is a way to provide perinatal prophylaxis to an additional
group of at-­risk infants. Perinatal recommendations also now endorse
the testing of pregnant individuals’ partners to identify partners with
HIV who may transmit HIV infection to them, leading to acute HIV
infection, which carries an extremely high risk of vertical transmission
both intrapartum and postpartum if the individual is breastfeeding and
seroconverts.

Feeding of the HIV-­Exposed Infant: Breastfeeding
Recommendations and Prophylaxis

It is universally recommended that all pregnant individuals receive a
cART regimen appropriate for their own health, which should be continued for the remainder of their lives. This approach improves parental survival, lowers the transmission risk to sexual partners, promotes
simplified universal treatment regimens, and reduces transmission
during breastfeeding and future pregnancies.
Breastfeeding has been recommended for infants born to individuals
with HIV in resource-­limited settings by the WHO and other authorities for nearly 2 decades. This recommendation was based on strong
evidence that early weaning is not safe in resource-­limited settings
because of the high risk of death from malnutrition and diarrhea in
formula-­fed infants without a consistent source of clean water and formula. Furthermore, exclusive breastfeeding (no additional solids or fluids other than water) resulted in less transmission than mixed feeding.
Guidelines evolved to recommend that HIV-­infected persons living in
resource-­limited settings should breastfeed their infants until at least
12 months of age, with exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months,
and cART should continue to be provided to the breastfeeding parent.
Data from multiple large studies of this practice in low-­and middle-­
income countries have shown suppressive parental cART is extremely
effective in preventing transmission of HIV via breastfeeding to
<1%. Additionally, there have been a series of smaller case series in
resource-­rich settings with individuals on suppressive cART breastfeeding with no transmission documented. However, it is important
to stress that the rate of transmission even for fully suppressed HIV-­
infected breastfeeding individuals is not zero. Because of this data, in
January 2023, the guidelines in the U.S. for recommended infant feeding have significantly changed for feeding of the HIV-­exposed infant.
These recommendations were made for several reasons:
• Recognition of the very low risk of transmission from virologically
suppressed individuals.
• Recognition of the benefits of breastfeeding to both the infant (improved immune status, lower risk of developing asthma, obesity,
type 1 diabetes, severe lower respiratory disease, otitis media, sudden infant death syndrome, gastrointestinal infections, and necrotizing enterocolitis) and breastfeeding parent (decreased risk of hypertension; type 2 diabetes; breast, endometrial, and ovarian cancers;
bonding with infant; decreased monetary costs of feeding).
• Recognition that pregnant individuals living with HIV in the United
States are disproportionately Black, a group that has significantly higher
prevalence of many of these negative health outcomes as well and that
prohibiting breastfeeding in this group denies them potential benefit.
• Recognition of important cultural pressures that may affect the desire to breastfeed and fear that by not breastfeeding, HIV status may
be inadvertently disclosed to family and friends.
• Recognition that some individuals living with HIV in the past who
were prohibited from breastfeeding did so surreptitiously without
support that could have decreased risk to infant.
It is now recommended that expectant individuals with HIV should
receive evidence-­based, patient-­centered counseling regarding infant
feeding starting early, ideally before conception or in early pregnancy.
The provider should engage in open-­minded shared decision making in discussing the decision to breastfeed or formula feed the infant
throughout the pregnancy. Key points of counseling should include:

2115

• Achieving and maintaining viral suppression through ART during
pregnancy and postpartum decreases breastfeeding transmission
risk to less than 1%, but not zero.
• Replacement feeding with properly prepared formula or pasteurized
donor human milk from a milk bank eliminates the risk of postnatal
HIV transmission to the infant. This is the recommended feeding
choice for individuals living with HIV who do not have suppressed
viral load through the third trimester and at delivery given the significantly increased risk of HIV transmission to the infant.
• Individuals with HIV who are on cART with a sustained undetectable viral load and who choose to breastfeed will be supported in this
decision.
• Individuals with HIV who choose to formula feed should also be
supported in their decision, and potential barriers should be addressed.
It is important to stress that engaging Child Protective Services
or similar agencies is not an appropriate response to infant feeding
choices of an individual living with HIV. This puts an important therapeutic relationship at risk for both the individual and the infant, can
result in harm to families, and can further exacerbate the stigma and
discrimination that individuals living with HIV face.
The risk of HIV transmission via breastmilk for individuals on suppressive cART (<50) is <1%. There are ways to make risk of transmission as low as possible in this scenario, including providing excellent
parental support such as addressing resource needs, mental health,
and helping promote cART adherence. The postpartum period is a
time of high risk for developing nonadherence to cART because of the
stress of child-­raising, lack of sleep, potential postpartum depression
(PPD) and other factors. Individuals living with HIV who give birth
have significantly higher rates of PPD that is associated with significant rise in cART nonadherence, so early screening and treatment of
PPD is critical. Support of a lactation specialist is also important to
help establish and maintain good milk supply so that mixed feeding
can be minimized and to promote good breast health and avoidance
of milk stasis, bleeding nipples, and mastitis. In the pre cART era,
mixed feeding (i.e., introduction of breast milk plus other liquid or
solid foods, including formula) was associated with increased risk
of transmission of HIV, particularly in the first 2 months of life; no
data are available in this area (including just formula supplementation) in the context of cART and virologic suppression. Because of
this historical data, the goal is exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months
to minimize risk.
It is recommended that individuals with HIV who are breastfeeding/chestfeeding have HIV RNA testing every 1-­2 months to monitor virologic suppression closely. For the breastfed infant, the initial
testing schedule is dictated by risk of infant at birth. Additionally, the
breastfed infant should receive testing at 1-­2 months and 4-­6 months
to avoid an interval of >3 months between tests, and every 3 months
after the 4-­to 6-­month test for as long as breastfeeding continues. It
is recommended to avoid rapid weaning, with a goal of weaning over
2-­4 weeks because of pre-­cART data associating rapid weaning with
increased risk of HIV transmission to the infant. Infants should be
tested 4-­6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months after weaning is complete
(see Fig. 322.4).
Several studies demonstrate the efficacy of ART prophylaxis of the
breastfed infant in preventing transmission of HIV during breastfeeding in the era before cART being recommended for all pregnant individuals and in some studies in which pregnant individuals received
cART but did not have viral load routinely monitored. Successful
regimens have included daily single-­dose nevirapine (NVP), lamivudine (3TC), lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r), and a combined NVP + ADV
regimen. For infants at low risk, it is not clear whether additional prophylaxis during breastfeeding after the initial prophylaxis of 2-­6 weeks
adds additional benefit; that said, some experts choose to provide prophylaxis for infants at low risk. In the scenario in which an individual
with HIV who is not virologically suppressed elects to breastfeed after
counseling despite recommendations not to do so because of increased
risk, it is recommended that the infant receive 6 weeks of three-­drug
presumptive HIV therapy (high risk), and then daily NVP throughout

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2116 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 322.8  Infant Antiretroviral Prophylaxis for
Newborns of Individuals Who Breastfeed
NEWBORNS AT LOW RISK OF HIV ACQUISITION DURING
BREASTFEEDING*
RECOMMENDED REGIMEN

DURATION

ZDV

2 wk

EXTENDED POSTNATAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR NEWBORNS AT
HIGH RISK OF HIV TRANSMISSION DURING BREASTFEEDING*
RECOMMENDED REGIMEN

DURATION

ZDV

4-­6 wk*

NVP†

SIMPLIFIED AGE-­BASED
DOSING FOR NEWBORNS ≥32
WK GESTATION RECEIVING
EXTENDED NVP PROPHYLAXIS
DURING BREASTFEEDING‡

AGE

VOLUME NVP
MG/ML ORAL
SYRUP DAILY

6 wk to 6 mo

2 mL

6 mo to 9 mo

3 mL

9 mo to 1-­4 wk
post weaning

4 mL

*This extended neonatal prophylaxis regimen is optional for low-­risk infants, though
recommended by some experts. For high-­risk breastfed infants (parent not
virologically suppressed), 6 wk of ZDV (plus additional agents as recommended in
Table 322.7) followed by extended neonatal NVP prophylaxis is recommended.
†For breastfeeding parents with viral resistance to NVP, alternative regimens for infant
prophylaxis after completion of the 4-­6 wk of presumptive HIV therapy include daily
3TC or LPV/r; see Table 322.3 Antiretroviral Drug Dosing Recommendations for
Newborns for dosing information.
‡Extended NVP prophylaxis during breastfeeding recommendations are adapted from
the Consolidated Guidelines on HIV Prevention, Testing, Treatment, Service Delivery
and Monitoring: Recommendations for a Public Health Approach. If prescribed, these
simplified doses should start following confirmation of a negative infant NAT test
and completion of a presumptive HIV therapy regimen in infants at high risk of HIV
acquisition. For infants at low risk of transmission, these doses can be given from birth.
World Health Organization. Consolidated guidelines on HIV prevention, testing,
treatment, service delivery and monitoring: recommendations for a public health
approach. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2021. Table A1.7. Available at https://
www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240031593. (Accessed 5 Nov 2023)

breastfeeding and for 1-­4 weeks after weaning to further mitigate risk
of HIV transmission (Table 322.8).
HIV-­negative breastfeeding individuals with a sexual partner with
HIV should also be monitored closely for developing HIV infection,
because acute infection during breastfeeding carries a high risk of
transmission to the infant (29–53%). It is recommended that these
individuals consider preexposure prevention (PrEP) (see later) and
practice barrier protection consistently to decrease risk of acute HIV
infection during the breastfeeding period and educated on the signs
and symptoms of acute HIV infection. They should also be tested
every 1-­2 months for seroconversion; if they become positive, breastfeeding should cease, and the infant should be placed on a high-­risk
three-­drug presumptive HIV therapy regimen for 28 days and tested
per the high-­risk schedule with start point at time of cessation of
breastfeeding.
Risk of transmission of HIV goes up considerably if virologic suppression in the breastfeeding parent is compromised. Therefore frequent HIV RNA (viral load) monitoring is recommended so that if
there is virologic rebound, risk can be mitigated. In the scenario that
viral load becomes detectable in the breastfeeding parent, it is recommended that the parent stop breastfeeding the infant immediately;
milk can be pumped and discarded to maintain supply. The individual should be provided counseling regarding adherence, support,
and resources, and discussion of whether to cease breastfeeding altogether or continue given the risk of HIV transmission to the infant

should occur. Other scenarios that would require either modifying or
stopping breastfeeding (in some cases temporarily) include cracked
or bleeding nipples and mastitis. In these conditions, breastfeeding can continue on the unaffected side, and milk from the affected
side should be pumped and discarded until the breast is fully healed
and recovered. Again, having an experienced lactation consultant
involved in the care of these individuals is critical. Clinicians are
strongly encouraged to consult the national Perinatal HIV/AIDS hotline (1-­888-­448-­8765) with questions about infant feeding by individuals with HIV; the hotline provides 24/7 support from experienced
HIV specialists to help in managing infants at high risk. U.S. guidelines for prevention of vertical transmission are regularly updated at
https://www.nih.gov/research-­training/hiv/aids-­info-­center/ and the
international guidelines are regularly updated at the WHO website
(https://www.who.int/health-­topics/hiv-­aids#tab=tab_1).

Prevention of Sexual Transmission: Preexposure
Prophylaxis and Postexposure Prevention

Prevention of sexual transmission involves avoiding the exchange of
bodily fluids. In sexually active adolescents, barrier protection (male and
female condoms) should be an integral part of programs to reduce sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV-­1. Unprotected sex with older
partners, multiple partners, transactional sex, and the use of recreational
drugs can be associated with acquisition of HIV-­1 infection in adolescents and young adults. Educational efforts about avoidance of risk factors and safer sex practices are essential for older school-­age children and
adolescents and should begin well before the onset of sexual activity. In
addition, promising research for sexually active adults may translate to
increased prevention for adolescents. Three African trials demonstrated
that male circumcision was associated with a 50–60% reduction in the
risk of HIV acquisition in young men. For females, use of a 1% vaginal
gel formulation of tenofovir during intercourse was found to reduce HIV
acquisition by nearly 40% in one study, though subsequent trials have
had variable efficacy; other topical microbicides are being investigated.
An increasingly important tool for HIV prevention is PrEP using once-­
daily dosing of co-­formulated tenofovir and emtricitabine, approved for
adolescents and adults weighing at least 35 kg (77 lb). The efficacy of PrEP
in preventing sexual acquisition of HIV in MSM, heterosexual couples,
and individuals in noncommitted relationships ranges from 70–92%. A
depo injectable PrEP option (cabotegravir) dosed every 8 weeks is now
approved for adults and adolescents ≥12 years weighing at least 35 kg (77
lb). large randomized multinational clinical trials of HIV serodiscordant
adults have demonstrated that effective cART therapy in the HIV-­infected
partner essentially eliminates secondary sexual transmission to an uninfected sexual partner, creating the catchphrase “U = U” or “undetectable
= untransmittable.” The data from these trials can likely be extrapolated
for youth with long-­standing virologic suppression.
Postexposure prevention (PEP) is another important tool in HIV
prevention and has been used in healthcare workers after needlesticks
and body substance exposures. It can also be effective after a single
high-­risk event (including unprotected sexual activity, high-­risk sexual assault, and intravenous drug use/needle sharing). PEP should be
given as soon as possible after the high-­risk exposure, ideally within
24 hours and at the latest within 72 hours of the exposure to have efficacy. Efficacy is higher the sooner it is given. Baseline testing should
be performed at the time PEP is started, but initial doses should not
be delayed for laboratory test results. Baseline testing includes HIV
antigen/antibody testing (fourth-­
generation HIV ELISA), hepatitis B and C testing (because most high-­risk exposures have risk of
transmission of these as well), serum creatinine, and alanine aminotransferase (ALT). If a patient is hepatitis B immune (including
having completed a full hepatitis B vaccine series), hepatitis B testing does not need to be performed. For sexual exposures, gonorrhea,
chlamydia, and syphilis, testing should be done. After completion of
a PEP course, follow-­up testing should be done at 4-­6 weeks and 3
months after exposure. If hepatitis C was transmitted, HIV testing
should be repeated at 6 months as well, because HIV seroconversion can be delayed in patients with co-­infection with hepatitis C.
PEP regimens are three-­drug treatment regimens for 28 days. For

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 323 u Human T-­Cell Leukemia Viruses (1 and 2)
individuals ≥12 years old, generally the preferred regimen consists of
tenofovir DF + emtricitabine with either dolutegravir or raltegravir
(note that dolutegravir allows for a once-­daily regimen). For individuals 2 years old to <12 years old, the preferred regimen is tenofovir
DF + emtricitabine + raltegravir. For those <2 years old the preferred
regimen is zidovudine + lamivudine + raltegravir. In the rare cases
in which the source patient is known to have HIV infection and is in
care, selection can be guided by the source patient’s genotype and/or
treatment history. Abacavir and nevirapine are both contraindicated
for use in PEP.

SUMMARY

The course and prognosis of HIV infection has improved dramatically as
a consequence of cART for all ages, particularly with newer agents with
fewer side effects. With good adherence, patients can achieve prolonged
virologic suppression and immune function can be preserved or reconstituted. However, lifelong adherence and side effects of medications are
important challenges to recognize that can prevent patients from achieving good outcomes. Globally, great strides have been made in preventing vertical transmission and increasing access to cART for children and
adults, which is important for maintaining health as well as driving down
sexual and vertical transmission with virologic suppression. However,
there is still much work to be done to ensure the end of the global HIV
epidemic, including continued advancement of our understanding of the
immunology of HIV latency and reservoirs, HIV vaccines, and continued increases in access to cART worldwide, particularly in children.
Visit Elsevier Ebooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2117

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND MODES OF TRANSMISSION

HTLV-­1 has infected 15-­20 million persons globally. It is endemic in
southwestern Japan (where >10% of adults are seropositive); areas
of the Caribbean, including Jamaica and Trinidad (up to 6%); and
in parts of sub-­Saharan Africa (up to 5%). Lower seroprevalence
rates are found in South America (up to 2%) and Taiwan (0.1–1%).
There is microclustering with marked variability within geographic
regions.
The seroprevalence of HTLV-­1 and HTLV-­2 in the general population in the United States is 0.01–0.03% for each virus, with higher
rates with increasing age. The prevalence of HTLV-­1 infection is highest in babies born in endemic areas or in persons who have had sexual
contact with persons from endemic areas. The prevalence of HTLV-­2
infection is highest in intravenous drug users, with a seroprevalence of
8.8–17.6% in this population.
HTLV-­
1 and -­
2 are transmitted as cell-­
associated viruses from
mother to child and transmission through genital secretions, contaminated blood products, and intravenous drug use. Mother-­to-­child
transmission during the intrauterine period or peripartum period is
estimated to occur in less than 5% of cases but increases to approximately 20% with breastfeeding. Higher maternal HTLV-­1 proviral
load and prolonged breastfeeding are associated with greater risk of
mother-­
to-­
child transmission. In Japan, approximately 20–25% of
children born to HTLV-­1–infected mothers became infected before
recommendations that seropositive mothers should avoid breastfeeding, with a marked reduction to 2.5% transmission after restriction
of breastfeeding. HTLV-­2 may also be transmitted via breastfeeding,
but it has a slightly lower reported transmission rate via breast milk of
approximately 14%.

DIAGNOSIS

Chapter 323

Human T-­Cell Leukemia
Viruses (1 and 2)
Paul Spearman and Lee Ratner

ETIOLOGY

Human T-­cell leukemia viruses 1 (HTLV-­1) and 2 (HTLV-­2) are members of the Deltaretrovirus genus of the Retroviridae family, which are
single-­stranded RNA viruses that encode reverse transcriptase, an
RNA-­dependent DNA polymerase that transcribes the single-­stranded
viral RNA into a double-­stranded DNA copy. HTLV-­1 was the first
human retrovirus discovered, isolated in 1979 from a cutaneous T-­cell
lymphoma. The closely related virus HTLV-­2 was subsequently identified in 1981. HTLV-­1 is associated with adult T-­cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) and HTLV-­
1–associated myelopathy/tropical spastic
paraparesis (HAM/TSP), whereas HTLV-­2 is less pathogenic and rarely
is associated with neurologic diseases.
HTLV-­1 and -­2 share a genome homology of approximately 65%. The
genome contains gag, pr, pol, and env genes and several nonstructural
genes. The nonstructural proteins include the Tax and Rex regulatory
proteins, the novel proteins essential for virus spread (p30, p12, and p13),
and the antisense-­encoded HTLV-­1 basic leucine zipper factor, HBZ.
HTLV-­1 and -­2 infect cells via the ubiquitous glucose transporter type
or via neuropilin-­1, both of which serve as virus receptors. HTLV-­1 and
-­2 can infect a variety of cells, with HTLV-­1 most often found in CD4+ T
cells and HTLV-­2 showing preference for CD8+ T cells. After viral entry,
reverse transcription produces a double-­stranded DNA copy of the RNA
genome that is transported into the nucleus and integrated into chromosomal DNA (the provirus), evading the typical mechanisms of immune
surveillance and facilitating lifelong infection.

HTLV-­1 and HTLV-­2 infections are diagnosed by screening using a
second-­generation enzyme immunoassay with confirmation by immunoblot, indirect immunofluorescence, or line immunoassays. Polymerase chain reaction can also be used to distinguish HTLV-­1 from
HTLV-­2 infection.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The lifetime risk of disease associated with HTLV-­1 infection is estimated at 5–10% and is highest after vertical transmission. HTLV-­1 is
associated with ATL and several nonmalignant conditions, including
the neurodegenerative disorder HAM, also known as tropical spastic
paraparesis (TSP) and sometimes termed HAM/TSP. The geographic
epidemiologic characteristics of ATL and HAM are similar. HTLV-­1–
associated arthropathy mimics rheumatoid arthritis, including
a positive rheumatoid factor. Treatment is with antiinflammatory
agents. HTLV-­1–associated uveitis may be unilateral or bilateral, is
more common among women, and resolves spontaneously, although
it often recurs within 1-­3 years. Topical corticosteroids hasten recovery. HTLV-­1–associated infective dermatitis is a chronic and recurrent eczematous disease occurring during childhood and adolescence
that predisposes to staphylococcal infection. HTLV-­1 infection predisposes to disseminated and recurrent Strongyloides stercoralis infection,
increased risk of developing tuberculosis disease after latent infection,
and severe scabies.

ADULT T-­CELL LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA

The age distribution of ATL peaks at approximately 50 years, underscoring the long latent period of HTLV-­1 infection. HTLV-­1–infected
persons remain at risk for ATL even if they move to an area of low
HTLV-­1 prevalence, with a lifetime risk for ATL of 2–4%. Most cases
of ATL are associated with monoclonal integration of HTLV-­1 provirus into the cellular genome of CD4+ T lymphocytes, resulting in
unchecked proliferation of CD4 T cells. There is a spectrum of disease
that is categorized into different forms: acute, lymphomatous, chronic,
primary cutaneous smoldering, and primary cutaneous tumoral. The
acute form of ATL comprises 55–75% of all cases. Smoldering subclinical lymphoproliferation may spontaneously resolve in approximately

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2118 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
half of cases or progress to chronic leukemia or lymphomatous, or even
acute ATL. Chronic, low-­grade, HTLV-­1–associated lymphoproliferation (pre-­ATL) may persist for years with abnormal lymphocytes
with or without peripheral lymphadenopathy before progressing to
the acute form. Acute ATL is characterized by hypercalcemia, lytic
bone lesions, lymphadenopathy that spares the mediastinum, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, cutaneous lymphomas, and opportunistic
infections. Leukemia may develop with circulating polylobulated
malignant lymphocytes, called flower cells, possessing mature T-­cell
markers. Antiviral therapy with zidovudine and interferon-­α is the
standard therapy for leukemic-­type ATL in the United States and
Europe. In lymphoma-­type ATL, response rates may be improved
using the anti-­CCR4 monoclonal antibody mogamulizumab with
chemotherapy. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is
sometimes employed.

HUMAN T-­CELL LYMPHOTROPIC VIRUS-­1–
ASSOCIATED MYELOPATHY

HAM is more common in women than in men and has a relatively
short incubation period of 1-­4 years after HTLV-­1 infection, compared with 40-­60 years for ATL. HAM occurs in up to 4% of persons with HTLV-­1 infection, usually developing during middle age.
It is characterized by infiltration of mononuclear cells into the gray
and white matter of the thoracic spinal cord, leading to severe white
matter degeneration and fibrosis. HTLV-­1 is found near but not
directly within the lesions, suggesting that reactive inflammation
is a major mechanism of disease. The cerebrospinal fluid typically
shows a mildly elevated protein and a modest monocytic pleocytosis, along with anti–HTLV-­1 antibodies. Neuroimaging studies are
normal or show periventricular lesions in the white matter. Clinical manifestations include gradual onset of slowly progressive, symmetric neurologic degeneration of the corticospinal tracts and, to a
lesser extent, the sensory system that leads to lower-­extremity spasticity or weakness, lower back pain, and hyperreflexia of the lower
extremities with an extensor plantar response. The bladder and
intestines may become dysfunctional, and men may become impotent. Some patients develop dysesthesias of the lower extremities
with diminished sensation to vibration and pain. Upper-­extremity
function and sensation, cranial nerves, and cognitive function are
usually preserved. Treatment regimens have included corticosteroids, danazol, interferon, plasmapheresis, high-­dose vitamin C,
and antivirals, all with minimal effects. Recent studies examined
the effects of mogamulizumab (anti-­CCR4 antibody) on HAM, but
results are not yet conclusive.

HUMAN T-­CELL LYMPHOTROPIC VIRUS-­2

HTLV-­2 was originally identified in patients with hairy cell leukemia, although most patients with hairy cell leukemia are seronegative
for HTLV-­2 infection. HTLV-­2 has been rarely isolated from patients
with leukemias or with myelopathies resembling HAM, and there
is limited evidence of disease specifically associated with HTLV-­2
infection.

PREVENTION

Routine antibody testing of all blood products for HTLV-­1 and -­2 is
performed in many developed countries and is effective in preventing
blood transfusion–associated infections. Unfortunately, this testing is
not always available in low-­and middle-­income countries with higher
endemicity. Prenatal screening and avoidance of breastfeeding by
HTLV-­1–infected mothers is an effective means of reducing mother-­
to-­child transmission of HTLV-­1. Safe sexual practices to avoid sexually transmitted infections, such as condom use and avoiding multiple
sexual partners, may reduce transmission of both HTLV-­I and HTLV-­
2. No vaccine is available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 324

Transmissible Spongiform
Encephalopathies
David M. Asher and Brian S. Appleby
The transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs, prion diseases) are slow infections of the human nervous system, consisting
of at least four diseases of humans (Table 324.1): kuru; Creutzfeldt-­
Jakob disease (CJD) with its variants—sporadic CJD (sCJD), familial CJD (fCJD—some authorities prefer “genetic” CJD), iatrogenic
CJD (iCJD), and new-­variant or variant CJD (vCJD); Gerstmann-­
Sträussler-­Scheinker syndrome (GSS); and fatal familial insomnia
(FFI), or the even more rare sporadic fatal insomnia syndrome.
sCJD can also be further subdivided based on clinical features—
e.g., Heidenhain variant in which early onset of occipital blindness
is prominent—or differences in characteristics of abnormal prion
protein—e.g., variably protease-­sensitive prionopathy (VPSPr). TSEs
also affect animals. The most common and best-­known TSEs of animals are scrapie in sheep, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE
or mad cow disease) in cattle, and a chronic wasting disease (CWD)
of deer, elk, reindeer, and moose found in parts of the United States,
Canada and, more recently, in Norway, Sweden, and Finland. A TSE
of camels has recently been described in North Africa, and others
might be anticipated. So far, of all the TSEs of animals, only BSE has
proven zoonotic (i.e., transmissible to humans).
All TSEs have similar clinical manifestations and histopathology,
and all are “slow” infections with very long asymptomatic incubation periods (often years), durations of several months or more, and
overt disease affecting only the nervous system. TSEs are relentlessly
progressive after illness begins and invariably fatal. The most striking
neuropathologic change that occurs in each TSE, to a greater or lesser
extent, is vacuolation, sometimes leading to spongy degeneration of
the cerebral cortical gray matter.

ETIOLOGY

The TSEs are transmissible to susceptible animals by inoculation of
suspensions of brain and some other tissues from affected subjects.
Although the infectious agents replicate in a few cell cultures, they
do not achieve the high titers of infectivity found in brain tissues or
cause recognizable cytopathic effects in cultures. Most studies of TSE
agents, before discovery of the prion proteins, used in vivo bioassays,
relying on the transmission of typical neurologic disease to animals
as evidence that the agent was present. Inoculation of susceptible
recipient animals with small amounts of infectious TSE agents results,
months or years later, in the accumulation in tissues of large amounts
of agent having the same physical and biologic properties as the original agent. The TSE agents display a spectrum of extreme resistance
to inactivation by a variety of chemical and physical treatments that
is unknown among conventional pathogens. This characteristic, as
well as their partial resistance to protein-­disrupting treatments and
their consistent association with abnormal isoforms of the normal
host-­encoded “prion” protein (PrP), stimulated the hypothesis that
the TSE agents are probably subviral in size, composed of protein,
and devoid of nucleic acid.
The term prion (for proteinaceous infectious agent), coined by S. B.
Prusiner, is now widely used for such agents. The prion hypothesis proposes that the molecular mechanism by which the pathogen-­specific
information of TSE agents is propagated involves a self-­replicating
change in the folding of host-­encoded PrP associated with a transition

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 324 u Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies

2119

Table 324.1  Clinical and Epidemiologic Features of Human Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (Prion Diseases)
GEOGRAPHIC
DISTRIBUTION
AND PREVALENCE

USEFUL ANCILLARY
TESTS

DURATION OF
ILLNESS

Worldwide; ∼1-­2/1 million/
yr; 85–95% of all CJD
cases in the United
States

EEG-­PSWCs; CSF 14-­
3-­3; RT-­QuIC, MRI/
DWI

1-­24 mo (mean: 4-­
6 mo)

Genetic association (PRNP
pathogenic variants)

Worldwide; geographic
clusters; >100 known
families; 5–15% of CJD
cases

Gene testing; EEG-­
PSWC; CSF 14-­3-­3,
RT-­QuIC, MRI/DWI

Mean ∼15 mo

Incoordination,
dementia (late)

Cadaveric dural grafts,
human pituitary
hormones, corneal
transplantation,
neurosurgical
instruments, EEG depth
electrodes

∼1% of CJD cases
in toto (cadaveric
dural grafts); human
pituitary hormones,
>100 cases; corneal
transplantation, three
cases; neurosurgical
instruments, six
cases, including two
from cortical depth
electrodes; RBC
transfusions, four cases
of vCJD infection, three
clinical, one preclinical
(United Kingdom);
human plasma–derived
factor VIII, one preclinical
case of vCJD (United
Kingdom)

EEG-­PSCW, CSF 14-­
3-­3, RT-­QuIC, MRI/
DWI

18 mo -­ >30 yr

vCJD

Mood and behavioral
abnormalities,
paresthesias,
dementia

Linked to BSE in cattle,
transfusion plasma
products

>230 clinical cases (see
iatrogenic vCJD): none
living, May 2017

Tonsil biopsy may
show PrPTSE MRI/
FLAIR

8-­36 mo (mean 14 mo)

Kuru

Incoordination, ataxia,
tremors, dementia
(late)

Linked to cannibalism

Fore tribe of Papua New
Guinea (∼2,600 known
cases)

EEG-­no PSWCs;
CSF 14-­3-­3 often
negative; MRI (?)

3-­24 mo

GSS

Incoordination, chronic
progressive ataxia,
corticospinal tract
signs, dementia (late),
myoclonus (rare)

90% genetic (PRNP
pathogenic variants)

Worldwide; >50 families;
∼1-­10/100 million/yr

PRNP gene
sequencing

2-­12 yr (mean ∼ 57 mo)

FFI

Disrupted sleep,
intractable insomnia;
autonomic
hyperactivation;
myoclonus, ataxia;
corticospinal tract
signs; dementia

PRNP gene pathogenic
variant (D 178L); very rare
sporadic cases

∼27 families in Europe,
United Kingdom, United
States, Finland, Australia,
China, Japan

PRNP testing;
EEG-­PSWCs only
rarely positive;
MRI-­no DWI
abnormalities; CSF
14-­3-­3 positive in
∼50%

8 mo to 6 yr (mean:
PRNP 129 MM
12 ± 4 mo
129 MV
21 ± 15 mo)

DISEASE

CLINICAL FEATURES

SOURCE OF INFECTION

sCJD

Dementia, myoclonus,
ataxia

Unknown

fCJD

Dementia, myoclonus,
ataxia

iCJD

BSE, Bovine spongiform encephalopathy; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CJD, Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease; DWI, diffusion-­weighted image; fCJD, familial Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease; FFI,
fatal familial insomnia; FLAIR, fluid attenuation inversion recovery MRI; GSS, Gerstmann-­Sträussler-­Scheinker syndrome; iCJD, iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease; PRNP, prion
protein–encoding gene; PrPTSE, abnormal prion protein; PSWCs, periodic sharp wave complexes; RBC, red blood cell; RT-­QuIC, real-­time quaking-­induced conversion; sCJD,
sporadic Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease; vCJD, variant Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease.
NOTE: PRNP 129 MM, homozygous, encoding the amino acid methionine at both codons 129 of the prion protein–encoding (PRNP) gene on chromosome 20; 129 MV, heterozygous
at PRNP codon 129, encoding methionine on one chromosome 20 and valine on the other.
Modified from Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005: p. 2222; Love S, Louis DN, Ellison DW, eds.
Greenfield’s Neuropathology. 8th ed. London: Hodder Arnold; 2008: p. 1239.

from an α-­helix-­rich structure in the native protease-­sensitive conformation (“cellular” PrP or PrPC) to a β-­sheet-­rich structure in the
protease-­resistant conformation associated with infectivity. The existence of a second host-­encoded protein—termed protein X—that participates in the transformation was once postulated to explain certain
otherwise puzzling findings but was never identified.

The prion hypothesis is still not universally accepted; it relies on
the postulated existence of a genome-­like coding mechanism based
on differences in protein folding that have not yet been satisfactorily
elucidated at a molecular level. In addition, it has yet to account convincingly for the many biologic strains of TSE agent that have been
observed, although strain-­specific differences in glycosylation patterns

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2120 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
of abnormal PrP have been proposed as providing a plausible molecular basis for the coding. It fails to explain why pure PrP uncontaminated with nucleic acid from an infected host has not consistently
transmitted a typical spongiform encephalopathy associated with a
serially self-­propagating agent. Also troubling is the fact that abnormal
PrP and infectivity were not consistently associated in several experimental models and human illnesses. Particularly problematic is the
finding that some illnesses associated with pathogenic variants in the
PRNP gene and accompanied by abnormal PrP failed to transmit infection to animals. If the TSE agents ultimately prove to consist of protein
and only protein, with no obligatory nucleic acid component, then
proponents of the prion hypothesis will have been prescient. If the
agents are ultimately found to contain small nucleic acid genomes,
then they might better be considered atypical viruses, for which the
term virino was once suggested. Until the actual molecular structure of the infectious TSE pathogens and the presence or absence
of a nucleic acid genome are rigorously established, it seems acceptable to continue calling them TSE agents (a term that remains
popular among some European authorities). Most U.S. authorities
now prefer the term prion (sometimes referring to the infectious
agents of TSEs and sometimes to abnormal PrP, even when not
transmissible).
The earliest evidence that abnormal proteins are associated with the
TSE was morphologic: scrapie-­associated fibrils (SAFs) were found
by negative-­stain electron microscopy in detergent-­treated extracts
of brain tissues from patients and animals with TSEs but not in
brain tissues of unaffected persons. SAFs resemble but are distinguishable from the amyloid fibrils that accumulate in the brains of
patients with Alzheimer disease. Antigenically related protease-­
resistant PrPs (PrP-­res) proved to be components of SAFs and to
be present in the amyloid plaques found in the brains of patients
and animals with TSEs. The abnormal forms of PrP have been variously designated PrPSc (scrapie-­type PrP), PrP-­res, PrPTSE (TSE-­
associated PrP), or PrPD (also PrPDis, for “disease-­associated” PrP)
by different authorities.
It remains unclear whether abnormal PrP constitutes the complete
infectious particle of spongiform encephalopathies, is a component of
those particles, or is a pathologic host protein not usually separated
from the actual infectious entity by current techniques. The demonstration that PrP is encoded by a normal host gene seemed to favor the
last possibility. (A possible model for mammalian prions was provided
by several studies. The model suggested that agent-­specific pathogenic
information can be transmitted and replicated by different conformations of fungal proteins having the same primary amino acid sequence
without participation of any agent-­specific nucleic acids, although
those transmissions required microinjections and misfolded proteins
were apparently not naturally transmitted to recipient fungi as infectious elements.)
Whatever its relationship to the actual infectious TSE particles,
PrP clearly plays a central role in susceptibility to infection, because
the normal PrP must be expressed in mice and cattle to infect them.
Furthermore, inherited normal variations (genetic polymorphisms)
in PrP genotype are associated with increased susceptibility to vCJD
and, to a lesser extent, to sCJD and with occurrence of two familial
TSEs (fCJD and GSS). PrPs are glycoproteins that have the physical properties of amyloid proteins when misfolded and aggregated
into protease-­resistant PrPTSE. The PrPs of different species of animals are very similar in their amino acid sequences and antigenicity but are not identical in structure. The primary structure of PrP is
encoded by the host and is not altered by the source of the infectious
agent provoking its formation. The function of the normal ubiquitous
protease-­sensitive PrP precursor (designated either PrPC or PrP-­sen,
for protease-­sensitive PrP, by different authorities) in normal cells is
unknown; it binds copper and may play some role in normal synaptic
transmission but is not required to sustain life or for relatively normal
cerebral function in mice and cattle. As noted, animals must express
PrP to develop overt TSE as well as to support replication of the TSE

agents. The degree of homology between amino acid sequences of
PrPs in different animal species may correlate with a “species barrier”
that affects susceptibility of animals of one species to infection with
a TSE agent adapted to grow in another species, although the degree
of sequence homology does not always predict susceptibility to the
same TSE agent.
Attempts to find particles resembling those of known viruses or
virus-­like agents in brain tissues of humans or animals with spongiform encephalopathies have been unsuccessful. Peculiar tubulovesicular structures reminiscent of some viruses have been seen repeatedly in
thin sections of TSE-­infected brain tissues and cultured cells but not in
normal brain cells; it has never been established that those structures
are associated with infectivity.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Kuru once affected many children of both sexes ≥4 years of age, adolescents, and young adults (mainly women) living only in a limited area
of Papua New Guinea. The complete disappearance of kuru among
people born after 1957 suggests that the practice of ritual cannibalism
(thought to have ended that year) was probably the only mechanism by
which the infection spread in Papua New Guinea. The probable incubation periods of some cases of kuru have exceeded 50 years. Kuru has
not been diagnosed since 2005.
sCJD is the most common human spongiform encephalopathy.
Most countries with surveillance for CJD have identified between one
and two cases of sCJD per million total population per year (0.25-­2
cases per million population, not age-­adjusted). That figure is somewhat misleading in that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has estimated the lifetime risk of sCJD in the United States
to be as many as 1 in 6,000 persons, taking into account the number
of recognized iCJD cases attributed to use of cadaveric pituitary hormones, typical advanced age of CJD cases at onset, and probable incubation periods of decades. sCJD was formerly thought to occur only
in older adults; however, sCJD and sporadic fatal insomnia have also
affected a few young people (to date, seven cases reported in adolescents, one in a 14-­year-­old girl). vCJD, however, has a peculiar predilection for younger people. Of 174 cases of vCJD reported through
2010 in the United Kingdom, all except 23 were in people younger than
40 years of age and 22 were younger than 20 years of age; the youngest
age at onset was 12 years.
Proponents of the prion hypothesis are convinced that PrP can
spontaneously misfold, becoming self-­replicating and causing sCJD;
skeptics favor the hypothesis of infection with some ubiquitous TSE
agent that, fortunately, has a very low attack rate except in persons with
certain pathogenic variants in the PRNP gene or possibly non-­PRNP
genetic risk factors. Neither possible etiology has been proven. fCJD,
the second most common human TSE, accounts for only 10% or 15%
of total cases of CJD. fCJD occurs in a foci of considerably higher incidence in Israel (among Libyan Jews), in isolated villages of Slovakia,
and in other limited areas.
sCJD has not been convincingly linked to any prior exposure to
other cases and the source of infection remains unknown. Person-­
to-­person spread has been confirmed only for iatrogenic cases.
Spouses and household contacts of patients are not at increased risk
of acquiring CJD, although two instances of conjugal CJD have been
reported. However, medical personnel exposed to brains of patients
with CJD may be at some increased risk; at least 20 healthcare
workers have been recognized with the disease. In 2019 a young
laboratory worker in France died after a 2-­year illness confirmed
at autopsy to be vCJD; her infection was plausibly attributed to
an accidental penetrating wound 7.5 years before onset by a forceps contaminated with brain tissue from a mouse experimentally
infected with BSE agent.
The striking resemblance of CJD to scrapie prompted a concern
that infected sheep tissues might be a source of spongiform encephalopathy in humans. No reliable epidemiologic evidence suggests that
exposure to potentially scrapie-­contaminated animals, meat, meat

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 324 u Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
products, or experimental preparations of the scrapie agent have
transmitted a TSE to humans. The potential of the CWD agent to
infect human beings has also not been demonstrated but remains
under investigation by the CDC and Canadian authorities. Consumption of contaminated venison from animals infected with the
CWD agent has not been implicated as a risk factor for human TSE
by epidemiologic studies. However, a Canadian study reported that
CWD had been experimentally transmitted to monkeys fed venison
from overtly healthy infected deer, prompting a health advisory from
Canadian authorities (https://www.thetyee.ca/Documents/2017/06/2
4/Risk-­Advisory-­Opinion-­CWD-­2017.pdf).
The same thing is not true for vCJD, which is clearly a zoonosis
acquired by humans after dietary exposure to the BSE agent. The outbreak of BSE among cattle (possibly infected by eating scrapie agent–
contaminated meat-­and-­bone meal and later bovine-­contaminated
meal added to feed) was first recognized in the United Kingdom in
1986 and later reported in cattle of 27 other countries, including Canada and the United States. More than 190,000 cases of BSE have been
reported to the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), almost
97% of those from the United Kingdom. Cases of BSE progressively
declined in the United Kingdom after 1992 and somewhat later in
other countries; in 2016 only two cases worldwide were reported to
the OIE (from France and Spain) and none from the United Kingdom. A single case of BSE was recognized in the United States in
2018. Rare sporadic cases of BSE in old cows, associated with an
“atypical” PrPTSE having somewhat different electrophoretic properties from those of the PrPTSE in younger cattle with “classic” cases
of BSE during the epidemic, stimulated the hypothesis that atypical
BSE was caused by spontaneous generation of a PrPTSE rather than
by a feed-­borne infection; that hypothesis, however intriguing and
appealing to some agricultural authorities, remains unconfirmed
though little investigated.
The finding of a new TSE in ungulate and feline animals in British
zoos and later in domestic cats first raised a fear that the BSE agent
might have acquired a range of susceptible hosts broader than that of
scrapie, posing a potential danger for humans. A broadening of the
host range of BSE agent remains the most plausible explanation for
the later appearance of human vCJD, first described in adolescents in
Britain in 1996 and, as of August 2021, eventually affecting at least
178 people potentially exposed to a BSE agent in the United Kingdom
(not counting a disturbing number of people with evidence of possible asymptomatic or “preclinical” vCJD infection) and more than
50 in 11 other countries (total 231 cases worldwide): 28 in France, 5
in Spain, 4 in Ireland, 3 in the Netherlands, 3 in Italy, 2 in Portugal,
and single cases in Japan and Saudi Arabia. vCJD has also occurred
in former residents in the United Kingdom (for more than 6 months)
later living in Ireland (two cases), France (one case), Canada (one
case), Taiwan (one case), and the United States (two cases). Two
cases of vCJD, one in the United States and one in Canada, have been
reported in former long-­time residents of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, a country that has not recognized BSE but might have imported
infected cattle or contaminated halal beef products from Britain. A
third case of vCJD was previously confirmed in a Saudi citizen residing in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The most recent case of vCJD
diagnosed in the United States occurred in an immigrant deemed by
the CDC to have been infected during years spent in Kuwait or, less
likely, Russia.
No case of vCJD has been confirmed in anyone born in the United
Kingdom after 1989. However, examination by immunohistochemistry of resected appendices in the United Kingdom for evidence of
subclinical vCJD infection suggested that about 1 in 2,000 tissues
tested had detectable accumulations of PrPTSE in lymphoid follicles. It
remains controversial whether those accumulations result from subclinical vCJD or other TSE (https://app.box.com/s/hhhhg857fjpu2bnx
hv6e/1/2936396377/91796156506/1); none of the PrPTSE-­positive subjects to date has been reported with overt TSE.

2121

Iatrogenic transmissions of CJD (iCJD) have been recognized for
more than 30 years (Table 324.2). Such accidental medical transmissions of CJD have been attributed to use of contaminated neurosurgical
instruments (no case reported since 1980), cortical electrodes contaminated during epilepsy surgery, injections of human cadaveric pituitary
growth hormone and gonadotropin (neither currently marketed in the
United States), transplantation of human dura mater allografts formerly used as a surgical patching material (especially in Japan), and,
rarely, contaminated corneal transplants. Pharmaceuticals and tissue
grafts derived from or contaminated with human neural tissues, particularly if obtained from unselected donors and large pools of donors,
pose special risks.
Studies of animals experimentally infected with TSE agents first
suggested that blood and blood components from humans with preclinical CJD infections might pose a risk of transmitting disease to
recipients. Since the 1980s such blood components have been withdrawn as a precaution in the United States when a donor was later
found to have CJD and blood products were still in-­date. A surveillance program in the United Kingdom reported vCJD in three recipients of nonleukoreduced red blood cells from donors later diagnosed
with vCJD; there was autopsy evidence of a preclinical vCJD infection in a fourth red cell recipient who died of another disease. (vCJD
has not occurred in anyone exclusively transfused with leukoreduced
red blood cells from a donor who later developed vCJD.) A study
initiated more than 20 years ago by the American Red Cross and
CDC found no recipient of blood components obtained from donors
later diagnosed with sCJD (and from one donor with fCJD) had ever
developed a TSE.
Evidence of a preclinical vCJD infection was found at autopsy in
a British patient with hemophilia A treated with a human plasma–
derived coagulation factor VIII to which at least one vCJD-­infected
donor contributed; the coagulation factor involved was never licensed
or marketed in the United States. Authorities in the United Kingdom
described two recipients of plasma-­derived coagulation factors (both
having history of transfusion with blood components as well) who later
developed sCJD, concluding that the finding, while of concern, might
be coincidental.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

The probable portal of entry for the TSE agent in kuru is thought to
have been either through the gastrointestinal tract or lesions in the
mouth or integument incidentally exposed to the agent during cannibalism. Patients with vCJD (and animals with BSE and BSE-­related
TSEs) are thought to have been similarly infected with the BSE agent
by consuming contaminated beef products. Except after direct introduction into the nervous system, the first site of replication of TSE
agents appears to be in tissues of the reticuloendothelial system. TSE
agents have been detected in low titers in blood of experimentally
infected animals (mice, hamsters, cervids, sheep, and monkeys) and
in the blood of persons with vCJD; infectivity was mainly associated
with nucleated cells, although plasma contained a substantial portion
of total infectivity in blood. Mice must have circulating lymphoid cells
to be infected by peripheral routes. Limited evidence suggests that TSE
agents can also spread to the central nervous system (CNS) by ascending peripheral nerves.
In kuru, it seems probable that the only portal of exit of the agent
from the body, at least in quantities sufficient to infect others, was
through infected tissues exposed during cannibalism. In iatrogenically transmitted CJD, the brains and eyes of patients with sCJD
have been the probable sources of contamination. Experimental
transmission of the agent to animals from kidney, liver, lung, lymph
node, and spleen sampled at autopsies of patients with sCJD showed
that those tissues as well as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sometimes
contained the CJD agent; none of those sources has been implicated
in accidental transmissions of CJD to humans. At no time during
the course of any TSE have antibodies or cell-­mediated immunity

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2122 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 324.2  Iatrogenic Transmission of Creutzfeldt-­Jakob
Disease by Products of Human Origin
PRODUCT

PATIENTS
(NO.)

INCUBATION TIME
MEAN

RANGE

Cornea

3

17 mo

16-­18 mo

Dura mater
allograft

>100

7.4 yr

1.3-­16 yr

Growth
hormone

>100*

12 yr

5-­38.5 yr

Gonadotropin

4

13 yr

12-­16 yr

Red blood cells

4

? 6 yr

6.3-­8.5 yr†

1

? >11 yr‡

Pituitary extracts

Plasma-­derived
coagulation
factor VIII

*There have been 28 cases reported among approximately 8,000 recipients of human
cadaveric growth hormone in the United States; the remaining cases have been
reported in other countries.
†The second transfusion-­transmitted case of vCJD (Peden AH, Head MW, Ritchie DL,
et al. Preclinical vCJD after blood transfusion in a PRNP codon 129 heterozygous
patient. Lancet. 2004;364:527–529) died of unrelated causes about 5 years after
transfusion but was found to have accumulations of abnormal PrP in spleen
and cervical lymph node, a finding unique to vCJD and interpreted as probable
preclinical infection.
‡The diagnosis of vCJD infection attributed to treatment with human plasma–
derived coagulation factor VIII (UK Health Protection Agency vCJD abnormal
prion protein found in a patient with haemophilia at post mortem. Press
release 17 February 2009. http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140714
084352/http://www.hpa.org.uk/webw/HPAweb&HPAwebStandard/HPAweb_C/1234859690542?p=1231252394302) was also supported by immunohistochemical
testing for abnormal PrP in the spleen of a person who died of other causes.
Both patients with “preclinical” infections are thought to have died during the
asymptomatic incubation period of vCJD.

to the infectious agents been convincingly demonstrated in either
patients or animals. However, mice must be immunologically competent to be infected with the scrapie agent by peripheral routes of
inoculation.
Typical changes in TSE include vacuolation and loss of neurons with
hypertrophy and proliferation of glial cells, most pronounced in the
cerebral cortex in patients with CJD and in the cerebellum in those
with kuru. The lesions are usually most severe in or even confined to
gray matter, at least early in the disease. Loss of myelin appears to be
secondary to degeneration of neurons. There generally is no inflammation, but a marked increase in the number and size of astrocytes
is usual. Spongiform changes are not a striking autopsy finding in
patients with FFI, and neuronal degeneration and gliosis are largely
restricted to thalamic nuclei.
Amyloid plaques are found in the brains of all patients with
GSS and in at least 70% of those with kuru. These plaques are less
common in patients with CJD. Amyloid plaques are most common in the cerebellum but occur elsewhere in the brain as well.
In brains of patients with vCJD, plaques surrounded by halos of
vacuoles (described as flower-­like or “florid” plaques) have been
a consistent finding. TSE amyloid plaques react with antiserum
prepared against PrP. Even in the absence of plaques, extracellular
PrPTSE can be detected in the brain parenchyma by immunostaining, Western blotting, and enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Kuru was a progressive degenerative disease of the cerebellum and
brainstem with less obvious involvement of the cerebral cortex. The
first sign of kuru was usually cerebellar ataxia followed by progressive

incoordination. Coarse, shivering tremors were characteristic. Variable abnormalities in cranial nerve function appeared, frequently with
impairment in conjugate gaze and swallowing. Patients died of inanition and pneumonia or of burns from cooking fires, usually within 1
year after onset. Although changes in mentation were common, there
was no frank dementia or progression to coma, as seen in CJD. There
were also no signs of acute encephalitis such as fever, headaches, and
convulsions.
Patients with sCJD initially have either sensory disturbances (most
often visual) or confusion and inappropriate behavior, progressing over
weeks or months to frank dementia, akinetic mutism, and ultimately
coma. Some patients have cerebellar ataxia early in disease, and most
patients experience myoclonic jerking movements. Mean survival of
patients with sCJD has been 4-­6 months from the earliest signs of illness, although approximately 10% live for 2 years. vCJD (Table 324.3)
differs from the more common sCJD: patients with vCJD are much
younger at onset (as young as 12 years) and more often present with
complaints of dysesthesia and subtle behavioral changes, often mistaken for psychiatric illness. Severe mental deterioration occurs later
in the course of vCJD. Patients with vCJD have survived substantially
longer than those with sCJD. (Attempts have been made to subclassify cases of CJD based on electrophoretic differences in PrPTSE and
variation in its sensitivity to digestion with the proteolytic enzyme proteinase [PK]; the different variants are said to have somewhat different
clinical features, including duration of illness, though all are ultimately
fatal.)
GSS is a familial disease somewhat resembling CJD but with
more prominent cerebellar ataxia or parkinsonian syndrome and
amyloid plaques. Dementia may appear only late in the course
of GSS, and the average duration of illness is longer than that of
typical sCJD (∼5 years). Progressively severe insomnia and dysautonomia as well as ataxia, myoclonus, and other signs resembling those of CJD and GSS characterize FFI and sporadic fatal
insomnia. GSS has not been diagnosed in children or adolescents.
A case of sporadic fatal insomnia has been described in a young
adolescent.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of spongiform encephalopathies is most often determined
on clinical grounds after excluding other diseases. The presence of the
14-­3-­3 protein (see the section “Laboratory Findings”) in CSF may aid
in distinguishing between CJD and Alzheimer disease, which is not a
consideration in children. Elevations of 14-­3-­3 protein levels in CSF
are not specific to TSEs and are common in viral encephalitis and other
conditions causing rapid necrosis of brain tissue. A research-­use PrP
peptide amplification test (real-­time quaking-­induced conversion [RT-­
QuIC]) appears to be sensitive and specific for antemortem diagnosis
of sCJD when applied to CSF or nasal brushings but may be less sensitive in younger patients compared with older individuals with TSEs.
Brain MRI has proven clinically useful (see later). Brain biopsy may
be diagnostic for all forms of CJD but can be recommended only if
a potentially treatable disease remains to be excluded or some other
reason compels an antemortem diagnosis and may result in a false
negative result depending on tissue quality, type, and TSE. Definitive diagnosis usually requires microscopic examination of brain tissue obtained at autopsy. The demonstration of PrPTSE in brain extracts
augments histopathologic diagnosis. Accumulation of the abnormal
PrP in lymphoid tissues, even before the onset of neurologic signs,
is typical of vCJD. Tonsil biopsy may avoid the need for brain biopsy
when antemortem histologic diagnosis of vCJD is indicated. To date no
blood-­based test has been validated for antemortem testing of either
humans or animals, though one cumbersome PrPTSE research-­use
test (protein misfolding cyclic amplification [PMCA]) shows promise.
Transmission of disease to susceptible animals by inoculation of brain
suspension, while sensitive, specific, and reliable, must be reserved for
cases of special research interest. Diagnosis usually rests on recognizing the typical constellation of clinical findings, course of illness, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 324 u Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies

2123

Table 324.3  Clinical and Histopathologic Features of Patients with Variant and Typical Sporadic Creutzfeldt-­Jakob Disease
FEATURE

VARIANT CJD (FIRST 10 PATIENTS)

SPORADIC CJD (185 PATIENTS)

Years of age at death* (range)

29 (19-­74)

65

Duration of illness, mo (range)

12 (8-­23)

4-­6

Presenting signs

Abnormal behavior, dysesthesia

Dementia, ataxia

Later signs

Dementia, ataxia, myoclonus

Ataxia, myoclonus

Periodic complexes on EEG

Rare

Most

PRNP 129 Met/Met

All tested (except one transfusion-­transmitted case, one plasma-­
derivative transmitted case; one possible clinical case in United
Kingdom where no tissue was available to confirm)

83%

Histopathologic changes

Vacuolation, neuronal loss, astrocytosis, plaques (100%)

Vacuolation, neuronal loss,
astrocytosis, plaques (≤15%)

Florid PrP plaques†

100%

0

PrPTSE glycosylation pattern

BSE-­like‡

Not BSE-­like

*Median age and duration for variant CJD; averages for typical sporadic CJD.
†Dense plaques with a pale periphery of surrounding vacuolated cells.
‡Characterized by an excess of high molecular mass band (diglycosylated) and 19-­kDa nonglycosylated band glycoform of PrP-­res (Collinge J, Sidle KC, Meads J, et al. Molecular
analysis of prion strain variation and the aetiology of “new variant” CJD. Nature. 1996;383:685–690).
BSE, Bovine spongiform encephalopathy; CJD, Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease; Met, codon 129 of one PRNP gene encoding for methionine; PRNP, prion protein–encoding gene; PrP,
prion protein.
Modified from Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, et al. A new variant of Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet. 1996;347:921–925.

testing (CSF examination, MRI, EEG), confirmed by histopathology
and detection of PrPTSE in brain tissues at autopsy (or, less often, by
tonsil or brain biopsy).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Virtually all patients with typical sporadic, iatrogenic, and familial
forms of CJD have abnormal EEGs as the disease progresses; the
background becomes slow and irregular with diminished amplitude. A variety of paroxysmal discharges such as slow waves, sharp
waves, and spike-­and-­wave complexes may also appear, and these
may be unilateral or focal or bilaterally synchronous. Paroxysmal
discharges may be precipitated by loud noise. Many patients have
typical periodic suppression-­burst complexes of high-­voltage slow
activity on EEG at some time during the illness. Patients with vCJD
have only generalized slowing, without periodic bursts of high-­
voltage discharges on EEG. CT or MRI may show cortical atrophy and large ventricles late in the course of CJD. Most cases of
sCJD and many cases of familial TSE demonstrate hyperintensity
in cortex or basal ganglia diffusion by weighted imaging (DWI).
Many patients with vCJD have an increase in density of the pulvinar on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI sequences.
Reliable interpretation of the images is best left to experienced
radiologists.
There may be modest elevation of CSF protein content in patients
with TSE. Unusual protein spots were observed in CSF specimens
from sCJD patients separated by two-­dimensional gel electrophoresis and silver staining; the spots were later identified as 14-­3-­3
proteins, normal proteins not related to PrP that are abundant in
neurons but not ordinarily detected in CSF. However, 14-­3-­3 protein, as noted previously, has also been detected in CSF specimens
from some patients with acute viral encephalitides and recent cerebral infarctions, and is not specific to CJD. Finding the 14-­3-­3 protein in CSF is neither sensitive nor specific but can help confirm
the diagnosis of sCJD, especially when accompanied by increases in
other cellular proteins. Tests for 14-­3-­3 in CSF are often negative in
patients with vCJD.

TREATMENT

No treatment has proven effective for any TSE, and it seems unlikely
that treatment can reverse the severe brain damage found in late disease. Studies of cell cultures and rodents experimentally infected with
TSE agents suggested that treatments with chlorpromazine, quinacrine,
and tetracyclines might be of benefit, especially during the incubation
period; however, results of clinical trials based on those studies have
been discouraging. Infusions with pentosan polysulfate directly into
the cerebral ventricles may have delayed the progression of vCJD in at
least one patient but did not reverse earlier brain damage. On the basis
of experimental studies in animals, several prophylactic postexposure
treatment regimens have been suggested, but none has been validated
or widely accepted. Results of some preliminary studies suggested that
treatments with antisense oligonucleotides or other molecular genetic
therapies might impair translation of the prion protein gene, potentially ameliorating the degenerative process of TSE if initiated before
CNS damage has appeared; such early treatment would have to be
directed to otherwise healthy persons bearing a pathogenic variant
known to occur in familial TSE, because those destined to develop the
more common sCJD cannot be identified before brain damage appears.
Appropriate compassionate supportive care should be provided to
all CJD patients as for those with other progressive fatal neurologic
diseases.

GENETIC COUNSELING

TSEs occur in some families in a pattern consistent with an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. In patients with a family history of
CJD, the clinical and histopathologic findings are similar to those seen
in sporadic cases. In the United States, only approximately 10% of cases
of CJD are familial. GSS and FFI are always familial. In some affected
families, approximately 50% of siblings and children of a patient with a
familial TSE eventually acquire the disease; in other families, the “penetrance” of illness is lower.
The gene encoding PrP is closely linked if not identical to that controlling the incubation periods of scrapie in sheep and both scrapie
and CJD in mice. The same gene in humans is designated the PRNP

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2124 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
gene, located on the short arm of chromosome 20. It has an open
reading frame of about 759 nucleotides (253 codons), in which more
than 20 different point pathogenic variants and a variety of inserted
sequences encoding extra tandem-­repeated octapeptides have been
linked to the occurrence of spongiform encephalopathy in families, a
disease expressed in a pattern consistent with autosomal dominance of
variable penetrance. The E200K point pathogenic variant has been the
most common worldwide.
The same nucleotide substitution at codon 178 of the PRNP gene
(D178N) associated with CJD in some families has also been found in
all patients with FFI but associated with linkage to a different polymorphic amino acid at codon 129 of the PRNP gene on the same chromosome (fCJD with 129V and FFI with 129M). Homozygosity for valine
(V) and especially for methionine (M) at codon 129 seems to increase
susceptibility to both iCJD and sCJD. All but three patients with vCJD
to be genotyped have been homozygous for methionine at codon 129
of the PRNP gene. A few probable preclinical vCJD infections and two
clinically typical cases of vCJD (one confirmed and another not completely evaluated) occurred in persons with the 129 MV heterozygous
genotype. It is of interest that when the PRNP genes from appendices
containing accumulations of what appears to be PrPTSE in the United
Kingdom were sequenced, a surprising number were homozygous for
129V—the genotype of only approximately 10% of British subjects—and
never found in a case of overt vCJD. The significance of this finding is
not clear. Authorities in the United Kingdom adopted the precautionary
assumption that some persons with PrPTSE in lymphoid tissues may have
latent infections; as time goes by without detecting any overt cases of
vCJD in those persons, that assumption becomes less likely. Whether the
blood or tissues of such persons are infectious remains unknown.
Although the interpretation of these findings in regard to the prion
hypothesis remains controversial, persons from families with CJD or GSS
who have the associated pathogenic variants in the PRNP gene clearly
have a high probability of eventually developing TSE. Bearers of TSE-­
associated pathogenic variants have successfully employed preimplantation genetic diagnosis and in vitro selection of embryos to avoid passing
the mutant gene to offspring. The significance of pathogenic variants in
the PRNP genes of individuals from families with no history of spongiform encephalopathy is not known. It seems wise to avoid alarming
those from unaffected families who have miscellaneous pathogenic variants in the PRNP gene, because the implications are not yet clear. In the
United States, persons are currently deferred from donating blood if a
blood relative has been diagnosed with a familial TSE unless the donor
(the relative or implicated parent) has no TSE-­related mutation.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of all spongiform encephalopathies is uniformly poor.
Approximately 10% of patients may survive for longer than 2 years but
the quality of life is poor.

FAMILY SUPPORT

The CJD Foundation (http://www.cjdfoundation.org), organized and maintained by family members and friends of patients
with CJD and related disorders, working closely with the CDC
(www.cdc.gov/prions/index.html) and with the National Prion Disease Pathology Surveillance Center, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio (http://www.cjdsurveillance.com), is a support and
educational group and a useful source of information regarding available resources for those dealing with the diseases.

PREVENTION

Exposure to the BSE agent in meat products clearly poses a special danger, which is now greatly reduced. Authorities in Canada, the United

States, and other countries responded by implementing progressively
more stringent agricultural and public health measures during the past
25 years, with prohibition of most bovine-­derived materials from feeds
for ruminants probably the most effective measure. Three cases of BSE
in native cattle were recognized in the United States from 2004 through
2012; a case was also found in a Canadian cow imported into the United
States in 2003. Canada found 20 native cattle with BSE between 2003
and 2015 (and imported a case from the United Kingdom in 1993).
In spite of encouraging epidemiologic studies that failed to implicate
exposure to scrapie or CWD agents in human TSEs, it seems prudent
to avoid exposing children to meat and other products likely to be contaminated with any TSE agent.
The safety of human blood, blood components, and plasma derivatives in the United States and Canada is protected by deferring, as
a precaution, some donors with histories suggesting an increased
risk of exposure to TSE agents: persons treated with human cadaveric pituitary hormones or dura mater allografts (neither currently
marketed in the United States) and donors who voluntarily disclose
history of familial TSE (fCJD, GSS, FFI) unless sequencing shows
that the TSE-affected relative or the donor has no TSE-related mutation in either PRNP gene (https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-bloodbiologics/guidancecompliance-regulatory-information-biologics/
biologicsguidances).
In principle, it would be better to identify the very few blood and
tissue donors actually infected with a TSE rather than deferring all
those at increased risk of exposure, because most of them are unlikely
to have been infected. Antemortem screening tests that might eventually identify donors with preclinical TSE infections are currently under
development though not clinically validated. It seems unlikely that any
test would be adopted to screen blood donors without simultaneously
implementing a highly specific validated confirmatory test to avoid
the serious adverse implications resulting from the inevitable false-­
positive screening results. In any case, the current risk of transfusion-­
transmitted TSE in the United States appears to be extremely low.
Postmortem testing of brain tissue from cadaveric tissue donors would
be feasible and more justifiable in view of the surprisingly high lifetime
risk of sCJD; tissue transplantation–associated TSE has not been recognized since donors with history of dementia and other neurologic
disease have been excluded.
Standard universal precautions should be used to handle all human
tissues, blood, and body fluids. Materials and surfaces contaminated
with tissues and CSF from patients suspected of having CJD must be
treated with great care, paying special attention to preventing injuries
with needles and other sharp instruments. Whenever possible, discard
contaminated instruments as “medical-­pathological waste” by careful packaging and incineration. Contaminated tissues and biologic
products probably cannot be completely freed of infectivity without
destroying their structural integrity and biologic activity; therefore
the medical and family histories of individual tissue donors should be
carefully reviewed to exclude a diagnosis of TSE or other neurologic
disease. Histopathologic examination of brain tissues of cadaveric
donors and rapid testing for abnormal PrP might eventually be performed where feasible (no rapid diagnostic test is currently marketed
for use with human tissues, though commercial animal TSE tests detect
PrPTSE in human CJD brains) to provide some additional assurance of
safety. Although no method of sterilization can be relied on to remove
all infectivity from contaminated surfaces, exposures to moist heat,
sodium hydroxide, chlorine bleach, concentrated formic acid, acidified
detergent, and guanidine salts markedly reduced infectivity in experimental studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

Section 14

Antiparasitic Therapy

2125

and dizziness. Intriguingly, nitazoxanide has in vitro activity against
multiple other pathogens, including influenza virus, rotavirus, hepatitis C virus, and SARS-­CoV-­2, although the clinical use of the agent
against these viruses remains investigational.

Tinidazole (Tindamax)

Chapter 325

Principles of Antiparasitic
Therapy
Beth K. Thielen
Parasites are divided into three main groups taxonomically: protozoans, which are unicellular, and helminths and ectoparasites, which are
multicellular. Chemotherapeutic agents appropriate for one group may
not be appropriate for the others, and not all drugs are readily available
(Table 325.1). Some drugs are not available in the United States, and
some are available only from the manufacturer, specialized compounding
pharmacies, or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Information on the availability of drugs and expert guidance in management can be obtained by contacting the CDC Parasitic Diseases Branch
(1-­404-­718-­4745; e-­mail parasites@cdc.gov (M-­F, 8 am-­4 pm, Eastern
time). For assistance in the management of malaria, healthcare providers
should call the CDC Malaria Hotline: 1-­770-­488-­7788 or 1-­855-­856-­4713
toll-­free, e-­mail malaria@cdc.gov (M-­F, 9 am-­5 pm, Eastern time). For all
emergency consultations after hours, clinicians can contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center at 1-­770-­488-­7100 and request to speak with
a CDC Malaria Branch clinician or on-­call parasitic diseases physician.
Some antiparasitic drugs are not licensed for use in the United States but
can be obtained as investigational new drugs (INDs) from the CDC; providers should call the CDC Drug Service, Division of Scientific Resources
and Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, at 1-­404-­639-­3670.

SELECTED ANTIPARASITIC DRUGS FOR
PROTOZOANS
Nitazoxanide (Alinia)

Nitazoxanide is a nitrothiazole benzamide, initially developed as a
veterinary anthelmintic. Nitazoxanide inhibits pyruvate: ferredoxin
oxidoreductase, which is an enzyme necessary for anaerobic energy
metabolism. In humans, nitazoxanide is effective against many protozoans and helminths. Nitazoxanide is approved for the treatment of
diarrhea caused by Cryptosporidium parvum and Giardia intestinalis in
patients ≥1 year of age.
Nitazoxanide is available as a tablet (500 mg) and an oral suspension (100 mg/5 mL), which has a pink color and strawberry flavor. The
bioavailability of the suspension is ∼70% compared with the tablet.
The drug is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract but should
be taken with food due to approximately twofold higher absorption.
One third is excreted in urine, and two thirds is excreted in feces as
the active metabolite, tizoxanide. Although in vitro metabolism studies
have not demonstrated cytochrome P450 enzyme effects, no pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in patients with compromised
renal or hepatic function. In addition, limited studies have been performed in pregnant or lactating women; nevertheless, CDC Guidelines
for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in Adults
and Adolescents with HIV recommend nitazoxanide for the treatment of severe cryptosporidiosis after the first trimester. Tizoxanide is
known to be excreted in breast milk, but decisions to breastfeed during therapy can be individualized. Common adverse effects include
abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and urine discoloration. Rare side
effects include anorexia, flatulence, increased appetite, fever, pruritus,

Tinidazole is a synthetic nitroimidazole with a chemical structure similar to metronidazole. It is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients 3 years of age and older and for treatment of
trichomoniasis, giardiasis, and amebiasis. In the treatment of giardiasis, it has the advantages of very few side effects and only requiring a
single dose. It is available as a tablet, which can be crushed and administered with food. Its mechanism of action against Trichomonas may
be secondary to the generation of free nitro radicals by the protozoan.
The mechanism of action against Giardia lamblia and Entamoeba histolytica is unknown. Like metronidazole, it can cause a disulfiram-­like
reaction if combined with alcohol. After oral administration, tinidazole
is rapidly and completely absorbed and is distributed into almost all tissues and body fluids; it can cross the blood-­brain barrier and placental
barrier. It is excreted via urine and feces. Hemodialysis increases clearance of the drug. No studies have been performed for patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis or for patients with compromised hepatic
function. Tinidazole is known to cross the placenta and enter fetal
circulation; the safety in pregnancy has not been well evaluated, and
alternative agents are preferred. It can also be detected in breast milk,
and breastfeeding should be interrupted during treatment and for 3
days after treatment.

Atovaquone/Proguanil (Malarone)

Atovaquone is a hydroxynaphthoquinone and has been used in
the past predominantly against Pneumocystis pneumonia in AIDS
patients. Its mechanism of action is via disruption of the mitochondria
membrane potential through interaction with cytochrome b. However, atovaquone can also effectively inhibit liver stages of all Plasmodium species, and in 2000 the FDA approved atovaquone/proguanil
for the prevention and treatment of acute, uncomplicated Plasmodium
falciparum malaria in adults and children ≥11 kg. Atovaquone alone
and in combination with proguanil is the only drug to completely
inhibit the liver stage, providing the advantage of only needing to use
the drug for 7 days after departing a malaria-­endemic area (compared
with several weeks).
Proguanil inhibits the parasite dihydrofolate reductase enzyme by
the active form, cycloguanil. When used alone, it has poor efficacy for
prophylaxis, but when administered with atovaquone, it acts in synergy
on the cytochrome b enzyme in Plasmodia mitochondria, though the
exact mechanism of synergy is unknown.
Two double-­blind, randomized clinical trials assessing malaria prophylaxis demonstrated that atovaquone/proguanil was at least comparable to (and perhaps better than) chloroquine plus proguanil, and that
atovaquone/proguanil was comparable to mefloquine. Atovaquone/
proguanil was better tolerated than chloroquine plus proguanil and
mefloquine. Atovaquone/proguanil treatment of acute uncomplicated
P. falciparum infection has demonstrated higher or comparable cure
rates when compared with other P. falciparum treatment drugs. Compared with other antimalarial therapies, atovaquone/proguanil has the
highest cost. There are limited data on use during pregnancy, and pharmacokinetics may be altered during pregnancy so alternative regimens
are preferred for malaria in pregnancy if available.

ARTEMISININ DERIVATIVES (ARTEMETHER,
ARTESUNATE) AND COMBINATION THERAPIES
(ARTEMETHER/LUMEFANTRINE OR COARTEM)

Artemisinin is a sesquiterpene lactone isolated from the weed Artemisia
annua. It was developed in China, where it is known as qinghaosu.
Artemisinin and its derivatives act very rapidly against Plasmodium
vivax as well as chloroquine-­sensitive and chloroquine-­resistant P.
falciparum. Artemisinins are also rapidly eliminated. Resistance to
artemisinins has been documented in Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar,
Thailand, and Vietnam. Coartem is the first artemisinin-­containing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2126 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections
Parasitic infections are found throughout the world. With increasing travel, immigration, use of immunosuppressive drugs, and the spread of HIV,
physicians anywhere may see infections caused by previously unfamiliar parasites. This table lists first-­choice and alternative drugs for most
parasitic infections.
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

AMEBIASIS (ENTAMOEBA HISTOLYTICA)
Asymptomatic
Drug of choice:
Iodoquinol (Yodoxin)2

650 mg PO tid × 20 days

30-­40 mg/kg/day (max 1950 mg) in 3 doses PO
× 20 days

or

Paromomycin

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 5-­10 days

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 5-­10 days

Alternative:

Diloxanide furoate3

500 mg tid PO × 10 days

20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 10 days

ACANTHAMOEBA KERATITIS
Drug of choice:
See footnote1

Mild to moderate intestinal disease
Drug of choice:
Metronidazole

500-­750 mg tid PO × 7-­10 days

35-­50 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7-­10 days

or

Tinidazole4

2 g PO once daily × 3 days

50 mg/kg/day PO (max 2 g) in 1 dose × 3 days

Either followed by:

Iodoquinol2

650 mg PO tid × 20 days

30-­40 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 20 days (max
2 g)

or

Paromomycin

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 5-­10 days

Alternative:

Nitazoxanide5

500 mg bid × 3 days

1-­3 yr: 100 mg bid × 3 days
4-­11 yr: 200 mg bid × 3 days
≥12 yr: use adult dosing

Severe intestinal and extraintestinal disease
Drug of choice:

Metronidazole

750 mg PO tid × 7-­10 days

35-­50 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7-­10 days

or

Tinidazole4

2 g PO once daily × 5 days

50 mg/kg/day PO (max 2 g) × 5 days

Either followed by:

Iodoquinol2

650 mg PO tid × 20 days

30-­40 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 20 days (max 2 g)

or

Paromomycin

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 5-10 days

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

Amebic meningoencephalitis, primary and granulomatous
NAEGLERIA FOWLERI
Drug of choice:

Amphotericin B
deoxycholate6,7

1.5 mg/kg/day IV in 2 divided doses × 3 days, 1.5 mg/kg/day IV in 2 divided doses × 3 days,
then 1 mg/kg daily IV × 11 days
then 1 mg/kg daily IV × 11 days

plus Amphotericin B
deoxycholate6,7

1.5 mg/kg intrathecally daily × 2 days, then 1
mg/kg intrathecally every other day × 8 days

1.5 mg/kg intrathecally daily × 2 days, then 1 mg/
kg intrathecally every other day × 8 days

plus Rifampin7

10 mg/kg (max 600 mg) IV or PO daily × 28 days

10 mg/kg (max 600 mg) IV or PO daily × 28 days

plus Fluconazole7

10 mg/kg (max 600 mg) IV or PO daily × 28
days

10 mg/kg (max 600 mg) IV or PO daily × 28 days

plus Azithromycin7

500 mg IV or PO daily × 28 days

10 mg/kg (max 500 mg) IV or PO daily × 28 days

1For treatment of keratitis caused by Acanthamoeba, 0.02% topical polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) and 0.02% chlorhexidine have been successfully used individually and in

combination in a large number of patients (Tabin G, et al. Cornea. 2001;20:757; Wysenbeek YS, et al. Cornea. 2000;19:464). The expected treatment course is 6-­12 mo. PHMB is no
longer available from Leiter’s Park Avenue Pharmacy but is available from the O’Brien Pharmacy (1-­800-­627-­4360; distributes in many states) and the Greenpark Pharmacy (1-­713-­
432-­9855; Texas only). Combinations with either 0.1% propamidine isethionate (Brolene) or hexamidine (Desomedine) have been used (Seal DV. Eye. 2003;17:893) successfully, but
these are not available in the United States. Neomycin is not recommended due to high levels of resistance (Acanthamoeba keratitis: Treatment guidelines from The Medical Letter,
143, 8/1/2013). In addition, the combination of chlorhexidine, natamycin (pimaricin), and debridement also has been successful (Kitagawa K, et al. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 2003;47:616).
2The drug is not available commercially but can be compounded by Expert Compounding Pharmacy, 6744 Balboa Blvd, Lake Balboa, CA 91406 (1-­800-­247-­9767 or 1-­818-­988-­7979 or
info@expertpharmacy.org).
3This drug is not available commercially in the United States.
4A nitroimidazole similar to metronidazole, tinidazole was approved by the FDA in 2004 and appears to be as effective and better tolerated than metronidazole. It should be taken
with food to minimize GI adverse effects. For children and patients unable to take tablets, a pharmacist may crush the tablets and mix them with cherry syrup (HUMCO, and others).
The syrup suspension is good for 7 days at room temperature and must be shaken before use. Ornidazole, a similar drug, is also used outside the United States.
5Nitazoxanide is FDA approved as a pediatric oral suspension for treatment of Cryptosporidium in immunocompetent children ≥1 yr of age. It has also been used in some small
studies for Balantidium coli infection. It may also be effective for mild to moderate amebiasis (Diaz E, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2003;68:384; Rossignol JF, et al. Trans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg. 2007;101:1025) and as an alternative therapy for microsporidiosis (published dosing for microsporidiosis: Bicart-­See A, et al. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000;44:167),
2020 CDC Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents with HIV). Nitazoxanide is available in 500 mg tablets and an oral
suspension; it should be taken with food.
6Naegleria infection has been treated successfully with IV and intrathecal use of both amphotericin B and miconazole plus rifampin and with amphotericin B, rifampin, and ornidazole
(Seidel J, et al. N Engl J Med. 1982;306:346; Jain R, et al. Neurol India. 2002;50:470). Other reports of successful therapy are less well documented.
7An approved drug, but usage is considered off-­label for this condition by the FDA.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2127

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

plus Miltefosine6–8

50 mg PO tid × 28 days

<45 kg: 50 mg bid (max 2.5 mg/kg) × 28 days
≥45 kg: use adult dosing

plus dexamethasone

0.6 mg/kg/day IV in 4 divided doses × 4 days

0.6 mg/kg/day IV in 4 divided doses × 4 days

ACANTHAMOEBA
Drug of choice:

See footnote7,8

BALAMUTHIA MANDRILLARIS
Drug of choice:

See footnote7,9,10

SAPPINIA DIPLOIDEA
Drug of choice:

See footnote11

ANCYLOSTOMA CANINUM (EOSINOPHILIC ENTEROCOLITIS)
Drug of choice:

Albendazole7

400 mg PO once

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

or

Mebendazole

100 mg PO bid × 3 days

100 mg PO bid × 3 days13

or

Pyrantel pamoate (OTC)7

11 mg/kg PO (max 1 g) × 3 days

11 mg/kg PO (max 1 g) × 3 days

or

Endoscopic removal

ANCYLOSTOMA DUODENALE, (see Hookworm infection)
ANGIOSTRONGYLIASIS (ANGIOSTRONGYLUS CANTONENSIS, ANGIOSTRONGYLUS COSTARICENSIS)
Drug of choice:

See footnote14

ANISAKIASIS (ANISAKIS SPP.)
Treatment of
choice:

Surgical or endoscopic removal

Alternative:

Albendazole7,15

400 mg PO bid × 6-­21 days

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

ASCARIASIS (ASCARIS LUMBRICOIDES, ROUNDWORM)
Drug of choice:

Albendazole7

400 mg PO once

<10 kg/2 yr: see adult dosing12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

or

Mebendazole

100 mg PO bid × 3 days or 500 mg PO once

100 mg PO bid × 3 days or 500 mg PO once13

or

Ivermectin7

150-­200 μg/kg PO once

<15 kg: not indicated
≥15 kg: see adult dosing

8If you have a patient with suspected free-­living amoeba infection, please contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center at 1-­800-­CDC-­INFO to consult with a CDC expert

regarding the use of this drug. Miltefosine has been reported to successfully treat primary amebic meningoencephalitis due to Naegleria fowleri, although controlled trials have not
been conducted (Linam WM, et al. Pediatrics. 2015;135:e744).
9Strains of Acanthamoeba isolated from fatal granulomatous amebic encephalitis are usually susceptible in vitro to pentamidine, ketoconazole, flucytosine, and (less so) amphotericin
B. Chronic Acanthamoeba meningitis has been successfully treated in two children with a combination of oral trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, rifampin, and ketoconazole
(Singhal T, et al. Pediatr Infect Dis. 2001;J 20:623), and in an AIDS patient with fluconazole, sulfadiazine, and pyrimethamine combined with surgical resection of the CNS lesion
(Seijo Martinez M, et al. J Clin Microbiol. 2000;38:3892). Disseminated cutaneous infection in an immunocompromised patient has been treated successfully with IV pentamidine
isethionate, topical chlorhexidine, and 2% ketoconazole cream, followed by oral itraconazole (Slater CA, et al. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:85).
10A free-­living leptomyxid ameba that causes subacute to fatal granulomatous CNS disease. Several cases of Balamuthia encephalitis have been successfully treated with flucytosine,
pentamidine, fluconazole, and sulfadiazine plus either azithromycin or clarithromycin (phenothiazines were also used) combined with surgical resection of the CNS lesion (Deetz TR,
et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37:1304; Jung S, et al. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2004;128:466). Case reports and in vitro data suggest miltefosine may have some antiamebic activity (Aichelburg
AC, et al. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14:1743; Martínez DY, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2010;51:e7; Schuster FL, et al. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2006;53:121). Miltefosine (Impavido) is now commercially
available. Contact the Centers for Disease Control/Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry at 1-­770-­488-­7100 or 1-­800-­232-­4636 (main number) for guidance on treatment.
11A free-­living ameba not previously known to be pathogenic to humans. It has been successfully treated with azithromycin, IV pentamidine, itraconazole, and flucytosine combined
with surgical resection of the CNS lesion (Gelman BB, et al. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2003;62:990).
12Limited data in children <2 yr but has been used successfully for treatment of cutaneous larva migrans in children as young as 8 mo at a dose of 200 mg daily × 3 days (Black MD,
et al. Australas J Dermatol. 2010;51:281). The WHO also recommends albendazole in children <2 yr for treatment of taeniasis, strongyloidiasis, filariasis, hookworms, roundworms,
pinworms, and threadworms.
13Limited safety data in children <2 yr of age.
14Most patients have a self-­limited course and recover completely. Analgesics, corticosteroids, and careful removal of CSF at frequent intervals can relieve symptoms from increased
intracranial pressure (Lo Re V III, Gluckman SJ. Am J Med. 2003;114:217). No anthelmintic drug is proven to be effective, and some patients have worsened with therapy (Slom TJ,
et al. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:668). Mebendazole or albendazole and a corticosteroid appeared to shorten the course of infection (Sawanyawisuth K, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg.
2008;102:990; Chotmongkol V, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2009;81:443).
15(Repiso Ortega A, et al. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003;26:341.) Successful treatment of a patient with anisakiasis with albendazole has been reported (Moore DA, et al. Lancet.
2002;360:54).

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2128 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

Atovaquone7

750 mg PO bid × 7-­10 days

20 mg/kg (max 750 mg) PO bid × 7-­10 days

plus azithromycin7

500-­1,000 mg once, then 250 mg daily × 7-­10
days. Higher doses (600-­1,000 mg) and/or
prolonged therapy (6 wk or longer) may be
required for immunocompromised patients

10 mg/kg PO on day 1 (max 500 mg/dose), then
5 mg/kg/day (max 250 mg/dose) PO days 2-­10

Clindamycin7

300-­600 mg IV qid or 600 mg tid PO × 7-­10
days

20-­40 mg/kg/day IV or PO in 3 or 4 doses × 7-­10
days (max 600 mg/dose)

plus quinine7

542 mg base (650 mg salt) tid PO × 7-­10 days

6 mg base/kg (8 mg salt/kg) (max 542 mg base or
650 mg salt/ dose), PO tid × 7-­10 days

BABESIOSIS (BABESIA MICROTI)
Drugs of choice:16

or

Balamuthia mandrillaris, see Amebic meningoencephalitis, primary
BALANTIDIASIS (BALANTIDIUM COLI)
Drug of choice:

Tetracycline7,17

Alternatives:

Metronidazole7

750 mg PO tid × 5 days

35-­50 mg/kg/day PO in 3 divided doses × 5 days

or

Iodoquinol2,7

650 mg PO tid × 20 days

30-­40 mg/kg/day (max 2 g) PO in 3 divided doses
× 20 days

or

Nitazoxanide5,7

500 mg PO bid × 3 days

1-­3 yr: 100 mg PO bid × 3 days

500 mg PO qid × 10 days

<8 yr: not indicated
≥8 yr: 10 mg/kg (max 500 mg) PO qid × 10 days

4-­11 yr: 200 mg PO bid × 3 days
≥12 yr: see adult dosing
BAYLISASCARIASIS (BAYLISASCARIS PROCYONIS)
Drug of choice:

Albendazole7,18

400 mg PO bid × 10-­20 days

<10 kg/2 yr: 25-­50 mg/kg/day PO in 1-­2 divided
doses × 10-­20 days12
≥2 yr: 25-­50 mg/kg/day PO in 1-­2 divided doses
× 10-­20 days

BLASTOCYSTIS HOMINIS INFECTION
Drug of choice:

See footnote19

CAPILLARIASIS (CAPILLARIA PHILIPPINENSIS)
Drug of choice:

Mebendazole7

200 mg PO bid × 20 days

200 mg PO bid × 20 days13

Alternative:

Albendazole7

400 mg PO daily × 10 days

<10 kg/2 yr 12
≥15 kg/2 yr: see adult dosing

CHAGAS DISEASE, SEE TRYPANOSOMIASIS
CLONORCHIS SINENSIS, SEE FLUKE INFECTION
CRYPTOSPORIDIOSIS (CRYPTOSPORIDIUM PARVUM)
Immunocompetent
Drug of choice:

Nitazoxanide5

500 mg PO bid × 3 days

1-­3 yr: 100 mg PO bid × 3 days
4-­11 yr: 200 mg PO bid × 3 days
≥12 yr: see adult dosing

16Exchange transfusion has been used in severely ill patients and those with high (>10%) parasitemia (Hatcher JC, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32:1117). Clindamycin and quinine is the

preferred therapy for severely ill patients. In patients who were not severely ill, combination therapy with atovaquone and azithromycin was as effective as clindamycin and quinine
and may have been better tolerated (Krause PJ, et al. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1454). Highly immunosuppressed patients should be treated for a minimum of 6 wk and at least 2
wk past the last positive smear (Krause PJ, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;46:370). High doses of azithromycin (600-­1,000 mg) have been used in combination with atovaquone for the
treatment of immunocompromised patients (Weiss LM, et al. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:773). Resistance to atovaquone plus azithromycin has been reported in immunocompromised
patients treated with a single subcurative course of this regimen (Wormser GP, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2010;50:381). Most asymptomatic patients do not require treatment unless
parasitemia persists >3 mo (Wormser GP, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2006;43:1089).
17Use of tetracyclines has historically been contraindicated in pregnancy and in children younger than 8 yr. The American Academy of Pediatrics now recommends that doxycycline
can be administered for short durations (i.e., 21 days or less) without regard to the patient’s age (Kimberlin DW, et al. Red Book: 2021-­2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious
Diseases. 32nd ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2021. p 866).
18No drugs have been consistently demonstrated to be effective. The combination of albendazole 37 mg/kg/day PO and high-­dose steroids has been used successfully (Peters JM,
et al. Pediatrics. 2012;129:e806; Haider S. Emerg Infect Dis. 2012;18:347). Albendazole 25 mg/kg/day PO × 20 days started as soon as possible (up to 3 days after possible infection)
might prevent clinical disease and is recommended for children with known exposure, as in the setting of ingestion of raccoon stool or contaminated soil (Murray WJ, et al. Clin
Infect Dis. 2004;39:1484). Mebendazole, levamisole, or ivermectin could be tried if albendazole is not available. Ocular baylisascariasis has been treated successfully using laser
photocoagulation therapy to destroy the intraretinal larvae.
19Clinical significance of these organisms is controversial; metronidazole 750 mg tid × 10 days, iodoquinol 650 mg tid × 20 days, or trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole 1 DS tablet bid
× 7 days has been reported to be effective (Stenzel DJ, et al. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1996;9:563; Ok UZ, et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 1999;94:3245). Metronidazole resistance may be
common (Haresh K, et al. Trop Med Int Health. 1999;4:274). Nitazoxanide has been effective in children (Diaz E, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2003;68:384).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2129

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

HIV infected
Drug of choice:

See footnote20

CUTANEOUS LARVA MIGRANS (ANCYLOSTOMA BRAZILIENSE, ANCYLOSTOMA CANINUM, DOG AND CAT HOOKWORM, CREEPING
ERUPTION)
Drug of choice:

Albendazole7,21

or

Ivermectin7

200 μg/kg PO daily × 1-­2 days

Alternative:

Thiabendazole

Apply topically tid × 7 days

400 mg PO daily × 3-­7 days

<10 kg/2 yr: 200 mg PO daily × 3 days12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing
<15 kg: not indicated
≥15 kg: see adult dosing
Apply topically tid × 7 days

CYCLOSPORIASIS (CYCLOSPORA CAYETANENSIS)
Drug of choice:

Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-­SMX)7,22

TMP 160 mg/SMX 800 mg (1 DS tab) PO bid
× 7-­10 days

4-­5 mg/kg TMP component (max 160 mg) PO bid
× 7-­10 days

CYSTICERCOSIS, SEE TAPEWORM INFECTION
CYSTOISOSPORIASIS (CYSTOISOSPORA BELLI, FORMERLY KNOWN AS ISOSPORA BELLI)
Drug of choice:

TMP-­SMX7

TMP 160 mg/SMX 800 mg (1 DS tab) PO bid
× 10 days

4-­5 mg/kg TMP component (max 160 mg) PO bid
× 10 days

Alternative:

Pyrimethamine

50-­75 mg PO divided bid x 10 days

—

plus leucovorin

10-­25 mg PO daily × 10 days

—

Ciprofloxacin7

500 mg PO bid × 7-­10 days

—

Paromomycin7

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 divided doses × 7 days

or

Iodoquinol2

650 mg PO tid × 20 days

30-­40 mg/kg/day PO (max 2 g) in 3 divided doses
× 20 days

or

Metronidazole7

500-­750 mg tid × 10 days

35-­50 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses × 10 days

or

Dientamoeba fragilis infection23

DIPHYLLOBOTHRIUM LATUM, SEE TAPEWORM INFECTION
DRACUNCULUS MEDINENSIS (GUINEA WORM) INFECTION
Treatment of
choice:

Slow mechanical extraction of worm24

ECHINOCOCCUS, SEE TAPEWORM INFECTION
ENTAMOEBA HISTOLYTICA, SEE AMEBIASIS
ENTEROBIUS VERMICULARIS (PINWORM) INFECTION25
Drug of choice:

Albendazole7

400 mg PO once; repeat in 2 wk

<10 kg/2 yr: 200 mg PO once; repeat in 2 wk12

or

Mebendazole

100 mg PO once; repeat in 3 wk

100 mg PO once; repeat in 3 wk13

or

Pyrantel pamoate (OTC)

11 mg/kg base PO once (max 1 g); repeat in
2 wk

11 mg/kg base PO once (max 1 g); repeat in 2 wk

≥2 yr: see adult dosing

20Nitazoxanide has not consistently been shown to be superior to placebo in HIV-­infected patients (Amadi B, et al. Lancet. 2002;360;1375). For HIV-­infected patients, potent

antiretroviral therapy (ART) is the mainstay of treatment. Nitazoxanide 500-­1,000 mg for 14 days, paromomycin 500 mg 4 times daily × 14-­21 days, or a combination of paromomycin
and azithromycin may be tried to decrease diarrhea and recalcitrant malabsorption of antimicrobial drugs, which can occur with chronic cryptosporidiosis (Pantenburg B, et al.
Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2009;7:385).
21Albanese G, et al. Int J Dermatol. 2001;40:67.
22HIV-­infected patients may need a higher dosage and long-­term maintenance (Kansouzidou A, et al. J Trav Med. 2004;11:61).
23Norberg A, et al. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2003;9:65.
24Treatment of choice is slow extraction of worm combined with wound care (MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60:1450). Instructions for this can be found at https://www.cdc.g
ov/parasites/guineaworm/treatment.html. Ten days of treatment with metronidazole 250 mg tid in adults and 25 mg/kg/day in 3 doses in children is not curative, but it decreases
inflammation and facilitates removal of the worm. Mebendazole 400-­800 mg/day × 6 days has been reported to kill the worm directly.
25Because all family members are usually infected, treatment of the entire household is recommended.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2130 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

FASCIOLA HEPATICA, SEE FLUKE INFECTION
FILARIASIS26
Lymphatic filariasis (Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, Brugia timori)
Drug of choice:27

Diethylcarbamazine28,29

6 mg/kg once or 6 mg/kg PO in 3 divided
doses × 12 days30

<18 mo: no indication

9 mg/kg PO in 3 doses × 14 days30

<18 mo: no indication

≥18 mo: see adult dosing

LOA LOA
<8,000 microfilaria/mL29
Drug of choice:

Diethylcarbamazine28,29

Alternatives:

Albendazole28

≥18 mo: see adult dosing
200 mg PO bid × 21 days

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

8,000 microfilaria/mL29,31
Treatment of
choice:

Apheresis

or

Albendazole28

200 mg PO bid × 21 days

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

Either followed by:

Diethylcarbamazine28,29

8-­10 mg/kg PO in 3 doses × 21 days30

<18 mo: no indication
≥18 mo: see adult dosing

MANSONELLA OZZARDI
Drug of choice:

See footnote32

MANSONELLA PERSTANS
Drug of choice:

Doxycycline7,17,33

100 mg bid PO × 6 wk

4 mg/kg/day in 2 doses PO × 6 wk

MANSONELLA STREPTOCERCA34
Drug of choice:

Diethylcarbamazine28

6 mg/kg/day PO × 14 days

6 mg/kg/day PO × 14 days

or

Ivermectin7

150 μg/kg PO once

<15 kg: not indicated
≥15 kg: see adult dosing

TROPICAL PULMONARY EOSINOPHILIA (TPE)35
Drug of choice:

Diethylcarbamazine28

6 mg/kg once or 6 mg/kg PO in 3 divided
doses × 14-­21 days27

<18 mo: no indication
≥18 mo: see adult dosing

26Antihistamines or corticosteroids may be required to decrease allergic reactions due to disintegration of microfilariae from treatment of filarial infections, especially those caused by

Loa loa. Endosymbiotic Wolbachia bacteria may have a role in filarial development and host response and may represent a new target for therapy. Treatment with doxycycline 100
or 200 mg/day × 4-­6 wk in lymphatic filariasis and onchocerciasis has resulted in substantial loss of Wolbachia with subsequent blocking of microfilariae production and absence of
microfilaria when followed for 24 mo after treatment (Hoerauf A, et al. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2003;192:211; Hoerauf A, et al. BMJ. 2003;326:207).
27Most symptoms caused by adult worm. Single-­dose combination of albendazole (400 mg) with either ivermectin (200 μg/kg) or diethylcarbamazine (6 mg/kg) is effective for
reduction or suppression of Wuchereria bancrofti microfilaria but does not kill the adult forms (Addiss D, et al. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(1):CD003753).
28This drug is not FDA approved and not commercially available but is available under IND application through the CDC Drug Service (CDC Drug Service, Division of Scientific
Resources, telephone at 1-­404-­639-­3670).
29Diethylcarbamazine is contraindicated in patients co-­infected with Onchocerca volvulus due to risk of a life-­threatening Mazzotti reaction and in patients with Loa loa infection and
microfilaria levels ≥8,000 mm3 due to risk of encephalopathy and renal failure. Some experts use a cutoff of ≥2,500 mm3.
30For patients with microfilaria in the blood, Medical Letter consultants would start with a lower dosage and scale up: day 1, 50 mg; day 2, 50 mg tid; day 3, 100 mg tid; day
4-­14, 6 mg/kg in 3 doses (for Loa loa, day 4-­14, 9 mg/kg in 3 doses). Multidose regimens have been shown to provide more rapid reduction in microfilaria than single-­dose
diethylcarbamazine, but microfilaria levels are similar 6-­12 mo after treatment (Andrade LD, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1995;89:319; Simonsen PE, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
1995;53:267). A single dose of 6 mg/kg is used in endemic areas for mass treatment (Figueredo-­Silva J, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1996;90:192; Noroes J, et al. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg. 1997;91:78).
31In heavy infections with Loa loa, rapid killing of microfilariae can provoke encephalopathy. Apheresis has been reported to be effective in lowering microfilarial counts in patients
heavily infected with Loa loa (Ottesen EA. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 1993;7:619). Albendazole or ivermectin has also been used to reduce microfilaremia; albendazole is preferred
because of its slower onset of action and lower risk for encephalopathy (Klion AD, et al. J Infect Dis. 1993;168:202; Kombila M, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1998;58:458). Albendazole
may be useful for treatment of loiasis when diethylcarbamazine is ineffective or cannot be used, but repeated courses may be necessary (Klion AD, et al. Clin Infect Dis.
1999;29:680). Diethylcarbamazine, 300 mg once a week, has been recommended for prevention of loiasis (Nutman TB, et al. N Engl J Med. 1988;319:752).
32Diethylcarbamazine has no effect. Ivermectin 200 μg/kg once has been effective.
33Doxycycline is preferred for strains that carry Wolbachia bacteria. Combination therapy with diethylcarbamazine and mebendazole and monotherapy with mebendazole have been
used successfully in strains that do not carry Wolbachia. Evidence is limited, and optimal therapy is uncertain. Ivermectin and albendazole appear to be ineffective.
34Diethylcarbamazine is potentially curative because of activity against both adult worms and microfilariae. Ivermectin is only active against microfilariae. (The Medical Letter: Drugs
for parasitic infections, vol 11, 2013.)
35Relapse occurs and can be treated with diethylcarbamazine.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2131

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

ONCHOCERCA VOLVULUS (RIVER BLINDNESS)
Ivermectin36

Drug of choice:

150 μg/kg PO once, repeated every 6-­12 mo
until asymptomatic

<15 kg: not indicated
≥15 kg: see adult dosing

FLUKE, HERMAPHRODITIC, INFECTION
Clonorchis sinensis (Chinese liver fluke)
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel

25 mg/kg PO tid × 2 day

25 mg/kg PO tid × 2 day37

or

Albendazole7

10 mg/kg PO × 7 days

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

Fasciola hepatica (sheep liver fluke)
Drug of choice:

Triclabendazole7,38,39

10 mg/kg PO once or twice

10 mg/kg PO once or twice

Alternative:

Nitazoxanide7

500 mg PO bid × 7 days

1-­3 yr: 100 mg PO bid
4-­11 yr: 200 mg PO bid
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

Bithionol3,7

or

30-­50 mg/kg PO on alternate days × 10-­15 doses

30-­50 mg/kg PO on alternate days × 10-­15 doses

Fasciolopsis buski, Heterophyes heterophyes, Metagonimus yokogawai (intestinal flukes)
Praziquantel7

Drug of choice:

25 mg/kg PO tid × 1 day

25 mg/kg PO tid × 1 day37

Metorchis conjunctus (North American liver fluke)40
Praziquantel7

Drug of choice:

25 mg/kg PO tid × 1 day

25 mg/kg PO tid × 1 day37

20 mg/kg PO tid × 1 day

20 mg/kg PO tid × 1 day37

Nanophyetus salmincola
Praziquantel7

Drug of choice:

Opisthorchis viverrini (Southeast Asian liver fluke), Opisthorchis felineus (cat liver fluke)
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel

25 mg/kg PO tid × 2 days

25 mg/kg PO tid × 2 days37

or

Albendazole7

10 mg/kg PO × 7 days

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

Paragonimus westermani (lung fluke)
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel7

25 mg/kg PO tid × 2 days

25 mg/kg PO tid × 2 days37

or

Triclabendazole7,41

10 mg/kg PO bid × 1 day or 5 mg/kg daily ×
3 days

10 mg/kg PO bid × 1 day or 5 mg/kg daily × 3
days

or

Bithionol3,7

30-­50 mg/kg PO on alternate days × 10-­15
doses

30-­50 mg/kg PO on alternate days × 10-­15 doses

GIARDIASIS (GIARDIA INTESTINALIS, ALSO KNOWN AS GIARDIA DUODENALIS OR GIARDIA LAMBLIA)
Drugs of choice:

Metronidazole7

250 mg PO tid × 5 days

5 mg/kg (max 250 mg) PO tid × 5 days

or

Nitazoxanide5

500 mg PO bid × 3 days

1-­3 yr: 100 mg PO every 12 hr × 3 days
4-­11 yr: 200 mg PO every 12 hr × 3 days
≥12 yr: see adult dosing

36Annual treatment with ivermectin, 150 μg/kg, can prevent blindness from ocular onchocerciasis (Mabey D, et al. Ophthalmology. 1996;103:1001). Ivermectin kills only the microfilaria

but not the adult worms; emerging evidence suggests doxycycline is effective in killing adult worms and sterilizing females. The recommended regimen from the CDC is
doxycycline 100-­200 mg PO daily for 6 wk begun 1 wk after a dose of ivermectin is given to reduce the microfilaria burden. Diethylcarbamazine and suramin were formerly used for
treatment of this disease but should no longer be used because of the availability of less toxic therapies.
37Limited safety data in children <4 yr of age but has been used in mass prevention campaigns with no reported adverse effects.
38Unlike infections with other flukes, Fasciola hepatica infections do not respond to praziquantel. Triclabendazole may be safe and effective, but data are limited (Graham CS,
et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33:1). In the United States, the drug is not approved by the FDA and is not yet commercially available. However, it is available to physicians licensed
in the United States through the CDC Drug Service, under a special protocol, which requires that both the CDC and FDA agree that the drug is indicated for treatment of a
particular patient. Providers should contact the CDC Drug Service, Division of Scientific Resources, at 1-­404-­639-­3670. It is available from Victoria Pharmacy, Zurich, Switzerland
(www.pharmaworld.com). The drug should be given with food for better absorption. A single study has found that nitazoxanide has limited efficacy for treating fascioliasis in adults
and children (Favennec L, et al. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003;17:265).
39Richter J, et al. Curr Treat Options Infect Dis. 2002;4:313.
40MacLean JD, et al. Lancet. 1996;347:154.
41Triclabendazole may be effective in a dosage of 5 mg/kg once a day × 3 days or 10 mg/kg bid × 1 day (Calvopiña M, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1998;92:566). In the United
States, it is not approved by the FDA and is not yet commercially available. However, it is available to physicians licensed in the United States through the CDC Drug Service,
under a special protocol, which requires both the CDC and FDA to agree that the drug is indicated for treatment of a particular patient. Providers should contact the CDC
Drug Service, Division of Scientific Resources, at 1-­404-­639-­3670. The drug is available from Victoria Pharmacy, Zurich, Switzerland; Phone, 41 43 344 60 60; FAX, 41 43 344 60 69;
http://www.pharmaworld.com; e-­mail, info@pharmaworld.com.

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2132 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

GIARDIASIS (GIARDIA INTESTINALIS, ALSO KNOWN AS GIARDIA DUODENALIS OR GIARDIA LAMBLIA)
Drugs of choice:

Metronidazole7

250 mg PO tid × 5 days

5 mg/kg (max 250 mg) PO tid × 5 days

or

Tinidazole4

2 g PO once

50 mg/kg PO once (max 2 g)

Alternatives42

Paromomycin7,43

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

25-­35 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

or

Furazolidone3

100 mg PO qid × 7-­10 days

6 mg/kg/day PO in 4 doses × 7-­10 days

or

Quinacrine2

100 mg PO tid × 5 days

2 mg/kg tid PO × 5 days (max 300 mg/day)

GNATHOSTOMIASIS (GNATHOSTOMA SPINIGERUM)
Treatment of
choice:44

Albendazole7

or

Ivermectin7

400 mg PO bid × 21 days

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

200 μg/kg/day PO × 2 days

<15 kg: not indicated
≥15 kg: see adult dosing

±

Surgical removal

GONGYLONEMIASIS (GONGYLONEMA SP.)45
Treatment of
choice:

Surgical removal

or

Albendazole7

400 mg PO daily × 3 days

10 mg/kg/day PO × 3 days

HOOKWORM INFECTION (ANCYLOSTOMA DUODENALE, NECATOR AMERICANUS)
Drug of choice:

Albendazole7

400 mg PO once

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

or

Mebendazole

100 mg PO bid × 3 days or 500 mg once

100 mg PO bid × 3 days or 500 mg once13

or

Pyrantel pamoate (OTC)7

11 mg/kg (max 1 g) PO × 3 days

11 mg/kg (max 1 g) PO × 3 days

HYDATID CYST, SEE TAPEWORM INFECTION
HYMENOLEPIS NANA, SEE TAPEWORM INFECTION
LEISHMANIA INFECTION46
Visceral47
Drugs of choice:

Liposomal amphotericin
B (AmBisome)48,49

3 mg/kg/day IV on days 1-­5, 14, and 21 (total
dose 21 mg/kg)

3 mg/kg/day IV on days 1-­5, 14, and 21 (total
dose 21 mg/kg)

or

Miltefosine50

30-­44 kg: 50 mg PO bid × 28 days

<12 yr: 2.5mg/kg daily × 28 days7

45 kg: 50 mg PO tid × 28 days

≥12 yr: see adult dosing

or

Sodium stibogluconate
(Pentostam)28,51

20 mg Sb/kg/day IV or IM × 28 days

20 mg Sb/kg/day IV or IM × 28 days

or

Amphotericin B
deoxycholate7

1 mg/kg IV daily or every 2 days for 15-­20
doses

1 mg/kg IV daily or every 2 days for 15-­20 doses

42Albendazole 400 mg daily × 5 days alone or in combination with metronidazole may also be effective (Hall A, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1993;87:84; Dutta AK, et al. Indian J

Pediatr. 1994;61:689; Cacopardo B, et al. Clin Ter. 1995;146:761). Combination treatment with standard doses of metronidazole and quinacrine given for 3 wk has been effective for
a small number of refractory infections (Nash TE, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33:22). In one study, nitazoxanide was used successfully in high doses to treat a case of Giardia infection
resistant to metronidazole and albendazole (Abboud P, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32:1792).
43Not absorbed; may be useful for treatment of giardiasis in pregnancy.
44de Gorgolas M, et al. J Travel Med. 2003;10:358. All patients should be treated with a medication regardless of whether surgery is attempted.
45Eberhard ML, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1999;61:51; Wilson ME, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32:1378.
46Consultation with physicians experienced in management of this disease is recommended. To maximize effectiveness and minimize toxicity, the choice of drug, dosage, and
duration of therapy should be individualized based on the region of disease acquisition, likely infecting species, number, significance and location of lesions, and host factors such
as immune status (Murray HW. Lancet. 2005;366:1561; Aronson N, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63:e202). Some of the listed drugs and regimens are effective only against certain
Leishmania species/strains and only in certain areas of the world (Sundar S, et al. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2013;14:53).
47Visceral infection is most commonly caused by the Old World species Leishmania donovani (kala-­azar) and Leishmania infantum and the New World species Leishmania chagasi.
Treatment duration may vary based on symptoms, host immune status, species, and area of the world in which the infection was acquired. Liposomal amphotericin B is the
treatment of choice in the IDSA leishmaniasis guidelines (Aronson N, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63:e202).
48Three lipid formulations of amphotericin B have been used for treatment of visceral leishmaniasis. Largely based on clinical trials in patients infected with Leishmania infantum, the
FDA approved liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome) for treatment of visceral leishmaniasis (Meyerhoff A. Clin Infect Dis. 1999;28:42). Amphotericin B lipid complex (Abelcet) and
amphotericin B cholesteryl sulfate (Amphotec) have also been used with good results but are considered investigational for this condition by the FDA.
49The FDA-­approved dosage regimen for immunocompromised patients (e.g., HIV infected) is 4 mg/kg/day on days 1-­5 and 4 mg/kg/day on days 10, 17, 24, 31, and 38. The relapse
rate is high; maintenance therapy may be indicated, but there is no consensus as to dosage or duration. (Russo R, et al. J Infect. 1996;32:133).
50For treatment of kala-­azar in adults in India, oral miltefosine 100 mg/day (∼205 mg/kg/day) for 3-­4 wk was 97% effective after 6 mo (Jha TK, et al. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1795;
Sangraula H, et al. J Assoc Physicians India. 2003;51:686). GI adverse effects are common, and the drug is contraindicated in pregnancy. The dose of miltefosine in an open-­label
trial in children in India was 2.5 mg/kg/day × 28 days (Bhattacharya SK, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;38:217). Miltefosine (Impavido) has been approved by the FDA for treatment of
leishmaniasis due to Leishmania donovani; cutaneous leishmaniasis due to L. braziliensis, Leishmania guyanensis, and Leishmania panamensis, and mucosal leishmaniasis due to L.
braziliensis since 2014 and is now commercially available.
51May be repeated or continued; a longer duration may be needed for some patients (Herwaldt BL. Lancet. 1999;354:1191).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2133

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

Alternative:

Meglumine
antimonate3,51

20 mg pentavalent antimony/kg/day IV or IM
× 28 days

20 mg pentavalent antimony/kg/day IV or IM ×
28 days

or

Pentamidine7

4 mg/kg IV or IM daily or every 2 days for
15-­30 doses

4 mg/kg IV or IM daily or every 2 days for 15-­30
doses

Drugs of choice:

Sodium
stibogluconate28,51

20 mg Sb/kg/day IV or IM × 20 days

20 mg Sb/kg/day IV or IM × 20 days

or

Liposomal amphotericin
B (AmBisome)7

3 mg/kg/day IV on days 1-­5 and 10 or 1-­7
(total dose 18-­21 mg/kg)

3 mg/kg/day IV on days 1-­5 and 10 or 1-­7 (total
dose 18-­21 mg/kg)

or

Amphotericin B
deoxycholate7

0.5-­1 mg/kg IV daily or every 2 days (total
dose 15-­30 mg/kg)

0.5-­1 mg/kg IV daily or every 2 days (total dose
15-­30 mg/kg)

or

Miltefosine50

30-­44 kg: 50 mg PO bid × 28 days

<12 yr: 2.5mg/kg daily × 28 days7

³ 45 kg: 50 mg PO tid x 28 days

≥12 yr: see adult dosing

Cutaneous52,53

Alternatives:

Meglumine
antimonate3,51

20 mg pentavalent antimony/kg/day IV or IM
× 20 days

20 mg pentavalent antimony/kg/day IV or IM ×
20 days

or

Pentamidine7,54

3-­4 mg/kg IV or IM every 2 days × 3-­4 doses

2-­3 mg/kg IV or IM daily or every 2 days × 4-­7 doses

or

Paromomycin7,55

Topically 2×/day × 10-­20 days

Topically 2×/day × 10-­20 days

or

Ketoconazole7

600 mg daily × 28 days

or

Fluconazole7

200 mg daily × 6 wk

or

Local therapy including cryotherapy, thermotherapy, intralesional SbV, topical paromomycin, photodynamic or laser therapy

Mucosal56
Drugs of choice:

Sodium
stibogluconate28,51

20 mg Sb/kg/day IV or IM × 28 days

20 mg Sb/kg/day IV or IM × 28 days

or

Liposomal amphotericin
B (AmBisome)7

3 mg/kg/day IV × 10 days or 4 mg/kg days 1-­5,
10, 17, 24, 31, and 38 (total dose 20-­60 mg/kg)

2-­4 mg/kg/day IV × 10 days or 4 mg/kg days 1-­5,
10, 17, 24, 31, and 38 (total dose 20-­60 mg/kg)

or

Amphotericin B
deoxycholate7

0.5-­1 mg/kg IV daily or every 2 days (total
dose 20-­45 mg/kg)

0.5-­1 mg/kg IV daily or every 2 days (total dose
20-­45 mg/kg)

or

Miltefosine50

30-­44 kg: 50 mg PO bid × 28 days

<12 yr: 2.5 mg/kg daily × 28 days7

45 kg: 50 mg PO tid × 28 days

≥12 yr: see adult dosing

Alternative:

Meglumine
antimonate3,51

20 mg pentavalent antimony/kg/day IV or IM
× 28 days

20 mg pentavalent antimony/kg/day IV or IM ×
28 days

LICE (HEAD AND BODY) INFESTATION (PEDICULUS HUMANUS CAPITIS, PEDICULUS HUMANUS HUMANUS)
Drugs of choice:

0.5% Malathion (Ovide)57

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart, approved for 6 yr

or

1% Permethrin (Nix)
(OTC)57

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart, approved for 2 mo

or

Pyrethrins with
Topically 2×, 1 wk apart
piperonyl butoxide (A-­
200, Proto, R&C, Rid,
Triple X) (OTC)58

Topically 2×, 1 wk, approved for ≥2 yr

52Cutaneous infection is most commonly caused by the Old World species Leishmania major and Leishmania tropica and the New World species Leishmania mexicana, Leishmania

(Viannia) braziliensis, and others. Treatment duration may vary based on symptoms, host immune status, species, and area of the world where infection was acquired.
53In a placebo-­controlled trial in patients 12 yr old and older, oral miltefosine was effective for the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania (Viannia) panamensis in

Colombia but not Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis in Guatemala at a dosage of about 2.5 mg/kg/day for 28 days. “Motion sickness,” nausea, headache, and increased creatinine
were the most frequent adverse effects (Soto J, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;38:1266). For treatment of Leishmania major cutaneous lesions, a study in Saudi Arabia found that oral
fluconazole, 200 mg once/day × 6 wk, appeared to speed healing (Alrajhi AA, et al. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:891).
54At this dosage, pentamidine has been effective against leishmaniasis in Colombia, where the likely organism was Leishmania (Viannia) panamensis (Soto-­Mancipe J, et al. Clin Infect
Dis. 1993;16:417; Soto J, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1994;50:107); its effect against other species is not well established. Updated based on Leishmania practice guidelines (Aronson
N, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63:e202).
55Topical paromomycin should be used only in geographic regions where cutaneous leishmaniasis species have low potential for mucosal spread. A formulation of 15%
paromomycin/12% methylbenzethonium chloride (Leshcutan) in soft white paraffin for topical use has been reported to be partially effective in some patients against cutaneous
leishmaniasis due to Leishmania major in Israel and against Leishmania mexicana and Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis in Guatemala, where mucosal spread is very rare (Arana BA,
et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2001;65:466). Methylbenzethonium is irritating to the skin; lesions may worsen before they improve.
56Mucosal infection is most commonly due to the New World species Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis, Leishmania (Viannia) panamensis, or Leishmania (Viannia) guyanensis.
Treatment duration may vary based on symptoms, host immune status, species, and area of the world where infection was acquired.
57Yoon KS, et al. Arch Dermatol. 2003;139:994.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2134 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

or

0.5% Ivermectin lotion
(Sklice)

Topically, once

Topically once, approved for ≥6 mo

or

0.9% Spinosad
suspension (Natroba)

Topically once, second dose in 1 wk if live
adult lice seen

Topically once, second dose in 1 wk if live adult
lice seen, approved for ≥6 mo

or

Ivermectin7,59

200-­400 μg/kg PO 2×, 1 wk apart

<15 kg: not indicated

or

5% Benzyl alcohol
lotion (Ulesfia)

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart

15 kg: see adult dosing
Topically 2×, 1 wk apart

LICE (PUBIC) INFESTATION (PHTHIRUS PUBIS)60
Drugs of choice:

1% Permethrin (Nix)
(OTC)57

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart, approved for ≥2 mo

or

Pyrethrins with
Topically 2×, 1 wk apart
piperonyl butoxide (A-­
200, Proto, R&C, Rid,
Triple X) (OTC)53

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart, approved for ≥2 yr

or

0.5% Malathion
(Ovide)57

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart, approved for ≥6 yr

or

0.5% Ivermectin lotion
(Sklice)

Topically, once

Topically once, approved for ≥6 mo

or

Ivermectin7,59

200-­400 μg/kg PO 2×, 1 wk apart

<15 kg: not indicated
≥15 kg: see adult dosing

LOA LOA, SEE FILARIASIS
MALARIA (PLASMODIUM FALCIPARUM, PLASMODIUM OVALE, PLASMODIUM VIVAX, AND PLASMODIUM MALARIAE) – TREATMENT
Uncomplicated infection due to P. falciparum or species not identified acquired in areas of chloroquine resistance or unknown resistance61
Drugs of choice:62

Atovaquone/proguanil
(Malarone)
Adult tabs: 50 mg
atovaquone/100 mg
proguanil
Pediatric tabs 62.5 mg
atovaquone/25 mg
proguanil)63

4 adult tabs PO once daily or 2 adult tabs PO
bid × 3 days64

<5 kg: not indicated
5-­8 kg: 2 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
9-­10 kg: 3 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
11-­20 kg: 1 adult tab PO daily × 3 days
21-­30 kg: 2 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
31-­40 kg: 3 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
>40 kg: 4 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days

or

Coartem (artemether/
lumefantrine)
Fixed dose of 20 mg
artemether and 120
mg lumefantrine per
tablet

4 tablets per dose. A 3-­day treatment
schedule with a total of 6 oral doses is
recommended for both adult and pediatric
patients based on weight. These 6 doses
should be administered over 3 days at 0, 8,
24, 36, 48, and 60 hr

5 to <15 kg: 1 tablet PO per dose
15 to <25 kg: 2 tablets PO per dose
25 to <35 kg: 3 tablets per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tablets PO per dose

58A second application is recommended 1 wk later to kill hatching progeny. Lice are increasingly demonstrating resistance to pyrethrins and permethrin (Meinking TL, et al. Arch

Dermatol. 2002;138:220). Ivermectin lotion 0.5% was approved by the FDA in 2012 for treatment of head lice in persons 6 mo of age and older. It is not ovicidal, but it appears to
prevent nymphs from surviving. It is effective in most patients when given as a single application on dry hair without nit combing (www.cdc.gov/parasites/lice/head/treatment.html).
59Ivermectin is effective against adult lice but has no effect on nits (Jones KN, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;36:1355).
60For infestation of eyelashes with Phthirus pubis lice, use petrolatum; Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) has also been used (Meinking TL. Curr Probl Dermatol.
1996;24:157). For pubic lice, treat with 5% permethrin or ivermectin as for scabies. TMP-­SMX has also been effective, together with permethrin for head lice (Hipolito RB, et al.
Pediatrics. 2001;107:E30).
61Chloroquine-­resistant Plasmodium falciparum occurs in all malarious areas except Central America west of the Panama Canal Zone, Mexico, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and
most of the Middle East (chloroquine resistance has been reported in Yemen, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and Iran). For treatment of multidrug-­resistant P. falciparum in Southeast Asia,
especially Thailand, where resistance to mefloquine is frequent, atovaquone/proguanil, artesunate plus mefloquine, or artemether plus mefloquine may be used (Luxemburger C,
et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1994;88:213; Karbwang J, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1995;89:296).
62Uncomplicated or mild malaria may be treated with oral drugs.
63To enhance absorption and reduce nausea and vomiting, it should be taken with food or a milky drink. Safety in pregnancy is unknown, and use is generally not recommended. In a
few small studies, outcomes were normal in women treated with the combination in the second and third trimesters (Paternak B, et al. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171:259; Boggild AK,
et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2007;76:208). The drug should not be given to patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min). There have been isolated case
reports of resistance in Plasmodium falciparum in Africa, but Medical Letter consultants do not believe there is a high risk for acquisition of Malarone-­resistant disease (Schwartz E,
et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37:450; Farnert A, et al. BMJ. 2003;326:628; Kuhn S, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2005;72:407; Happi C, et al. Malar J. 2006;5:82).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2135

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

or

Quinine sulfate

542 mg base (650 mg salt) PO tid × 3-­7
days64

8.3 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/kg) PO tid × 3-­7
days65

plus doxycycline7,17

100 mg PO bid × 7 days

4 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses × 7 days

or plus tetracycline7,17

250 mg PO qid × 7 days

6.25 mg/kg PO qid × 7 days

or plus clindamycin7,66

20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 divided doses × 7
days67

20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

Mefloquine68,69

750 mg PO followed 12 hr later by 500 mg

15 mg/kg PO followed 12 hr later by 10 mg/kg

Alternative:

Uncomplicated infection due to P. falciparum or species not identified acquired in areas of chloroquine sensitivity or uncomplicated P. malariae
or P. knowlesi
Drug of choice:

Chloroquine phosphate
(Aralen)

600 mg base (1,000 mg salt) PO, then 300 mg
base (500 mg salt) PO at 6, 24, and 48 hr

10 mg base/kg (16.7 mg salt/kg) PO, then 5 mg
base/kg (8.3 mg salt/kg) PO at 6, 24, and 48 hr

or

Hydroxychloroquine
(Plaquenil)70

620 mg base (800 mg salt) PO, then 310 mg
base (400 mg salt) PO at 6, 24, and 48 hr

10 mg base/kg (12.9 mg salt/kg) PO, then 5 5 mg
base/kg (6.5 mg salt/kg) PO at 6, 24, and 48 hr

or

Artemether-­
lumefantrine
(Coartem)10 (1 tab: 20
mg artemether / 120
mg lumefantrine)

Adults: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course: day 1: initial dose and
second dose 8 hr later; days 2 and 3: 1
dose bid

5 to­<15 kg: 1 tab PO per dose
15 to­<25 kg: 2 tabs PO per dose
25 to­<35 kg: 3 tabs PO per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course: day 1: initial dose and second
dose 8 hr later; days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid

Uncomplicated infection with P. vivax acquired in areas of chloroquine resistance71
Drugs of choice:

Atovaquone/proguanil
(Malarone)
Adult tabs: 50 mg
atovaquone/100 mg
proguanil
Pediatric tabs 62.5 mg
atovaquone/25 mg
proguanil)63

4 adult tabs PO once daily × 3 days

<5 kg: not indicated
5-­8 kg: 2 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
9-­10 kg: 3 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
11-­20 kg: 1 adult tab PO daily × 3 days
21-­30 kg: 2 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
31-­40 kg: 3 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
>40 kg: 4 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days

or

plus primaquine72

30 mg base PO daily × 14 days

0.5 mg/kg/day PO × 14 days

Quinine sulfate

542 mg base (650 mg salt) PO tid × 3-­7 days64

8.3 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/kg) PO tid × 3-­7 days58

plus doxycycline7,17

100 mg PO bid × 7 days

4 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses × 7 days

or plus tetracycline7,17

250 mg PO qid × 7 days

6.25 mg/kg PO qid × 7 days

or plus clindamycin7,66

20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 divided doses × 7
days67

20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

plus primaquine72

30 mg base PO daily × 14 days

0.5 mg/kg/day PO × 14 days

64Although approved for once-­daily dosing, Medical Letter consultants usually divide the dose into 2 doses to decrease nausea and vomiting.
65In Southeast Asia, relative resistance to quinine has increased and treatment should be continued for 7 days.
66For use in pregnancy.
67Lell B, et al. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2002;46:2315.
68At this dosage, adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, a disturbed sense of balance, toxic psychosis, and seizures can occur. Mefloquine should not be used for

treatment of malaria in pregnancy unless there is no other treatment option, because of an increased risk for stillbirth (Nosten F, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 1999;28:808). It should be avoided
for treatment of malaria in persons with active depression or with a history of psychosis or seizures and should be used with caution in persons with psychiatric illness. Mefloquine
can be given to patients taking β-­blockers if they do not have an underlying arrhythmia; it should not be used in patients with conduction abnormalities. Mefloquine should not be
given together with quinine, quinidine, or halofantrine, and caution is required in using quinine, quinidine, or halofantrine to treat patients with malaria who have taken mefloquine for
prophylaxis. Resistance to mefloquine has been reported in some areas, such as the Thailand-­Myanmar and Thailand-­Cambodia borders and in the Amazon basin, where 25 mg/kg
should be used. In the United States, a 250 mg tablet of mefloquine contains 228 mg mefloquine base. Outside the United States, each 275 mg tablet contains 250 mg base.
69Plasmodium falciparum with resistance to mefloquine is a significant problem in the malarious areas of Thailand and in areas of Myanmar and Cambodia that border on Thailand.
It has also been reported on the borders between Myanmar and China, Laos and Myanmar, and in Southern Vietnam. In the United States, a 250 mg tablet of mefloquine contains
228 mg mefloquine base. Outside the United States, each 275 mg tablet contains 250 mg base.
70If chloroquine phosphate is not available, hydroxychloroquine sulfate is as effective; 400 mg of hydroxychloroquine sulfate is equivalent to 500 mg of chloroquine phosphate.
71Plasmodium vivax with decreased susceptibility to chloroquine is a significant problem in Papua New Guinea and Indonesia. There are also a few reports of resistance from
Myanmar, India, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Guyana, Brazil, Colombia, and Peru.
72Primaquine phosphate can cause hemolytic anemia, especially in patients whose red cells are deficient in glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). This deficiency is most
common in African, Asian, and Mediterranean peoples. Patients should be screened for G6PD deficiency before treatment. Primaquine should not be used during pregnancy.
For those with intermediate G6PD deficiency, weekly primaquine may be used (45 mg/wk) for 8 wk with close monitoring for hemolysis. Those with G6PD deficiency may be given
chloroquine 300 mg (base) PO weekly for 1 yr for acute infection to prevent relapses.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2136 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

or

Artemether-­
lumefantrine
(1 tab: 20 mg
artemether/120 mg
lumefantrine)
Weight-­based treatment
schedule for both
adult and pediatric
patients. Patients take
initial dose, followed
by a second dose 8 hr
later, then 1 dose twice
a day for the next 2
days (total of 6 oral
doses over 3 days)

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

or

Mefloquine68

750 mg PO followed 12 hr later by 500 mg PO

15 mg/kg PO followed 12 hr later by 10 mg/kg PO

plus primaquine72

30 mg base PO daily × 14 days

0.5 mg/kg/day PO × 14 days

5 kg to <15 kg: 1 tablet per dose
15 kg to <25 kg: 2 tablets per dose
25 kg to <35 kg: 3 tablets per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tablets per dose
Not recommended for people taking mefloquine
prophylaxis or for children weighing <5 kg, or
people breastfeeding infants weighing <5 kg

Uncomplicated infection with P. ovale and P. vivax acquired in areas without chloroquine resistance71
Drug of choice:

or

or

Chloroquine phosphate
(Aralen)

600 mg base (1,000 mg salt) PO, then 300 mg
base (500 mg salt) PO at 6, 24, and 48 hr

10 mg base/kg (16.7 mg salt/kg) PO, then 5 mg
base/kg (8.3 mg salt/kg) PO at 6, 24, and 48 hr

plus primaquine72

30 mg base PO daily × 14 days

0.5 mg/kg/day PO × 14 days

Hydroxychloroquine
(Plaquenil)70

620 mg base PO, then 310 mg base PO at 6,
24, and 48 hr

10 mg/kg base PO, then 5 mg/kg base PO at 6,
24, and 48 hr

plus primaquine72

30 mg base PO daily × 14 days

0.5 mg/kg/day PO × 14 days

Tafenoquine (Krintafel)73

300 mg PO × 1 dose

>16 yr: see adult dosing

Artesunate28,75

2.4 mg/kg/dose IV × 3 days, at 0, 12, and 24 hr

2.4 mg/kg/dose IV × 3 days, at 0, 12, and 24 hr

Followed by:
• Artemether/
lumefantrine
(preferred), or
• Atovaquone-­
proguanil, or
• Quinine plus
doxycycline or
clindamycin, or
• Mefloquine (only
if no other options
available)

Dosing as above

Dosing as above

Coartem (Artemether/
lumefantrine)
Fixed dose of 20 mg
artemether and 120
mg lumefantrine per
tablet (preferred)

4 tablets per dose. A 3-­day treatment
schedule with a total of 6 oral doses is
recommended for both adult and pediatric
patients based on weight. These 6 doses
should be administered over 3 days at 0, 8,
24, 36, 48, and 60 hr

5 to <15 kg: 1 tablet PO per dose

Atovaquone/proguanil
(Malarone)
Adult tabs: 50 mg
atovaquone/100 mg
proguanil
Pediatric tabs 62.5 mg
atovaquone/25 mg
proguanil)63

4 adult tabs PO once daily × 3 days

<5 kg: not indicated

Severe malaria due to all Plasmodium spp.
Drugs of choice:74

Alternative:

or

15 to <25 kg: 2 tablets PO per dose
25 to <35 kg: 3 tablets per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tablets PO per dose

5-­8 kg: 2 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
9-­10 kg: 3 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
11-­20 kg: 1 adult tab PO daily × 3 days
21-­30 kg: 2 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
31-­40 kg: 3 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
>40 kg: 4 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days

73Tafenoquine received regulatory approval in the United States in 2018 for prophylaxis of malaria and radical cure of Plasmodium vivax. Tafenoquine is associated with hemolytic

anemia in those with glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Prior to use, quantitative G6PD testing is needed to confirm normal activity.
74Exchange transfusion has been helpful for some patients with high-­density (>10%) parasitemia, altered mental status, pulmonary edema, or renal complications (Miller KD, et al.

N Engl J Med. 1989;321:65).
75Artesnuate is considered first-­line therapy for severe malaria. If not available within 24 hours, contact CDC’s Malaria Hotline. To avoid the development of resistance, adults treated

with artesunate must also receive oral treatment doses of either atovaquone/proguanil, doxycycline, clindamycin, or mefloquine; children should take either atovaquone/proguanil,
clindamycin, or mefloquine (Nosten F, et al. Lancet. 2000;356:297; van Vugt M. Clin Infect Dis. 2002;35:1498; Smithuis F, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2004;98:182). If artesunate
is given IV, oral medication should be started when the patient is able to tolerate it (SEAQUAMAT group. Lancet. 2005;366:717; Duffy PE, et al. Lancet. 2005;366:1908). If oral
therapy is not tolerated, consider administration via nasogastric (NG) tube or after an antiemetic. If parasitemia >1%, continue IV artesunate at the same dose daily up to 6 more
days until parasite density ≤1%. When parasite density ≤1%, give complete follow-­up on oral regimen as listed earlier. Reduced susceptibility to artesunate characterized by slow
parasitic clearance has been reported in Cambodia (Rogers WO, et al. Malar J. 2009;8:10; Dundorp AM, et al. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:455).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2137

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

or

Quinine sulfate

648 mg salt PO tid × 3-­7 days64

10 mg salt/kg PO tid × 3-­7 days58

plus doxycycline7,17

100 mg PO bid × 7 days

4 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses × 7 days

or plus tetracycline7,17

250 mg PO qid × 7 days

6.25 mg/kg PO qid × 7 days

or plus clindamycin7,66

20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 divided doses × 7 days67

20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

or

Artemether-lumefantrine
(1 tab: 20 mg
artemether/120 mg
lumefantrine)
Weight-based treatment
schedule for both
adult and pediatric
patients. Patients take
initial dose, followed
by a second dose 8 hr
later, then 1 dose twice
a day for the next 2
days (total of 6 oral
doses over 3 days)

or

Mefloquine68

5 kg to <15 kg: 1 tablet per dose
15 kg to <25 kg: 2 tablets per dose
25 kg to <35 kg: 3 tablets per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tablets per dose
Not recommended for people taking mefloquine
prophylaxis or for children weighing <5 kg, or
people breastfeeding infants weighing <5 kg

750 mg PO followed 12 hr later by 500 mg PO

15 mg/kg PO followed 12 hr later by 10 mg/kg PO

Prevention of relapses: P. vivax and P. ovale only
Drug of choice:

Primaquine phosphate72

30 mg base/day PO × 14 days

0.6 mg base/kg/day PO × 14 days

or

Tafenoquine (Krintafel)73

300 mg PO × 1 dose

>16 yr: see adult dosing

MALARIA – PREVENTION76
Chloroquine-­sensitive areas61
Drug of choice

Chloroquine
phosphate77–79

500 mg salt (300 mg base), PO once/wk
beginning 1-­2 wk before travel to malarious
area and 4 wk after leaving

5 mg/kg base once/wk, up to adult dose of 300
mg base beginning 1-­2 wk before travel to
malarious area and 4 wk after leaving

or

Hydroxychloroquine
(Plaquenil)70

400 mg (310 mg base) PO once/wk
beginning 1-­2 wk before travel to malarious
area and 4 wk after leaving

5 mg/kg base once/wk, up to adult dose of 310
mg base beginning 1-­2 wk before travel to
malarious area and 4 wk after leaving

1 adult tab PO per day beginning 1-­2 days
before travel to malarious area and 7 days
after leaving

11-­20 kg: 1 pediatric tab PO/day

Chloroquine-­resistant areas61
Drug of choice:

Atovaquone/
proguanil63,78,80

21-­30 kg: 2 pediatric tabs PO/day
31-­40 kg: 3 pediatric tabs PO/day
>40 kg: 1 adult tab PO/day

or

Mefloquine48,78,79,81

1 adult tab PO per day beginning 1-­2 wk
before travel to malarious area and 4 wk
after leaving

<9 kg: 5 mg/kg salt once/wk
9-­19 kg: 1⁄4 tab once/wk
19-­30 kg: 1⁄2 tab once/wk
31-­45 kg: 3⁄4 tab once/wk
>45 kg: 1 tab once/wk

76No drug regimen guarantees protection against malaria. If fever develops within a year (particularly within the first 2 mo) after travel to malarious areas, travelers should be advised

to seek medical attention. Insect repellents, insecticide-­impregnated bed nets, and proper clothing are important adjuncts for malaria prophylaxis (Med Lett. 2003;45:41). Malaria in
pregnancy is particularly serious for both the pregnant individual and the fetus; therefore, prophylaxis is indicated if exposure cannot be avoided.
77In pregnancy, chloroquine prophylaxis has been used extensively and safely.
78For prevention of attack after departure from areas where Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium ovale are endemic, which includes almost all areas where malaria is found (except
Haiti), some experts prescribe in addition primaquine phosphate 30 mg base/day or, for children, 0.6 mg base/kg/day during the last 2 wk of prophylaxis. Others prefer to avoid the
toxicity of primaquine and rely on surveillance to detect cases when they occur, particularly when exposure was limited or doubtful. See also footnote71.
79Beginning 1-­2 wk before travel and continuing weekly for the duration of stay and for 4 wk after leaving malarious zone. Most adverse events occur within three doses. Some
Medical Letter consultants favor starting mefloquine 3 wk before travel and monitoring the patient for adverse events; this allows time to change to an alternative regimen if
mefloquine is not tolerated. Mefloquine should not be taken on an empty stomach; it should be taken with at least 8 oz of water. For pediatric doses less than ½ tablet, it is
advisable to have a pharmacist crush the tablet, estimate doses by weighing, and package them in gelatin capsules. There are no data for use in children weighing <5 kg, but
based on dosages in other weight groups, a dose of 5 mg/kg can be used.
80Beginning 1-­2 days before travel and continuing for the duration of stay and for 1 wk after leaving malarious zone. In one study of malaria prophylaxis, atovaquone/proguanil
was better tolerated than mefloquine in nonimmune travelers (Overbosch D, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33:1015). The protective efficacy of Malarone against Plasmodium vivax
is variable, ranging from 84% in Indonesian New Guinea (Ling J, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2002;35:825) to 100% in Colombia (Soto J, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2006;75:430). Some
Medical Letter consultants prefer alternate drugs if traveling to areas where P. vivax predominates.
81Mefloquine has not been approved for use during pregnancy. However, it has been reported to be safe for prophylactic use during the second or third trimester of pregnancy and
possibly during early pregnancy, as well. Mefloquine is not recommended for patients with cardiac conduction abnormalities, and patients with a history of depression, seizures,
psychosis, or psychiatric disorders should avoid mefloquine prophylaxis. Resistance to mefloquine has been reported in some areas, such as the Thailand-­Myanmar and Thailand-­
Cambodia borders; in these areas, atovaquone/proguanil or doxycycline should be used for prophylaxis.

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2138 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

or

Doxycycline7,82

100 mg PO daily

≥8 yr: 2 mg/kg/day, up to 100 mg/day

or

Tafenoquine (Arakoda)

200 mg once daily for 3 days before travel to
a malarious area, then 200 mg weekly while
in the malarious area, then 200 mg as a
single dose, 7 days after leaving malarious
area

No dosing data for children

Alternatives
for areas with
primarily P. vivax:

Primaquine7,83

30 mg base PO daily beginning 1-­2 days
before travel to malarious area and 7-­14
days after leaving

0.5 mg/kg base (max 30 mg) daily beginning 1-­2
days before travel to malarious area and 7-­14
days after leaving

MALARIA – PRESUMPTIVE SELF-­TREATMENT84
Drugs of choice:

Atovaquone/proguanil
(Malarone)
Adult tabs: 50 mg
atovaquone/100 mg
proguanil
Pediatric tabs 62.5 mg
atovaquone/25 mg
proguanil)63

4 adult tabs PO once daily × 3 days

<5 kg: not indicated
5-­8 kg: 2 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
9-­10 kg: 3 pediatric tabs PO daily × 3 days
11-­20 kg: 1 adult tab PO daily × 3 days
21-­30 kg: 2 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
31-­40 kg: 3 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days
>40 kg: 4 adult tabs PO daily × 3 days

or

or

Quinine sulfate64

648 mg salt PO tid × 3-­7 days

10 mg salt/kg PO tid × 3-­7 days

plus doxycycline7,17

100 mg PO bid × 7 days

4 mg/kg/day PO in 2 divided doses × 7 days

Mefloquine68,69

750 mg PO followed 12 hr later by 500 mg

15 mg/kg PO followed 12 hr later by 10 mg/kg

MICROSPORIDIOSIS
Ocular (Encephalitozoon hellem, Encephalitozoon cuniculi, Vittaforma corneae [Nosema corneum])
Drug of choice:

Albendazole7,85

400 mg PO bid

plus fumagillin86

Topical Fumidil B (fumagillin
bicyclohexylammonium) in saline (to achieve
concentration of 70 mg/mL of fumagillin)
2 drops per eye every 2 hr for 4 days, then
2 drops qid

<10 kg/2 yr: 15 mg/kg/day in 2 doses12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

Intestinal (Enterocytozoon bieneusi, Encephalitozoon [Septata] intestinalis)
E. bieneusi87
Drug of choice:

Fumagillin

60 mg/day PO × 14 days in 3 divided doses

Alternatives:

Nitazoxanide5,7

1000 mg PO bid × 3 days

Albendazole7,85

400 mg PO bid × 21 days

E. intestinalis
Drug of choice

<10 kg/2 yr 15 mg/kg/day in 2 doses:12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

Disseminated (E. hellem, E. cuniculi, E. intestinalis, Pleistophora sp., Trachipleistophora sp., and Brachiola vesicularum)
Drug of choice88

Albendazole7,85

400 mg PO bid

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

82Beginning 1-­2 days before travel and continuing for the duration of stay and for 4 wk after leaving. Use of tetracyclines is contraindicated in pregnancy and in children younger than

8 yr old. Doxycycline can cause GI disturbances, vaginal moniliasis, and photosensitivity reactions.
83Studies have shown that daily primaquine beginning 1 day before departure and continued until 3-­7 days after leaving the malarious area provides effective prophylaxis against

chloroquine-­resistant Plasmodium falciparum (Baird JK, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37:1659). Some studies have shown less efficacy against Plasmodium vivax. Nausea and
abdominal pain can be diminished by taking with food.
84A traveler can be given a course of atovaquone/proguanil, mefloquine, or quinine plus doxycycline for presumptive self-­treatment of febrile illness. The drug given for self-­

treatment should be different from that used for prophylaxis. This approach should be used only in very rare circumstances when a traveler cannot promptly get to medical care.
85For HIV-­infected patients, continue until resolution of ocular symptoms and until CD4 count >200 cells/μL for >6 mo after initiation of antiretroviral therapy.
86Ocular lesions caused by Encephalitozoon hellem in HIV-­infected patients have responded to fumagillin eyedrops prepared from Fumidil-­B (bicyclohexyl ammonium fumagillin) used

to control a microsporidial disease of honey bees (Diesenhouse MC. Am J Ophthalmol. 1993;115:293), available from Leiter’s Park Avenue Pharmacy (San Jose, CA; 1-­800-­292-­6773;
www.leiterrx.com). For lesions caused by Vittaforma corneae, topical therapy is generally not effective and keratoplasty may be required (Davis RM, et al. Ophthalmology. 1990;97:953).
87Oral fumagillin (Sanofi Recherche, Gentilly, France) has been effective in treating Enterocytozoon. bieneusi (Molina J-­M, et al. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1963), but it has been

associated with thrombocytopenia. HAART may lead to microbiologic and clinical response in HIV-­infected patients with microsporidial diarrhea (Benson CA, et al. MMWR
Recomm Rep. 2004;53([RR-­15]:1). Octreotide (Sandostatin) has provided symptomatic relief in some patients with large-­volume diarrhea.
88Molina J-­M, et al. J Infect Dis. 1995;171:245. There is no established treatment for Pleistophora. For disseminated disease caused by Trachipleistophora or Brachiola, itraconazole

400 mg PO once/day plus albendazole may also be tried (Coyle CM, et al. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:42).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2139

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

11 mg/kg PO once, repeat twice, 2 wk apart

11 mg/kg PO once, repeat twice, 2 wk apart

MITES, SEE SCABIES
MONILIFORMIS MONILIFORMIS INFECTION
Drug of choice:

Pyrantel pamoate (OTC)7

NAEGLERIA SPECIES, SEE AMEBIC MENINGOENCEPHALITIS, PRIMARY
NECATOR AMERICANUS, SEE HOOKWORM INFECTION
OESOPHAGOSTOMUM BIFURCUM
Drug of choice:

See footnote89

ONCHOCERCA VOLVULUS, SEE FILARIASIS
OPISTHORCHIS VIVERRINI, SEE FLUKE INFECTION
PARAGONIMUS WESTERMANI, SEE FLUKE INFECTION
PEDICULUS CAPITIS, PEDICULUS HUMANUS, PHTHIRUS PUBIS, SEE LICE
PINWORM, SEE ENTEROBIUS
PNEUMOCYSTIS JIROVECII (FORMERLY PNEUMOCYSTIS CARINII) PNEUMONIA (PCP)90
Moderate to severe disease
Drug of choice:

TMP-­SMX

15-­20 mg/kg/day TMP component IV in 3-­4
divided doses × 21 days (change to PO
after clinical improvement)

15-­20 mg/kg/day TMP component IV in 3-­4
divided doses × 21 days (change to PO after
clinical improvement)

Alternatives:

Pentamidine

3-­4 mg IV daily × 21 days

3-­4 mg IV daily × 21 days

or

Primaquine

30 mg base PO daily × 21 days

0.3 mg/kg base PO (max 30 mg) daily × 21 days

plus clindamycin7

600-­900 mg IV tid or qid × 21 days, or 300-­
450 mg PO tid or qid × 21 days (change to
PO after clinical improvement)

15-­25 mg/kg IV tid or qid × 21 days, or 10 mg/kg
PO tid or qid (max 300-­450 mg/dose) × 21 days
(change to PO after clinical improvement)

Mild to moderate disease
Drug of choice:

TMP-­SMX

320 mg/1600 mg (2 DS tablets) PO tid × 21 days

TMP 15-­20 mg/kg/day PO in 3 or 4 doses × 21 days

Alternative:

Dapsone

100 mg PO daily × 21 days

2 mg/kg/day (max 100 mg) PO × 21 days

plus trimethoprim

15 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses

15 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses

primaquine

30 mg base PO daily × 21 days

0.3 mg/kg base PO daily (max 30 mg) × 21 days

plus clindamycin

300-­450 mg PO tid or qid × 21 days

10 mg/kg PO tid or qid (max 300-­450 mg/dose)
× 21 days

atovaquone

750 mg PO bid × 21 days

1-­3 mo: 30 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses × 21 days

or

or

Primary and secondary prophylaxis91
Drug of choice:

TMP-­SMX

1 tab (single strength or greater) PO daily or
1 DS tab PO 3 days/wk

TMP 150 mg/m2 in 1-­2 doses daily or on 3
consecutive days/wk

Alternatives:91

Dapsone7

50 mg PO bid, or 100 mg PO daily

2 mg/kg/day (max 100 mg) PO or 4 mg/kg (max
200 mg) PO each wk

or

Dapsone7

50 mg PO daily or 200 mg PO each wk

plus pyrimethamine92

50 mg PO or 75 mg PO each wk

or

Pentamidine aerosol

300 mg inhaled monthly via Respirgard II
nebulizer

≥5 yr: 300 mg inhaled monthly via Respirgard II
nebulizer

or

Atovaquone7

1,500 mg/day PO in 1 or 2 doses

1-­3 mo: 30 mg/kg/day PO
4-­24 mo: 45 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses × 21 days
>24 mo: 30 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses × 21 days

89Albendazole or pyrantel pamoate may be effective (Ziem JB, et al. Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 2004;98:385).

2 ≤70 mm Hg or A-­a O2 gradient ≥35 mm Hg, prednisone should also be used (Gagnon S,
et al. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:1444; Caumes E, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18:319).
91Primary/secondary prophylaxis in patients with HIV can be discontinued after the CD4 count increases to >200 × 106/L for longer than 3 mo.
92Plus leucovorin 25 mg with each dose of pyrimethamine.
90Pneumocystis has been reclassified as a fungus. In severe disease with room air Po

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2140 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

ROUNDWORM, SEE ASCARIASIS
SAPPINIA DIPLOIDEA, SEE AMEBIC MENINGOENCEPHALITIS, PRIMARY
SCABIES (SARCOPTES SCABIEI)
Drug of choice:

5% Permethrin93

Topically, 2× at least 1 wk apart

Topically 2×, 1 wk apart, approved for ≥ 2 mo

Alternatives:93

Ivermectin7,93,94

200 μg/kg PO × 2 at least 1 wk apart

<15 kg: not indicated

10% Crotamiton

Topically overnight on days 1, 2, 3, and 8

≥15 kg: see adult dosing
Topically overnight on days 1, 2, 3, and 8

SCHISTOSOMIASIS (BILHARZIASIS)
Schistosoma haematobium or Schistosoma intercalatum
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel

40 mg/kg/day PO in 1 or 2 doses × 1 day

40 mg/kg/day PO in 1 or 2 doses × 1 day37

Schistosoma japonicum or Schistosoma mekongi
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel

60 mg/kg/day PO in 2 or 3 doses × 1 day

60 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 1 day37

Schistosoma mansoni
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel

40 mg/kg/day PO in 1 or 2 doses × 1 day

40 mg/kg/day PO in 1 or 2 doses × 1 day37

Alternative:

Oxamniquine95,96

15 mg/kg PO once

20 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses × 1 day

<15 kg: not indicated

Sleeping sickness, see Trypanosomiasis
Strongyloidiasis (Strongyloides stercoralis)
Drug of choice:97

Ivermectin

200 μg/kg/day PO × 2 days

Alternative:

Albendazole7,98

400 mg PO bid × 7 days

≥15 kg: see adult dosing
<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing
TAPEWORM INFECTION
Adult (intestinal stage)
Diphyllobothrium latum (fish), Taenia saginata (beef), Taenia solium (pork), Dipylidium caninum (dog)
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel7

5-­10 mg/kg PO once

5-­10 mg/kg PO once37

Alternative:

Niclosamide

2 g PO once

50 mg/kg PO once

Hymenolepis nana (dwarf tapeworm)
Drug of choice:

Praziquantel7

25 mg/kg PO once

25 mg/kg PO once37

Alternative:

Niclosamide99

2 g PO daily × 7 days

11-­34 kg: 1 g PO on day 1 then 500 mg/day PO ×
6 days
>34 kg: 1.5 g PO on day 1 then 1 g/day PO × 6 days

Larval (tissue stage)
Echinococcus granulosus (hydatid disease cystic echinococcosis)
Drug of choice:100

Albendazole7

400 mg PO bid × 1-­6 mo

<10 kg/2 yr: 10-­15 mg/kg/day (max 800 mg/day)
PO, in 2 doses12
≥2 yr: 15 mg/kg/day PO (max 400 mg) × 1-­6 mo

93In some cases, treatment may need to be repeated in 10-­14 days (Currie BJ, et al. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:717). A second ivermectin dose taken 2 wk later increased the cure rate to

95%, which is equivalent to that of 5% permethrin (Usha V, et al. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2000;42:236). Ivermectin, either alone or in combination with a topical scabicide, is the drug
of choice for crusted scabies in immunocompromised patients (del Giudice P. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2004;15:123).
94Ivermectin, either alone or in combination with a topical scabicide, is the drug of choice for crusted scabies in immunocompromised patients (del Giudice P. Curr Opin Infect Dis.

2004;15:123). The safety of oral ivermectin in pregnancy and young children has not been well studied. Ivermectin is included on the KIDS list (Meyers RS, et al. J Pediatr Pharmacol
Ther. 2020;25:175) due to concerns about encephalopathy, but more recent studies suggest that it may be used safely (Levy M, et al. Br J Dermatol. 2020;182:1003).
95Oxamniquine has been effective in some areas in which praziquantel is less effective (Stelma FF, et al. J Infect Dis. 1997;176:304). Oxamniquine is contraindicated in pregnancy.
96In East Africa, the dose should be increased to 30 mg/kg, and in Egypt and South Africa to 30 mg/kg/day × 2 days. Some experts recommend 40-­60 mg/kg over 2-­3 days in all of

Africa (Shekhar KC. Drugs. 1991;42:379).
97In immunocompromised patients or disseminated disease, it may be necessary to prolong or repeat therapy or to use other agents. Veterinary parenteral and enema formulations

of ivermectin have been used in severely ill patients unable to take oral medications (Chiodini PL, et al. Lancet. 2000;355:43; Orem J, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37:152; Tarr PE. Am J
Trop Med Hyg. 2003;68:453).
98Albendazole must be taken with food; a fatty meal increases oral bioavailability.
99Niclosamide must be thoroughly chewed or crushed and swallowed with a small amount of water. Nitazoxanide may be an alternative (Juan JO, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg.

2002;96:193; Chero JC, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2007;101:203; Diaz E, et al. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2003;68:384).
100Optimal treatment depends on multiple factors, including size, location, and number of cysts and presence of complications. In some patients, medical therapy alone is preferred,

but some patients may benefit from surgical resection or percutaneous drainage of cysts. Praziquantel is useful preoperatively or in case of spillage of cyst contents during surgery.
Puncture aspiration-­injection-­reaspiration (PAIR) with ultrasound guidance plus albendazole therapy has been effective for management of hepatic hydatid cyst disease (Smego RA
Jr, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37:1073).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2141

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

Echinococcus multilocularis (alveolar echinococcosis)
Treatment of choice: See footnote101
Neurocysticerosis
Taenia solium (pork)
1-­2 viable parenchymal cysticerci115
Treatment of
choice:102,115

Albendazole

400 mg bid PO × 8-­30 days;
can be repeated as necessary

<10 kg/2 yr: 15 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses (max
dose 1200 mg/day) for 10-­14 days with food
≥2 yr: 15 mg/kg/day PO in 2 doses (max 1200
mg/day) for 10-­14 days with food

>2 viable parenchymal cysticerci115
Albendazole
plus praziquantel

15 mg/kg/day for 10-­14 days
50 mg/kg/day for 10-­14 days

—

Single enhancing lesions (SELs) from cysticercosis115
Albendazole

—

15 mg/kg/day bid with meals for 1–2 weeks
Single enhancing lesions (SELs) from cysticercosis115

Albendazole

—

15 mg/kg/day bid with meals for 1–2 weeks
Calcified parenchymal lesions115
Symptomatic therapy alone

plus steroids
or

Surgical removal

101Surgical excision is the only reliable means of cure. Reports have suggested that in nonresectable cases, the use of albendazole or mebendazole can stabilize and sometimes cure

infection (Craig P. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2003;16:437). Medical treatment is prolonged up to 2 yr or more.
102Initial therapy for patients with inflamed parenchymal cysticercosis should focus on symptomatic treatment with antiseizure medication. Treatment of parenchymal cysticerci with

albendazole or praziquantel is controversial (Maguire JH. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:215). Patients with live parenchymal cysts who have seizures should be treated with albendazole
together with steroids (6 mg dexamethasone or 40-­60 mg prednisone daily) and an antiseizure medication (Garcia HH, et al. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:249). Some recent studies
have shown improved outcomes with combination albendazole and praziquantel (Garcia HH, et al. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014;14:687). Patients with subarachnoid cysts or giant cysts in
the fissures should be treated for at least 30 days (Proaño JV, et al. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:879). Surgical intervention or CSF diversion is indicated for obstructive hydrocephalus;
prednisone 40 mg/day may be given with surgery. Arachnoiditis, vasculitis, or cerebral edema is treated with prednisone 60 mg/day or dexamethasone 4-­6 mg/day together with
albendazole or praziquantel (White AC Jr. Annu Rev Med. 2000;51:187). Any cysticercocidal drug may cause irreparable damage when used to treat ocular or spinal cysts, even
when corticosteroids are used. An ophthalmic exam should always precede treatment to rule out intraocular cysts.
115For patients with 1-­2 viable parenchymal cysticerci, albendazole monotherapy for 10-­14 days compared to either no antiparasitic therapy (strong, high) or combination antiparasitic
therapy (weak, moderate). We recommend albendazole (15 mg/kg/day) combined with praziquantel (50 mg/kg/day) for 10–14 days rather than albendazole monotherapy for
patients with >2 viable parenchymal cysticerci (strong, moderate). We suggest retreatment with antiparasitic therapy for parenchymal cystic lesions persisting for 6 months after
the end of the initial course of therapy (weak, low). We suggest albendazole therapy rather than no antiparasitic therapy for all patients with SELs (weak, moderate). Remarks:
albendazole (15 mg/kg/day in twice-­daily doses up for 1–2 weeks) should be given with meals. We recommend symptomatic therapy alone instead of antiparasitic drugs in patients
with calcified parenchymal lesions (strong, moderate). (Infectious Diseases Society of America [IDSA] and the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene [ASTMH].
Diagnosis and treatment of neurocysticercosis: 2017 Clinical Practice Guidelines by the CID. Published 2/22/2018. Clin Infect Dis 2018;66(8):e49–e75.)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2142 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

TOXOCARIASIS, SEE VISCERAL LARVA MIGRANS
TOXOPLASMOSIS (TOXOPLASMA GONDII)103 (ACQUIRED OR OCULAR INFECTION)
Drugs of
choice:104,105

Alternative for
sulfadiazine or
for suppression/
prophylaxis

Pyrimethamine106

Dosage is adjusted for weight, but 50 mg
PO bid on days 1 and 2, then 50 mg qd is
maximum. Duration depends on clinical
response, treating at least 1-­2 wk beyond
complete resolution and end of any
immune compromise or immaturity. Please
see Chapter 336

1 mg/kg (max 50 mg) bid × 2 days, then 1 mg/kg
qd (max 50 mg). Duration depends on clinical
response, treating at least 1-­2 wk beyond complete
resolution and end of any immune compromise or
immaturity. Please see Chapter 336107
Calcium leucovorin is always given with
pyrimethamine and in the week after
discontinuing
Please see formulation and instructions for
infants in Chapter 336
In the United States pyrimethamine serum levels
can be measured at NMS Laboratories in
Philadelphia
Pyrimethamine cannot be given in the first
trimester of pregnancy

plus sulfadiazine

1.5 g PO bid is a standard dose for a 100-­lb
person, maximum 2 g PO bid. Duration
depends on clinical response, treating at
least 1-­2 wk beyond complete resolution
and end of any immune compromise or
immaturity. Please see Chapter 336.

1.5 g PO bid is a standard dose for a 100-­lb
person, maximum 2 g PO bid. Duration
depends on clinical response, treating at least
1-­2 wk beyond complete resolution and end of
any immune compromise or immaturity. Please
see Chapter 336
This is used with pyrimethamine for synergy

Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-­SMX)

1 double-­strength tablet daily. Alternative dosing: TMP-­SMX 150/750 mg/m2 body surface area
one double-­strength tablet 3 times weekly.
once daily PO
Adult alternative regimen: Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) – 5
mg/kg trimethoprim and 25 mg/kg
sulfamethoxazole given PO or IV bid
Clindamycin (600 mg IV or PO 4 times daily)
plus oral pyrimethamine (200 mg loading
dose followed by 50 mg daily among patients
<60 kg or 75 mg daily among patients ≥60
kg) plus oral leucovorin (10 to 25 mg daily).

TRICHINELLOSIS (TRICHINELLA SPIRALIS)
Drugs of choice:

Steroids for severe
symptoms

Prednisone 30-­60 mg PO daily × 10-­15 days

plus Albendazole7

400 mg PO bid × 8-­14 days

Mebendazole7

200-­400 mg PO tid × 3 days, then 400-­500
mg PO tid × 10 days

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: see adult dosing

Alternative:

200-­400 mg PO tid × 3 days, then 400-­500 mg
PO tid × 10 days13

TRICHOMONIASIS (TRICHOMONAS VAGINALIS)
Drug of choice:108

Metronidazole

2 g PO once or 500 mg PO bid × 7 days

15 mg/kg/day PO in 3 doses × 7 days

or

Tinidazole4

2 g PO once

50 mg/kg PO once (max 2 g)

TRICHOSTRONGYLUS INFECTION
Drug of choice:

Pyrantel pamoate7

11 mg/kg base PO once (max 1 g)

11 mg/kg PO once (max 1 g)

Alternative:

Mebendazole7

100 mg PO bid × 3 days

100 mg PO bid × 3 days13

or

Albendazole7

400 mg PO once

<10 kg/2 yr12
≥2 yr: 15 mg/kg/day PO (max 800 mg) × 1-­6 mo

103In ocular toxoplasmosis with macular involvement, corticosteroids are recommended in addition to antiparasitic therapy for an antiinflammatory effect.
104To treat CNS toxoplasmosis in HIV-­infected patients, some clinicians have used pyrimethamine 50-­100 mg/day (after a loading dose of 200 mg) with sulfadiazine and, when sulfonamide

sensitivity developed, have given clindamycin 1.8-­2.4 g/day in divided doses instead of the sulfonamide. Atovaquone plus pyrimethamine appears to be an effective alternative in sulfa-­
intolerant patients (Chirgwin K, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2002;34:1243). Treatment is followed by chronic suppression with lower-­dosage regimens of the same drugs. For primary prophylaxis
in HIV patients with <100 × 106/L CD4 cells, either trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, pyrimethamine with dapsone, or atovaquone with or without pyrimethamine can be used. Primary or
secondary prophylaxis may be discontinued when the CD4 count increases to >200 × 106/L for more than 3 mo (Benson CA, et al. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004;53([RR-­15]:1).
105Women who develop toxoplasmosis during the first trimester of pregnancy can be treated with spiramycin (3-­4 g/day). After the first trimester, if there is no documented
transmission to the fetus, spiramycin can be continued until term. If transmission has occurred in utero, therapy with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine should be started (Montoya
JG, et al. Lancet. 2004;363:1965). Pyrimethamine is a potential teratogen and should be used only after the first trimester.
106Plus leucovorin 10-­25 mg with each dose of pyrimethamine.
107Congenitally infected newborns should be treated with pyrimethamine every 2 or 3 days and a sulfonamide daily for about 1 yr (Remington JS, et al., eds. Infectious Disease of the
Fetus and Newborn Infant. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001: p. 290).
108Sexual partners should be treated simultaneously. Metronidazole-­resistant strains have been reported and can be treated with higher doses of metronidazole (2-­4 g/day × 7-­14
days) or with tinidazole (Hager WD. Sex Transm Dis. 2004;31:343).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 325 u Principles of Antiparasitic Therapy

2143

Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

TRICHURIASIS (TRICHURIS TRICHIURA, WHIPWORM)
Drug of choice:

Mebendazole

100 mg PO bid × 3 days

100 mg PO bid × 3 days13

Alternative:

Albendazole7

400 mg PO × 3 days

<10 kg/2 yr12

or

Ivermectin7

≥2 yr: see adult dosing
200 μg/kg PO daily × 3 days

<15 kg: not indicated
≥15 kg: see adult dosing

TRYPANOSOMIASIS109
Trypanosoma cruzi (American trypanosomiasis, Chagas disease)
Drug of choice:

Benznidazole28

Alternative:

Nifurtimox28,110

5-­7 mg/kg/day PO in 2 divided doses × 60
days

≤12 yr: 5-­7.5 mg/kg/day PO in 2 divided doses ×
60 days
>12 yr: see adult dosing

8-­10 mg/kg/day PO in 3-­4 doses × 90 days

≤10 yr: 15-­20 mg/kg/day PO in 3-­4 doses × 90 days
11-­16 yr: 12.5-­15 mg/kg/day in 3-­4 doses × 90 days
>16 yr: see adult dosing

Trypanosoma brucei gambiense (West African trypanosomiasis, sleeping sickness)
Hemolymphatic stage
Drug of choice111

Pentamidine isethionate7

4 mg/kg/day IM × 7-­10 days

4 mg/kg/day IM or IV × 7-­10 days

Alternative:

Suramin28

100 mg (test dose) IV, then 1 g IV on days 1,
3, 7, 14, and 21

2 mg/kg (test dose) IV, then 20 mg/kg IV on days
1, 3, 7, 14, and 21

Late disease with CNS involvement
Drug of choice:

Eflornithine28,112

100 mg/kg IV qid × 14 days

100 mg/kg IV qid × 14 days

Alternative:

Melarsoprol28,113

2-­3.6 mg/kg (max 200 mg) daily IV (progressively
increased during series) × 3 days
After 7 days, 3.6 mg/kg daily × 3 days
After 7 days, give a third series of 3.6 mg/kg
daily × 3 days.

2-­3.6 mg/kg (max 200 mg) daily IV (progressively
increased during series) × 3 days
After 7 days, 3.6 mg/kg daily × 3 days
After 7 days, give a third series of 3.6 mg/kg daily
× 3 days

Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense (East African trypanosomiasis, sleeping sickness)
Hemolymphatic stage
Drug of choice:

Suramin28

100 mg (test dose) IV, then 1 g IV on days 1,
3, 7, 14, and 21

2 mg/kg (test dose), then 20 mg/kg IV on days 1,
3, 7, 14, and 21

Late disease with CNS involvement
109Barrett MP, et al. Lancet. 2003;362:1469.

110The addition of γ-­interferon to nifurtimox for 20 days in experimental animals and in a limited number of patients appears to shorten the acute phase of Chagas disease (McCabe

RE, et al. J Infect Dis. 1991;163:912).

111For treatment of Trypanosoma brucei gambiense, pentamidine and suramin have equal efficacy but pentamidine is better tolerated.
112Eflornithine is highly effective in Trypanosoma brucei gambiense but not against Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense infections. It is available in limited supply only from the WHO

and the CDC. Eflornithine dose may be reduced to 400 mg/kg IV in 2 doses for 7 days when used in conjunction with nifurtimox at a dose of 5 mg/kg PO tid × 10 days (Priotto G,
et al. Lancet. 2009;374:56).
113In frail patients, begin with as little as 18 mg and increase the dose progressively. Pretreatment with suramin has been advocated for debilitated patients. Corticosteroids have
been used to prevent arsenical encephalopathy (Pépin J, et al. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1995;89:92). Up to 20% of patients with Trypanosoma brucei gambiense fail to respond
to melarsoprol (Barrett MP. Lancet. 1999;353:1113). Consultation with experts at the CDC is recommended.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2144 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 325.1  Drugs for Parasitic Infections—cont’d
INFECTION

DRUG

ADULT DOSAGE

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE

Drug of choice:

Melarsoprol28,112

2-­3.6 mg/kg (max 200 mg) daily IV (progressively
increased during series) × 3 days
After 7 days, 3.6 mg/kg daily × 3 days
After 7 days, give a third series of 3.6 mg/kg
daily × 3 days

2-­3.6 mg/kg (max 200 mg) daily IV (progressively
increased during series) × 3 days
After 7 days, 3.6 mg/kg daily × 3 days
After 7 days, give a third series of 3.6 mg/kg daily
× 3 days

VISCERAL LARVA MIGRANS (TOXOCARIASIS)114
Drugs of choice:

Albendazole7

400 mg PO bid × 5 days

<10 kg/2 yr12

or

Mebendazole7

100-­200 mg PO bid × 5 days

≥2 yr: see adult dosing
100-­200 mg PO bid × 5 days13

WHIPWORM, SEE TRICHURIASIS
WUCHERERIA BANCROFTI, SEE FILARIASIS
114Optimum duration of therapy is not known; some consultants would treat for 20 days. For severe symptoms or eye involvement, corticosteroids can be used in addition.

bid, Twice a day; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DEC, diethylcarbamazine; DS, double strength;
FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; GI, gastrointestinal; HAART, highly active antiretroviral therapy; IDSA, Infectious Disease Society of America; IM, intramuscularly;
IND, investigational new drugs; IV, intravenously; OTC, over the counter; PO, by mouth; qd, once a day; qid, four times a day; tid, three times a day; WHO, World Health
Organization.
Adapted from Drugs for parasitic infection. Med Lett. 2013;11(Suppl):e1–e23. Available at http://www.medicalletter.org

drug approved for use by the FDA for patients ≥5 kg. It is a fixed-­dose
combination of two novel antimalarials, artemether (20 mg) and lumefantrine (120 mg). It is a highly effective 3-­day malaria treatment, with
cure rates of >96%, even in areas of multidrug resistance. It can be used
to treat chloroquine-­resistant uncomplicated malaria during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy and as an alternative agent in the
first trimester. Artesunate was approved by the FDA for intravenous
(IV) treatment for severe malaria in 2020.

SELECTED ANTIPARASITIC DRUGS FOR HELMINTHS
AND ECTOPARASITES
Albendazole (Albenza)

Albendazole is a benzimidazole carbamate structurally related to
mebendazole and has similar anthelmintic activity. Its absorption from
the gastrointestinal tract is poor but improved with a concomitant
high-­fat meal. Albendazole sulfoxide, the principal metabolite with
anthelmintic activity, has a plasma half-­life of 8.5 hours. It is widely
distributed in the body, including the bile and cerebrospinal fluid. It
is eliminated in bile. Albendazole is FDA approved for treatment of
two cestode (tapeworm) infections: neurocysticercosis and hydatid
diseases (Echinococcus granulosus). It is used off-­label for numerous
other helminth infections, including cutaneous larva migrans (Ancylostoma caninum and Ancylostoma braziliense), ascariasis (Ascaris lumbricoides), liver flukes (Clonorchis sinensis and Opisthorchis viverrini),
pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), lymphatic filariasis (Wuchereria
bancrofti, Brugia malayi, Brugia timori), gnathostomiasis (Gnathostoma spp.), hookworms (Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus), microsporidiosis, trichinellosis (Trichinella spiralis), and visceral
larva migrans (Toxocara canis and Toxocara cati). Albendazole is generally well tolerated. Common adverse effects include headache, nausea,
vomiting, and abdominal pain. Serious adverse effects include elevated
liver enzymes and leukopenia, which have occurred in a few patients
with treatment of hydatid disease. Rare adverse effects include acute
renal failure, pancytopenia, granulocytopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
Despite the fact that albendazole and other antiparasitic drugs, including mebendazole, praziquantel, and pyrimethamine, have been in use
for decades, the number of manufacturers is small and costs have risen
in recent years. Data are limited in pregnancy, and treatment during

pregnancy generally deferred if possible. Albendazole is excreted in
breast milk but is generally considered compatible with breastfeeding
by the WHO.

Ivermectin (Stromectol, Mectizan)

Ivermectin is a semisynthetic derivative of one of the avermectins,
which is a group of macrocyclic lactones produced by Streptomyces
avermitilis. After oral administration, ivermectin has peak plasma
concentrations after approximately 4 hours and a plasma elimination
half-­life of approximately 12 hours. It is excreted as metabolites over
a 2-­week period via feces. It is FDA approved for treatment of two
nematode (roundworm) infections: onchocerciasis (Onchocerca volvulus) and strongyloidiasis (Strongyloides stercoralis). It may have some
effect in treating a broad range of other helminths and ectoparasites,
including cutaneous larva migrans (Ancylostoma braziliense), ascariasis (Ascaris lumbricoides), loiasis, pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis),
whipworm (Trichuris trichiura), gnathostomiasis (Gnathostoma spinigerum), Mansonella infections, lice (Pediculus humanus and Phthirus
pubis), mites (Demodex spp.), and scabies (Sarcoptes scabiei). Combination therapies of ivermectin with albendazole or diethylcarbamazine are being used to treat lymphatic filariasis. Combination therapy
with albendazole and the off-­label use of veterinary injectable formulations have been used to treat complicated Strongyloides infections,
including disseminated disease and hyperinfection syndrome. Though
there has been significant public interest in ivermectin as a treatment
for SARS-­CoV-­2, clinical studies have not shown efficacy. Common
adverse events include dizziness, headache, pruritus, and gastrointestinal effects. Serious adverse events include encephalopathy due
to pathogenic variants in the ABCB1 transporter and Mazzotti reactions in patients with onchocerciasis, including arthralgia, synovitis,
enlarged lymph nodes, rash, and fever secondary to microfilaria death.
A topical formulation is available for treatment of head lice, which are
increasingly becoming very resistant to over-­the-­counter medications
such as permethrins. Data are limited in pregnancy, and other agents
are preferred if available for a given condition. Ivermectin is excreted
in breast milk, and decisions to use this medication while breastfeeding
should consider the risks and benefits of therapy based on the specific
indication.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 326 u Primary Amebic Meningoencephalitis
Praziquantel (Biltricide)

Praziquantel achieves its antiparasitic activity via the pyrazino
isoquinoline ring system and was originally synthesized as a
potential tranquilizer. After oral administration, praziquantel
is rapidly absorbed, with peak levels in 1-­2 hours and a plasma
half-­life of about 1-­3 hours. Elimination via the urine and feces
is >80% complete after 24 hours. Praziquantel is metabolized in
the liver by the microsomal cytochrome P450 (especially 2B1 and
3A). Bioavailability of praziquantel is increased with concomitant
administration of agents that inhibit cytochrome P450. Praziquantel is FDA approved for treatment of several species of trematodes
(flatworms) including the Chinese liver fluke (Clonorchis sinensis),
Southeast Asian liver fluke (Opisthorchis viverrini), and schistosomiasis (Schistosoma spp.). It is used off-­label for treatment of
additional trematode pathogens, including the North American
liver fluke (Metorchis conjunctus), Nanophyetus salmincola, intestinal flukes (Fasciolopsis buski, Heterophyes heterophyes, Metagonimus yokogawai), and lung flukes (Paragonimus westermani,
Paragonimus kellicotti). It is also used off-­label for multiple cestode
(tapeworm) infections. Adverse effects can be seen in 30–60% of
patients, although most are mild and disappear within 24 hours.
Common adverse effects include headache, abdominal pain, dizziness, and malaise. Serious but rare adverse effects include arrhythmias, heart block, and convulsions.

Section 15

Protozoan Diseases
Chapter 326

Primary Amebic
Meningoencephalitis
Matthew D. Eberly
Naegleria, Acanthamoeba, Balamuthia, and Sappinia are small, free-­
living amebae that cause human amebic meningoencephalitis, which
has two distinct clinical presentations. The more common is an acute,
fulminant, and usually fatal primary amebic meningoencephalitis
caused by Naegleria fowleri that occurs in previously healthy children
and young adults. Granulomatous amebic meningoencephalitis,
which is caused by Acanthamoeba, Balamuthia, and Sappinia, is a more
indolent infection that typically occurs in immunocompromised hosts
and may also present with a disseminated form of the disease.

ETIOLOGY

Naegleria is an ameboflagellate that can exist as cyst, trophozoite,
and transient flagellate forms. Temperature and environmental nutrient and ion concentrations are the major factors that determine the
stage of the ameba. Trophozoites are the only stages that are invasive,
although cysts are potentially infective because they can convert to the
vegetative form very quickly under the proper environmental stimuli.
Although there are over 40 species of Naegleria, only Naegleria fowleri
has been shown to be pathogenic for humans.
Acanthamoeba exists in cyst and motile trophozoite forms; only the
trophozoite form is invasive. Cases of Acanthamoeba keratitis usually follow incidents of trivial corneal trauma followed by flushing

2145

with contaminated tap water. Infections can also occur among contact
lens wearers who come into contact with contaminated water during
swimming or use contact lenses cleaned or stored in contaminated tap
water. Granulomatous amebic encephalitis from Acanthamoeba occurs
worldwide and is associated with an immunocompromising condition
such as HIV infection, diabetes mellitus, chronic liver disease, renal
failure, immunosuppressive therapy, or radiation therapy.
Balamuthia mandrillaris has been implicated as an etiology of
granulomatous amebic encephalitis. Although the clinical presentation is similar to infection with Acanthamoeba, most patients are not
immunocompromised.
Other free-­living amebae can also cause infection, as illustrated by a
case report of Sappinia pedata granulomatous encephalitis.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The free-­living amebae have a worldwide distribution. Naegleria species have been isolated from a variety of freshwater sources, including ponds and lakes, domestic water supplies, hot springs and spas,
thermal discharge of power plants, groundwater, and, occasionally,
from the nasal passages of healthy children. Acanthamoeba species
have been isolated from soil, mushrooms, vegetables, brackish water,
and seawater, as well as most of the freshwater sources for Naegleria.
It can also be found in tap water because chlorination does not kill
Acanthamoeba. Balamuthia is present in soil and may be transmitted
by inhalation or contamination of preexisting skin lesions.
Naegleria meningoencephalitis has been reported from every continent except Antarctica. Most of the cases occur during the summer
months in previously healthy individuals who have a history of swimming in or contact with freshwater lakes and rivers before their illness.
Between 1962 and 2022, 157 cases of primary amebic meningoencephalitis (PAM) were reported in the United States. Most of the reports
have come from the southern and southwestern states, particularly
Florida and Texas, but infections have occurred in Kansas, Indiana,
and Minnesota. Of note, cases have been linked to sinus irrigation with
neti pots containing contaminated tap water; exposure to a lawn water
slide, which derived its tap water from a treated public drinking water
system; a chlorinated recreational splash pad; a swimming pool supplied by an overland water pipe; and rafting on an artificial whitewater
river.

PATHOGENESIS

The free-­living amebae enter the nasal cavity by inhalation or aspiration of dust or water contaminated with trophozoites or cysts. Naegleria gains access to the central nervous system through the olfactory
epithelium and migrates via the olfactory nerve to the olfactory bulbs
located in the subarachnoid space and bathed by the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF). This space is richly vascularized and is the route of spread
to other areas of the central nervous system. Grossly, there is widespread cerebral edema and hyperemia of the meninges. The olfactory
bulbs are necrotic, hemorrhagic, and surrounded by a purulent exudate. Microscopically, the gray matter is the most severely affected,
with severe involvement in all cases. Fibrinopurulent exudate may be
found throughout the cerebral hemispheres, brainstem, cerebellum,
and upper portions of the spinal cord. Pockets of trophozoites may
be seen in necrotic neural tissue, usually in the perivascular spaces of
arteries and arterioles.
The route of invasion and penetration in cases of granulomatous
amebic meningoencephalitis caused by Acanthamoeba and Balamuthia
may be by direct spread through olfactory epithelium or hematogenous
spread from a primary focus in the skin or lungs. Pathologic examination reveals granulomatous encephalitis, with multinucleated giant
cells mainly in the posterior fossa structures, basal ganglia, bases of
the cerebral hemispheres, and cerebellum. Both trophozoites and cysts
may be found in the central nervous system lesions, primarily located
in the perivascular spaces and invading blood vessel walls. The olfactory bulbs and spinal cord are usually spared. The single case of Sappinia encephalitis followed a sinus infection, and evaluation revealed a
solitary 2 cm temporal lobe mass with mild ring enhancement.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2146 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

A

B

C

Fig. 326.1 A and B, MRIs of the brain of a patient with Balamuthia mandrillaris granulomatous amebic encephalitis. Multiple enhancing lesions

are seen in the right hemisphere, left cerebellum, midbrain, and brainstem. C, Photomicrograph of the brain lesion from the same patient showing
perivascular amebic trophozoites. A round amebic cyst with a characteristic double wall is seen in the top center (hematoxylin and eosin, original
magnification ×100). (From Deol I, Robledo L, Meza A, et al. Encephalitis due to a free-­living amoeba [Balamuthia mandrillaris]: case report with
literature review. Surg Neurol. 2000;53:611–616.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period of Naegleria infection may be as short as 2 days
or as long as 15 days. Symptoms have an acute onset and progress rapidly. Infection is characterized by a sudden onset of severe headache,
fever, pharyngitis, nasal congestion or discharge, and nausea and vomiting, followed by altered mental status, nuchal rigidity, photophobia,
confusion, somnolence, seizures, and ultimately coma. Most cases end
in death within 3-­10 days after onset of symptoms.
Granulomatous amebic meningoencephalitis may occur weeks
to months after the initial infection. The presenting signs and symptoms are often those of single or multiple central nervous system
space-­occupying lesions and include hemiparesis, ataxia, personality changes, seizures, and drowsiness. Altered mental status is often a
prominent symptom. Headache and fever occur only sporadically, but
stiff neck is seen in a majority of cases. Cranial nerve palsies, especially
of cranial nerves III and VI, may be present. There is also one report
of acute hydrocephalus and fever with Balamuthia. Granulomatous
amebic meningoencephalitis is usually fatal after 4-­6 weeks of illness.
Results of neuroimaging studies of the brain usually demonstrate multiple low-­density lesions resembling infarcts or enhancing lesions of
granulomas (Fig. 326.1).

DIAGNOSIS

The CSF in Naegleria infection may mimic that of herpes simplex
encephalitis early in the disease and that of acute bacterial meningitis
later in the disease, with a neutrophilic pleocytosis, elevated protein
level, and hypoglycorrhachia. Motile amebae may be visualized on a wet
mount of freshly drawn CSF using Wright or Giemsa stains, but they are
often mistaken for lymphocytes or macrophages. Because Naegleria are
the only amebae that differentiate into the flagellate state in a hypotonic
environment, placing a drop of fresh CSF in 1 mL of distilled water and
watching for the development of swimming flagellates after 1-­2 hours
can confirm the diagnosis of Naegleria. Naegleria can also be grown on a
non-­nutrient agar plate coated with Escherichia coli, on which they feed.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and immunofluorescence assays for
Naegleria performed on CSF and biopsy material are available through
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The diagnosis of granulomatous amebic meningoencephalitis
relies on the isolation or histologic identification of Acanthamoeba
trophozoites or cysts from brain tissue specimens. The CSF findings of granulomatous meningoencephalitis reveal lymphocytic
pleocytosis, moderately elevated protein, and low glucose concentrations. However, motile trophozoites of Acanthamoeba are more
difficult to isolate than Naegleria, and the CSF is typically sterile.
Acanthamoeba may be cultured from the same agar used for growing Naegleria, but Balamuthia must be grown on mammalian cell
cultures. Pediatric cases of Balamuthia meningoencephalitis have

been diagnosed antemortem by brain biopsy as well as postmortem.
PCR and immunofluorescence assays can be used on specimens to
identify Acanthamoeba and Balamuthia species, and are also available from the CDC.

TREATMENT

Naegleria infection is nearly always fatal, but early recognition and
treatment are crucial to survival. Until 2013, there had been only
two known survivors in North America, with treatment regimens
of amphotericin B, either alone or in combination with other agents
such as rifampin, chloramphenicol, fluconazole, ketoconazole, and
dexamethasone. In 2013, however, the CDC made available the antileishmanial drug miltefosine for the treatment of primary amebic
meningoencephalitis. That summer, two children who contracted
Naegleria both survived; both patients received oral miltefosine as
part of their treatment, and one underwent external ventricular drain
placement and therapeutic hypothermia. Miltefosine is now commercially available in the United States (www.impavido.com). The recommended drug treatment for primary amebic meningoencephalitis
by the CDC includes intravenous and intrathecal amphotericin B,
oral miltefosine, along with azithromycin, fluconazole, rifampin,
and dexamethasone. Early identification, early initiation of combination therapy, and aggressive management of increased intracranial
pressure remain key elements for a successful outcome. For suspected
cases, clinicians should contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center at (770) 488-­7100 for assistance.
The optimal therapy for granulomatous amebic meningoencephalitis
is uncertain. However, miltefosine has likewise been used to successfully treat patients with Balamuthia and disseminated Acanthamoeba
infections. Strains of Acanthamoeba isolated from fatal cases are usually susceptible in vitro to pentamidine, ketoconazole, and flucytosine
and less so to amphotericin B. One patient was successfully treated with
sulfadiazine and fluconazole, and another was successfully treated with
intravenous pentamidine followed by oral itraconazole. Acanthamoeba
keratitis responds to long courses of topical propamidine–polymyxin
B sulfate or topical polyhexamethylene biguanide or chlorhexidine
gluconate, and antifungal azoles plus topical steroids. Limited success
has been demonstrated in Balamuthia infection with systemic azole
therapy combined with flucytosine. More recently, the combination
of flucytosine, pentamidine, fluconazole, sulfadiazine, azithromycin,
and phenothiazines resulted in the survival of two patients with Balamuthia meningoencephalitis, although both were left with mild neuromotor and cognitive impairment. Corticosteroids before initiating
effective therapy appear to have a detrimental effect, contributing to
rapid progression of disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 327 u Amebiasis

Chapter 327

Amebiasis
Edsel Maurice T. Salvana and
Robert A. Salata

is seen most frequently in travelers to and immigrants from developing countries. Residents of mental health institutions and men who
have sex with men are at increased risk for invasive amebiasis. Food or
drink contaminated with Entamoeba cysts and oral-­anogenital sex are
the most common means of infection. Untreated water and night soil
(human feces used as fertilizer) are important sources of infection in
resource-­limited settings. Food handlers shedding amebic cysts play a
role in spreading infection.

PATHOGENESIS
Entamoeba species infect or colonize up to 10% of the world’s population, with a disproportionate burden of illness in resource-­limited settings. In most infected individuals, Entamoeba histolytica or a related
species infects the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract and causes few
symptoms or sequelae. Although E. histolytica is the only confirmed
invasive species, other Entamoeba species have been implicated in
human disease. Molecular epidemiology is helping detail the role that
these diverse protozoans play in human health. Invasive E. histolytica
infection can lead to amebic colitis, amebic liver abscess, and, less
commonly, abscesses in other extraintestinal sites.

ETIOLOGY

Four morphologically identical but genetically distinct species of Entamoeba are known to infect humans. Entamoeba histolytica, the main
pathogenic species, causes a spectrum of disease and can become invasive in 4–10% of infected patients. Entamoeba dispar, the most prevalent
species, does not cause symptomatic disease. Entamoeba moshkovskii,
can cause diarrhea in infants and children, and asymptomatic infection with E. moshkovskii may be as common as E. dispar infection in
some communities. Patients previously described as asymptomatic
carriers of E. histolytica based on microscopy findings were likely harboring E. dispar or E. moshkovskii. A fourth species, E. bangladeshi,
was discovered in Bangladesh in 2012 and has recently been found in
South Africa. The potential for E. bangladeshi to cause human disease
remains unclear. Four other species of nonpathogenic Entamoeba are
known to colonize the human gastrointestinal tract: Entamoeba coli,
E. hartmanni, E. gingivalis, and E. polecki. A fifth species, E. nuttalli,
typically infects nonhuman primates such as macaques, but a case of
asymptomatic infection has been described in a zookeeper.
Infection is usually acquired through the ingestion of parasite cysts,
which measure 10-­18 μm in diameter and contain four nuclei. Cysts are
resistant to harsh environmental conditions, including chlorine concentrations commonly used in water purification, but can be killed by heating
them to 55°C (131°F). Cysts are resistant to gastric acidity and digestive
enzymes and germinate in the small intestine to form trophozoites. These
large, actively motile organisms colonize the lumen of the large intestine
and may invade the mucosal lining. Some eventually transform to cysts
and are passed out in the stool to infect other hosts anew.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The prevalence of infection with E. histolytica varies greatly by region
and socioeconomic status. Early prevalence studies did not distinguish
between E. histolytica and E. dispar, but more recent estimates show
that infection with E. histolytica causes 100 million cases of symptomatic disease and 2,000 to 17,000 deaths annually. Molecular studies
have put the global prevalence of E. histolytica at 3.55%, ranging from
1.72% to 21.58% in different regions of the world.
Prospective studies have shown that 4–10% of individuals infected
with E. histolytica develop amebic colitis and that <1% of infected individuals develop disseminated disease, including amebic liver abscess.
These numbers vary by region; for example, in South Africa and Vietnam, liver abscesses form a disproportionately large number of the cases
of invasive disease due to E. histolytica. Amebic liver abscesses occur
equally in male and female children but are generally rare in childhood.
Peak abscess formation occurs in individuals between 30-­60 years old
and is 10-­12 times more prevalent in adult males than females.
Amebiasis causes its largest burden of disease in Africa, Southeast
Asia, and the Eastern Mediterranean. In the United States, amebiasis

2147

Trophozoites are responsible for tissue invasion and destruction. E. histolytica secretes many proteases, the best described of which is amebic
cysteine protease 5 (EhCP5). EhCP5 cleaves MUC2 mucin, degrading
the intestinal mucus layer and exposing colonic epithelial cells. MUC2
is also involved in regulating antimicrobial peptide production by Paneth cells during E. histolytica infection. Amebae then attach using a
galactose and N-­acetyl-­d-­
galactosamine–specific lectin. This lectin
also provides resistance to complement-­mediated lysis, and its intermediate subunit has been found to have hemagglutinating, hemolytic,
and cytolytic activity.
Once attached to the colonic mucosa, trophozoites penetrate the
epithelial layer, destroying host cells by cytolysis and induction of
apoptosis. Cytolysis is mediated by trophozoite release of amebapores
(pore-­forming proteins), phospholipases, and hemolysins. Once host
cells are partially digested by amebic proteases, the degraded material is internalized through phagocytosis. Trogocytosis is another
mechanism that amebae use to kill host cells. This involves ingesting
pieces of living cells, inducing intracellular calcium elevation leading
to apoptosis.
Early invasive amebiasis produces significant inflammation, owing
in part to parasite-­mediated activation of nuclear factor-­κB. Once E. histolytica trophozoites invade the intestinal mucosa, the organisms multiply
and spread laterally underneath the intestinal epithelium to produce the
characteristic flask-­shaped ulcers. Amebae produce similar lytic lesions if
they reach the liver. These lesions are commonly called abscesses, although
they contain no granulocytes. Well-­established ulcers and amebic liver
abscesses demonstrate little local inflammatory response.
Immunity to infection is associated with a mucosal secretory IgA
response against the galactose/N-­acetyl-­d-­galactosamine lectin.
Macrophages are among the earliest responders, mediating phagocytosis and secreting cytokines to recruit other inflammatory cells.
Eosinophilia is common in parasitic infections and may play a role in
IgA regulation. Neutrophils are generally protective and exert amebicidal activity by phagocytosis, degranulation, and formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). The disparity between the extent of
tissue destruction by amebae and the absence of a local host inflammatory response in the presence of systemic humoral and cell-­mediated
responses may reflect both parasite-­mediated apoptosis and the ability
of the trophozoite to kill not only epithelial cells but also neutrophils,
monocytes, and macrophages.
The E. histolytica genome is functionally tetraploid, and there is evidence of lateral gene transfer from bacteria. The amebapore-­A (Ap-­A)
gene, along with other important genes, can be epigenetically silenced
using plasmids with specifically engineered sequences or short hairpin RNAs. Transcriptional profiling using proteomics and microarrays has identified multiple virulence factors, including cysteine
proteases, which modulate lysosome and phagosome function, as well
as excretory-­secretory proteins. Many calcium-­binding proteins are
encoded and are involved in motility, adhesion, cytolysis, and phagocytosis. Some of these proteins bind directly to actin to modulate pseudopod formation and phagocytosis. The bacterial microbiome has also
been shown to influence E. histolytica pathogenicity by affecting lectin expression, with increased Prevotella copri populations associated
with higher rates of diarrhea in infected children. Enteropathogenic
Escherichia coli have been linked to increased E. histolytica virulence
through upregulation of amebic proteolytic activity. Enteric bacteria
improve survival of these anaerobic amebae during times of oxidative
stress. Decreased bacterial diversity has been linked to an increase in
symptomatic amebic infections in children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2148 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical presentations range from asymptomatic cyst passage to amebic
colitis, amebic dysentery, ameboma, and extraintestinal disease. Up to
10% of infected persons develop invasive disease within a year, and
asymptomatic carriers should be treated. Severe disease is more common in young children, pregnant women, malnourished individuals,
and persons taking corticosteroids. Invasive disease is more common
in men. Extraintestinal disease usually involves the liver, but less common extraintestinal manifestations include amebic brain abscess, pleuropulmonary disease, skin ulcers, and genitourinary lesions.

Amebic Colitis

Amebic colitis may occur within 2 weeks of infection or may be delayed
for months. The onset is usually gradual, with colicky abdominal pain
and frequent bowel movements (6-­
8/day). Diarrhea is frequently
associated with tenesmus. Almost all stool is heme-­positive, but most
patients do not present with grossly bloody stools. Generalized constitutional symptoms and signs are characteristically absent, with fever
documented in only one third of patients. Amebic colitis affects all age
groups but is strikingly common in children 1-­5 years of age. Severe
amebic colitis in infants and young children tends to be rapidly progressive, with more frequent extraintestinal involvement and high
mortality rates, particularly in tropical countries. Amebic dysentery
can result in dehydration and electrolyte disturbances.

Amebic Liver Abscess

Amebic liver abscess, a serious manifestation of disseminated infection, is uncommon in children. Although diffuse liver enlargement has
been associated with intestinal amebiasis, liver abscesses occur in <1%
of infected individuals and may appear in patients with no clear history
of intestinal disease. Amebic liver abscess may occur months to years
after exposure, so obtaining a careful travel history is critical. In children,
fever is the hallmark of amebic liver abscess and is frequently associated
with abdominal pain, abdominal distention, and enlargement and tenderness of the liver. Changes at the base of the right lung may also occur,
including elevation of the diaphragm and atelectasis or effusion.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory examination findings are often unremarkable in uncomplicated amebic colitis. Laboratory findings in amebic liver abscess are a
slight leukocytosis, moderate anemia, high erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, and elevations of hepatic enzyme (particularly alkaline phosphatase) levels. Stool examination for amebae is negative in more than half of
patients with documented amebic liver abscess. Ultrasonography, CT, or
MRI can localize and delineate the size of the abscess cavity (Fig. 327.1).
The most common finding is a single abscess in the right hepatic lobe.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A diagnosis of amebic colitis is made in the presence of compatible
symptoms with detection of E. histolytica either by stool antigen testing
or PCR. This approach has a greater than 95% sensitivity and specificity,
and when it is coupled with a positive serology test, it is the most accurate means of diagnosis in developed countries. Several approved stool
antigen kits are commercially available in the United States, but most
cannot distinguish between E. histolytica and E. dispar. Microscopic
examination of stool samples has a sensitivity of 60%. Sensitivity can be
increased to 85–95% by examining three stools. Microscopy cannot differentiate between E. histolytica, E. dispar, E. moshkovskii, and E. bangladeshi unless phagocytosed erythrocytes (specific for E. histolytica) are
seen. Endoscopy and biopsies of suspicious areas should be performed
when stool sample results are negative and suspicion remains high. Various serum antibody tests are available. Serologic results are positive in
70–80% of patients with invasive disease (colitis or liver abscess) at presentation and in >90% of patients after 7 days. Indirect hemagglutination
is the most sensitive serologic test and yields a positive result even years
after invasive infection. Therefore many uninfected adults and children
in highly endemic areas demonstrate antibodies to E. histolytica.
Conventional and real-­time multiplex PCR performed on stool is
the most sensitive and preferred method for distinguishing E. histolytica from nonpathogenic E. dispar, E. moshkovskii, and E. bangladeshi.

Fig. 327.1 Abdominal CT scan of a patient with an amebic liver ab-

scess. (From Miller Q, Kenney JM, Cotlar AM. Amebic abscess of the liver presenting as acute cholecystitis. Curr Surg. 2000;57:476–479. Fig. 1.)

Different multiplex formats have also been developed, including enteric
pathogen panels with varying sensitivities and specificities. Tetraplex
assays that can distinguish between all four morphologically identical
isolates have also been developed. Isothermal nucleic acid methods
using recombinase and loop-­mediated amplification (LAMP) in point-­
of-­care diagnostics are promising and will greatly facilitate treatment,
especially in developing countries. A small study using quantitative
PCR detected E. histolytica DNA in the serum of patients with amebic
liver abscess with a sensitivity of 89.5% and a specificity of 100%.
The differential diagnosis for amebic colitis includes colitis due to
bacterial, mycobacterial, and viral pathogens, as well as noninfectious
causes such as inflammatory bowel disease. Pyogenic liver abscess due
to bacterial infection, hepatoma, and echinococcal cysts are in the differential diagnosis for amebic liver abscess. However, echinococcal
cysts are rarely associated with systemic symptoms such as fever, unless
there is cyst rupture or leakage.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications of amebic colitis include acute necrotizing colitis, ameboma, toxic megacolon, extraintestinal extension, and local perforation and peritonitis. Less commonly, a chronic form of amebic colitis
develops, often recurring over several years. Amebomas are nodular
foci of proliferative inflammation that sometimes develop in the wall
of the colon. Amebiasis should be excluded before initiating corticosteroid treatment for inflammatory bowel disease because steroid treatment of E. histolytica is associated with high mortality rates.
An amebic liver abscess may rupture into the peritoneum, pleural
cavity, skin, and pericardium. Cases of amebic abscesses in extrahepatic sites, including the lung and brain, have been reported.

TREATMENT

Invasive amebiasis is treated with a nitroimidazole such as metronidazole or tinidazole and then a luminal amebicide (Table 327.1). Tinidazole may have better clinical efficacy than metronidazole, with shorter
and simpler dosing, and is better tolerated. Adverse effects include nausea, abdominal discomfort, and a metallic taste that disappears after
completion of therapy. Therapy with a nitroimidazole should be followed
by treatment with a luminal agent, such as paromomycin (which is preferred) or iodoquinol. Diloxanide furoate can also be used in children >2
years of age but is no longer available in the United States. Paromomycin should not be given concurrently with metronidazole or tinidazole
because diarrhea is a common side effect of paromomycin and may confuse the clinical picture. Asymptomatic intestinal infection with E. histolytica should be treated, preferably with paromomycin or alternatively
with either iodoquinol or diloxanide furoate. For fulminant cases of
amebic colitis, some experts suggest adding dehydroemetine (1 mg/kg/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 328 u Giardiasis and Balantidiasis
Table 327.1  Drug Treatment for Amebiasis
ADULT DOSAGE
(ORAL)

MEDICATION

INVASIVE DISEASE
Metronidazole
Colitis or liver abscess:
500 mg tid for 7-­10
days

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE
(ORAL)*
Colitis or liver abscess:
35-­50 mg/kg/day in 3
divided doses for 7-­10
days

2149

investigation of diarrheal episodes may help identify the source of
infection. No prophylactic drug or vaccine is available.
Immunization with different E. histolytica antigens has shown promising protective responses in animal models. Amebic surface protein LecA,
galactose/N-­acetyl-­d-­galactosamine lectin, serine-­rich E. histolytica protein (SREHP), heparan sulfate binding proteins, and other antigens have
elicited protective immune responses, especially in combination with
different adjuvants. Acquired immune response can be protective as evidenced by anti-­lectin IgA in stool among Bangladeshi children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Or
Tinidazole

Colitis: 2 g once daily
for 3 days
Liver abscess: 2 g once
daily for 3-­5 days

Colitis: 50 mg/kg/day
once daily for 3 days
Liver abscess: 50 mg/
kg/day once daily for
3-­5 days

500 mg tid for 7 days

25-­35 mg/kg/day in 3
divided doses for 7
days

500 mg tid for 10 days

20 mg/kg/day in 3 divided
doses for 7 days

Followed by:
Paromomycin
(preferred)

Chapter 328

Giardiasis and
Balantidiasis

Or
Diloxanide
furoate†

328.1 Giardia duodenalis
Chandy C. John

Or
Iodoquinol

650 mg tid for 20 days

30-­40 mg/kg/day in
3 divided doses for
20 days

ASYMPTOMATIC INTESTINAL COLONIZATION
Paromomycin
As for invasive disease As for invasive disease
(preferred)
Or
Diloxanide
furoate†
Or
Iodoquinol
*All pediatric dosages are up to a maximum of the adult dose.
†Not available in the United States.

day subcutaneously or intramuscularly, never intravenously), available
only through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Patients should be hospitalized for monitoring if dehydroemetine is
administered. Dehydroemetine should be discontinued if tachycardia,
T-­wave depression, arrhythmia, or proteinuria develops. Nitazoxanide
has been shown to be amebicidal in several clinical trials, but more studies are needed to define optimal dosing and duration of treatment.
Broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy may be indicated in fulminant
colitis to cover possible spillage of intestinal bacteria into the peritoneum
and translocation into the bloodstream. Intestinal perforation and toxic
megacolon are indications for surgery. In amebic liver abscess, image-­
guided aspiration of large lesions or left lobe abscesses may be necessary
if rupture is imminent or if the patient shows a poor clinical response
4-­6 days after administration of amebicidal drugs. A Cochrane meta-­
analysis comparing metronidazole and metronidazole plus aspiration in
uncomplicated amebic liver abscess showed that there is insufficient evidence to make any recommendation for or against this approach. Chloroquine, which concentrates in the liver, may also be a useful adjunct
to nitroimidazoles in the treatment of amebic liver abscess or in cases
of treatment failure or intolerance. To confirm cure, stool examination
should be repeated every 2 weeks after completion of therapy until clear.

PROGNOSIS

Most infections evolve to either an asymptomatic carrier state or eradication. Extraintestinal infection carries about a 5% mortality rate.

PREVENTION

Control of amebiasis can be achieved by exercising proper sanitation
and hygiene. Regular examination of food handlers and thorough

Giardia duodenalis is a flagellated protozoan that infects the duodenum
and jejunum. Infection results in clinical manifestations that range
from asymptomatic colonization to acute or chronic diarrhea and malabsorption. Infection is more prevalent in children than in adults. Giardia is endemic in areas of the world with poor levels of sanitation. It is
also an important cause of morbidity in developed countries, where
it is associated with urban childcare centers, residential institutions
for the developmentally delayed, and waterborne and foodborne outbreaks. Giardia is a particularly significant pathogen in children with
malnutrition and certain immunodeficiencies (IgA deficiency, common variable immunodeficiency, X-­linked hypogammaglobulinemia).

ETIOLOGY

The life cycle of G. duodenalis (also known as Giardia lamblia or Giardia
intestinalis) is composed of two stages: trophozoites and cysts. Giardia
infects humans after ingestion of as few as 10-­100 cysts, which measure
8-­10 μm in diameter. Each ingested cyst produces two trophozoites in
the duodenum. After excystation, trophozoites colonize the lumen of the
duodenum and proximal jejunum, where they attach to the brush border
of the intestinal epithelial cells and multiply by binary fission. The body
of the trophozoite is teardrop shaped, measuring 10-­20 μm in length and
5-­15 μm in width. Giardia trophozoites contain two oval nuclei anteriorly, a large ventral disk, a curved median body posteriorly, and four
pairs of flagella. As detached trophozoites pass down the intestinal tract,
they encyst to form oval cysts that contain four nuclei. Cysts are passed
in stools of infected individuals and may remain viable in water for as
long as 2 months. Their viability often is not affected by the usual concentrations of chlorine used to purify water for drinking.
Giardia strains that infect humans are diverse biologically, as shown
by differences in antigens, restriction endonuclease patterns, DNA fingerprinting, isoenzyme patterns, and pulsed-­field gel electrophoresis.
Studies suggest that different Giardia genotypes may cause unique
clinical manifestations, but these findings appear to vary according to
the geographic region tested.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Giardia occurs worldwide and is the most common intestinal parasite
identified in public health laboratories in the United States, where it is
estimated that up to 2 million cases of giardiasis occur annually. Giardia infection usually occurs sporadically, but Giardia is a frequently
identified etiologic agent of outbreaks associated with drinking water.
The age-­specific prevalence of giardiasis is high during childhood and
begins to decline after adolescence. The asymptomatic carrier rate of G.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2150 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
lamblia in the United States is as high as 20–30% in children younger
than 36 months of age attending childcare centers. Asymptomatic carriage may persist for several months.
Risk of acquiring and transmitting Giardia is increased in children and employees in childcare centers, individuals who drink contaminated water, international travelers, men who have sex with men,
immunodeficient individuals, and individuals exposed to farm animals. Children visiting friends and relatives are at increased risk for
Giardia infections during international travel. The major reservoir and
vehicle for spread of Giardia appears to be water contaminated with
Giardia cysts, but foodborne transmission also occurs. The seasonal
peak in age-­specific case reports coincides with the summer recreational water season and may be a result of the extensive use of communal swimming venues by young children, the low infectious dose,
and the extended periods of cyst shedding that can occur. In addition,
Giardia cysts are relatively resistant to chlorination and to ultraviolet
light irradiation. Boiling is effective for inactivating cysts.
Person-­to-­person spread also occurs, particularly in areas of low
hygiene standards, frequent fecal-­oral contact, and crowding. Individual susceptibility, lack of toilet training, crowding, and fecal contamination of the environment all predispose to transmission of
enteropathogens, including Giardia, in childcare centers. Childcare
centers play an important role in transmission of urban giardiasis, with
secondary attack rates in families as high as 17–30%. Children in childcare centers may pass cysts for several months. Campers who drink
untreated stream or river water, particularly in the western United
States, and residents of institutions for the developmentally delayed are
also at increased risk for infection.
Humoral immunodeficiencies, including common variable immunodeficiency and X-­linked agammaglobulinemia, predispose humans
to chronic symptomatic Giardia infection, suggesting the importance
of humoral immunity in controlling giardiasis. Selective immunoglobulin A deficiency is also associated with Giardia infection. Although
many individuals with AIDS have relatively mild Giardia infections,
Giardia infection refractory to treatment may occur in a subset of individuals with AIDS. Human milk contains glycoconjugates and secretory immunoglobulin A antibodies that may provide protection to
nursing infants against Giardia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period of Giardia infection usually is 1-­2 weeks but may
be longer. A broad spectrum of clinical manifestations occurs, depending on the interaction between G. lamblia and the host. Children who
are exposed to G. lamblia may experience asymptomatic excretion of
the organism, acute infectious diarrhea, or chronic diarrhea with persistent gastrointestinal tract signs and symptoms, including failure to
thrive and abdominal pain or cramping. Giardia was the cause of 15%
of nondysenteric diarrheal illnesses in children examined in U.S. outpatient clinics in one study. Most infections in children and adults are
asymptomatic. There is usually no extraintestinal spread, but occasionally trophozoites may migrate into bile or pancreatic ducts.
Symptomatic infections occur more frequently in children than in
adults. Most symptomatic patients usually have a limited period of
acute diarrheal disease with or without low-­grade fever, nausea, and
anorexia; in a small proportion of patients, an intermittent or more
protracted course characterized by diarrhea, abdominal distention
and cramps, bloating, malaise, flatulence, nausea, anorexia, and weight
loss develops (Table 328.1). Stools initially may be profuse and watery
and later become greasy and foul smelling and may float. Stools do not
contain blood, mucus, or fecal leukocytes. Varying degrees of malabsorption may occur. Abnormal stool patterns may alternate with periods of constipation and normal bowel movements. Malabsorption of
sugars, fats, and fat-­soluble vitamins is well documented and may be
responsible for substantial weight loss. Giardia has been associated
with iron deficiency in internationally adopted children. Extraintestinal manifestations of Giardia appear to be more common in adults
than children and include arthritis and, in one report after an outbreak,
chronic fatigue syndrome. Giardiasis in children has been associated
with growth stunting, and repeated Giardia infections correlate with a
decrease in cognitive function in children in endemic areas.

Table 328.1  Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Giardiasis
SYMPTOM

FREQUENCY (%)

Diarrhea

64–100

Malaise, weakness

72–97

Abdominal distention

42–97

Flatulence

35–97

Abdominal cramps

44–81

Nausea

14–79

Foul-­smelling, greasy stools

15–79

Anorexia

41–73

Weight loss

53–73

Vomiting

14–35

Fever

0–28

Constipation

0–27

DIAGNOSIS

Giardiasis should be considered in children who have acute nondysenteric diarrhea, persistent diarrhea, intermittent diarrhea and constipation, malabsorption, chronic crampy abdominal pain and bloating,
failure to thrive, or weight loss. It should be particularly high in the
differential diagnosis of children in childcare centers, children in contact with an index case, children with a history of recent travel to an
endemic area, and children with humoral immunodeficiencies. Testing
for giardiasis should be standard for internationally adopted children
from Giardia-­endemic areas, and screening for iron deficiency should
be considered in internationally adopted children with giardiasis.
Stool enzyme immunoassay (EIA) or direct fluorescent antibody tests
for Giardia antigens are the tests of choice for giardiasis. EIA is less reader
dependent and more sensitive for detection of Giardia than microscopy.
Some studies report that a single stool is sufficiently sensitive for detection of Giardia by EIA, whereas others suggest that sensitivity is increased
with testing of two samples. A diagnosis of giardiasis was traditionally
established by microscopy documentation of trophozoites or cysts in stool
specimens, but three stool specimens are required to achieve a sensitivity
of >90% using this approach. In patients in whom other parasitic intestinal infections are in the differential diagnosis, microscopy examination of
stool allows evaluation for these infections in addition to Giardia.
Polymerase chain reaction and gene probe–based detection systems
specific for Giardia have been used in environmental monitoring and
clinical testing. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction testing for multiple parasitic pathogens is a viable option for testing.
In patients with chronic symptoms in whom giardiasis is suspected
but in whom testing of stool specimens for Giardia yields a negative
result, aspiration or biopsy of the duodenum or upper jejunum should be
considered. In a fresh specimen, trophozoites usually can be visualized
by direct wet mount. An alternate method of directly obtaining duodenal
fluid is the commercially available Entero-­Test (Hedeco Corp, Mountain
View, CA), but this method is less sensitive than aspiration or biopsy.
The biopsy can be used to make touch preparations and tissue sections
for identification of Giardia and other enteric pathogens and also to visualize changes in histology. Biopsy of the small intestine should be considered in patients with characteristic clinical symptoms, negative stool
and duodenal fluid specimen findings, and one or more of the following:
abnormal radiographic findings (such as edema and segmentation in
the small intestine); an abnormal lactose tolerance test result; an absent
secretory immunoglobulin A level; hypogammaglobulinemia; or achlorhydria. Duodenal biopsy may show findings consistent with chronic
inflammation, including eosinophilic infiltration of the lamina propria.
Radiographic contrast studies of the small intestine may show nonspecific findings such as irregular thickening of the mucosal folds.
Blood cell counts usually are normal. Giardiasis is not tissue invasive
and is not associated with peripheral blood eosinophilia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 328 u Giardiasis and Balantidiasis
TREATMENT

Children with acute diarrhea in whom Giardia organisms are identified should receive therapy. In addition, children who manifest failure
to thrive or exhibit malabsorption or gastrointestinal tract symptoms
such as chronic diarrhea should be treated.
Asymptomatic excreters generally are not treated, except in specific
instances such as outbreak control, prevention of household transmission by toddlers to pregnant women and patients with hypogammaglobulinemia or cystic fibrosis, and situations requiring oral antibiotic
treatment where Giardia may produce malabsorption of the antibiotic.
The FDA has approved tinidazole and nitazoxanide for the treatment
of Giardia in the United States. Both medications have been used to treat
Giardia in thousands of patients in other countries and have excellent
safety and efficacy records against Giardia (Table 328.2). Tinidazole has
the advantage of single-­dose treatment and very high efficacy (>90%),
while nitazoxanide has the advantage of a suspension form, high efficacy
(80–90%), and very few adverse effects. Metronidazole, although never
approved by the FDA for treatment of Giardia, is also highly effective
(80–90% cure rate), and the generic form is considerably less expensive
than tinidazole or nitazoxanide. For children ≥3 year of age, tinidazole is
the preferred treatment, with nitazoxanide as alternative, while for children 1-­2 years, nitazoxanide is the preferred treatment, since tinidazole
is approved only for children ≥3 years of age. Metronidazole is the drug
of choice for children <12 months and an alternative to tinidazole and
nitazoxanide for children ≥12 months. Recent reports on travelers to
South Asia document resistance rates as high as 30% to metronidazole,
so nitazoxanide or tinidazole may be preferred for children who have
traveled to or are from this area. Frequent adverse effects are seen with
metronidazole therapy, and it requires 3-­times-­a-­day dosing for 5-­7 days.
Suspension forms of tinidazole and metronidazole must be compounded
by a pharmacy; neither drug is sold in suspension form.
Second-­line alternatives for the treatment of patients with giardiasis
include albendazole, paromomycin, and quinacrine (see Table 328.2).
Albendazole may be of similar efficacy to metronidazole. Albendazole
has few adverse effects and is effective against many helminths, making
it useful for treatment when multiple intestinal parasites are identified or
suspected. Paromomycin is a nonabsorbable aminoglycoside and is less
effective than other agents but is recommended for treatment of pregnant women with giardiasis because of the potential teratogenic effects of
other agents. Quinacrine is effective and inexpensive but is not available
commercially and must be obtained from compounding pharmacies
(see Table 328.2). Quinacrine can also rarely have serious side effects,

2151

including hallucinations and psychosis. Refractory cases of giardiasis
have been successfully treated with a number of regimens, including
nitazoxanide, prolonged courses of tinidazole, or combination therapy,
most commonly a 3-­week course of metronidazole and quinacrine.

PROGNOSIS

Symptoms recur in some patients in whom reinfection cannot be
documented and in whom an immune deficiency such as an immunoglobulin abnormality is not present, despite use of appropriate therapy.
Several studies have demonstrated that variability in antimicrobial susceptibility exists among strains of Giardia, and in some instances resistant strains have been demonstrated. Combined therapy may be useful
for infection that persists after single-­drug therapy, assuming reinfection has not occurred and the medication was taken as prescribed.

PREVENTION

Infected persons and persons at risk should practice strict handwashing after any contact with feces. This point is especially important for
caregivers of diapered infants in childcare centers, where diarrhea is
common and Giardia organism carriage rates are high.
Methods to purify public water supplies adequately include chlorination, sedimentation, and filtration. Inactivation of Giardia cysts by
chlorine requires the coordination of multiple variables such as chlorine
concentration, water pH, turbidity, temperature, and contact time. These
variables cannot be appropriately controlled in all municipalities and are
difficult to control in swimming pools. Individuals, especially children
in diapers, should avoid swimming if they have diarrhea. Individuals
should also avoid swallowing recreational water and drinking untreated
water from shallow wells, lakes, springs, ponds, streams, and rivers.
Travelers to endemic areas are advised to avoid uncooked foods
that might have been grown, washed, or prepared with water that
was potentially contaminated. Purification of drinking water can be
achieved by a filter with a pore size of <1 μm or that has been rated by
the National Sanitation Foundation for cyst removal, or by brisk boiling of water for at least 1 minute. Treatment of water with chlorine or
iodine is less effective but may be used as an alternate method when
boiling or filtration is not possible.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

328.2 Balantidiasis
Chandy C. John

Table 328.2  Drug Treatment for Giardiasis
MEDICATION

ADULT DOSAGE
(ORAL)

RECOMMENDED
Tinidazole
2 g once

PEDIATRIC DOSAGE
(ORAL)*
>3 yr: 50 mg/kg once

Nitazoxanide

500 mg bid for 3
days

1-­3 yr: 100 mg (5 mL) bid for
3 days
4-­11 yr: 200 mg (10 mL) bid
for 3 days
>12 yr: 500 mg bid for 3
days

Metronidazole

250 mg tid for 5-­7
days

15 mg/kg/day in 3 divided
doses for 5-­7 days

400 mg once a day
for 5 days

>6 yr: 400 mg once a day
for 5 days

Paromomycin

500 mg tid for 5-­10
days

Not recommended

Quinacrine†

100 mg tid for 5-­7
days

6 mg/kg/day in 3 divided
doses for 5 days

ALTERNATIVE
Albendazole

*All pediatric dosages are up to a maximum of the adult dose.
†Not commercially available. Can be compounded by Medical Center Pharmacy in New

Haven, CT (203-­688-­8970) or Panorama Compounding Pharmacy in Van Nuys, CA
(818-­988-­7979).

Balantidium coli is a ciliated protozoan and is the largest protozoan that
parasitizes humans. Both trophozoites and cysts may be identified in
feces. Disease caused by this organism is uncommon in the United States
and generally is reported where there is a close association of humans
with pigs, which are the natural hosts of B. coli. Because the organism
infects the large intestine, symptoms are consistent with large bowel
disease, similar to those associated with amebiasis and trichuriasis, and
include nausea, vomiting, lower abdominal pain, tenesmus, and bloody
diarrhea. Symptoms associated with chronic infection include abdominal cramps, watery diarrhea with mucus, occasionally bloody diarrhea,
and colonic ulcers similar to those associated with Entamoeba histolytica.
Extraintestinal spread of B. coli is rare and usually occurs only in immunocompromised patients. Most infections are asymptomatic.
Diagnosis using direct saline mounts is established by identification
of trophozoites (50-­100 μm long) or spherical or oval cysts (50-­70 μm
in diameter) in stool specimens. Trophozoites usually are more numerous than cysts.
The recommended treatment regimen is metronidazole (25-50 mg/
kg/day divided tid PO; maximum: 750 mg/dose) for 5 days, or tetracycline (40 mg/kg/day divided qid PO; maximum: 500 mg/dose) for 10
days for persons older than 8 years of age. An alternative is iodoquinol
(40 mg/kg/day divided tid PO; maximum: 650 mg/dose) for 20 days.
Prevention of contamination of the environment by pig feces is the
most important means for control.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2152 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 329

Cryptosporidium,
Cystoisospora,
Cyclospora, and
Microsporidia
Sarah M. Heston and Patricia M. Flynn
The spore-­forming intestinal protozoa Cryptosporidium, Cystoisospora
(formerly Isospora), and Cyclospora are important intestinal pathogens
in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. Cryptosporidium, Cystoisospora, and Cyclospora are coccidian parasites that
predominantly infect the epithelial cells lining the digestive tract, and
all are transmitted by the fecal-­oral route. Microsporidia were formerly
considered spore-­forming protozoa but have been reclassified as fungi.
Microsporidia are ubiquitous, obligate intracellular organisms that
infect many other organ systems in addition to the gastrointestinal
tract and cause a broader spectrum of disease.

CRYPTOSPORIDIUM

Cryptosporidium is recognized as a leading protozoal cause of diarrhea
in children worldwide and is a common cause of outbreaks in childcare centers; it is also a significant pathogen in immunocompromised
patients.

Etiology

Cryptosporidium hominis and Cryptosporidium parvum cause most
cases of cryptosporidiosis in humans. Disease is initiated by ingestion of infectious oocysts that were excreted in the feces of infected
humans and animals. The oocysts are immediately infectious to other
hosts or can reinfect the same host. The ingested oocysts release sporozoites that attach to and invade the intestinal epithelial cells.

Epidemiology

Cryptosporidiosis is associated with diarrheal illness worldwide and is
more prevalent in developing countries and among children younger
than 2 years of age. It has been implicated as an etiologic agent of persistent diarrhea in the developing world and as a cause of significant
morbidity and mortality from malnutrition, including permanent
effects on growth. Risk factors for infection include animal contact,
diarrhea in a household member, open defecation/lack of toilet facilities, and poor drinking water quality.
Transmission of Cryptosporidium to humans can occur by close
association with infected animals, via person-­to-­person transmission,
or from environmentally contaminated water and food. Although
zoonotic transmission, especially from cows, occurs in persons in
close association with animals, person-­
to-­
person transmission is
probably responsible for cryptosporidiosis outbreaks within hospitals
and childcare centers, where transmission rates as high as 67% have
been reported. Recommendations to prevent outbreaks in childcare
centers include exclusion of children with diarrhea from attending,
strict handwashing, elimination of water play or swimming activities, use of protective clothes or diapers capable of retaining liquid
diarrhea, and separation of diapering and food-­handling areas and
responsibilities.
Outbreaks of cryptosporidial infection are associated with contaminated community water supplies and recreational waters, including
lakes and chlorinated swimming pools. Wastewater in the form of raw
sewage and runoff from dairies and grazing lands can contaminate

both drinking and recreational water sources. It is estimated that Cryptosporidium oocysts are present in 65–97% of the surface water in the
United States. The organism’s small size (4-­6 μm in diameter), resistance to chlorination, and ability to survive for long periods outside a
host create problems in public water supplies.

Clinical Manifestations

The incubation period is 2-­10 days (average, 7 days) after infection.
Cryptosporidium infection is associated with profuse, watery, nonbloody diarrhea that can be accompanied by diffuse crampy abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Although less common in
adults, vomiting occurs in more than 80% of children with cryptosporidiosis. Nonspecific symptoms such as myalgia, weakness, and headache also may occur. Fever occurs in 30–50% of cases. Malabsorption,
lactose intolerance, dehydration, weight loss, and malnutrition often
occur in severe cases. The clinical spectrum and disease severity have
been linked with both the infecting species and host human leukocyte
antigen class I and class II alleles.
In immunocompetent persons, the disease is usually self-­limiting,
typically 5-­10 days, although diarrhea may persist for several weeks
and oocyst shedding may persist for many weeks after symptoms
resolve. Chronic diarrhea is common in young infants and individuals
with immunodeficiency, such as congenital hypogammaglobulinemia
or HIV infection. Symptoms and oocyst shedding can continue indefinitely and may lead to severe malnutrition, wasting, anorexia, and even
death.
Cryptosporidiosis in immunocompromised hosts is often associated
with biliary tract disease, characterized by fever, right upper quadrant
pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. It also is associated with pancreatitis. Respiratory tract disease is rare.

Diagnosis

Infection can be diagnosed by microscopy using modified acid-­fast
stain or polymerase chain reaction (PCR), but immunodetection of
antigens on the surface of the organism in stool samples using monoclonal antibody–based assays is the current diagnostic method of
choice because of the high sensitivity and specificity. Multiplex molecular test panels for gastrointestinal pathogens that include Cryptosporidium are available and are a standard test.
In stool, oocysts appear as small, spherical bodies (2-­6 μm) and
stain red with modified acid-­
fast staining. Because Cryptosporidium does not invade below the epithelial layer of the mucosa,
fecal leukocytes are not found in stool specimens. Oocyst shedding
in feces can be intermittent, and several fecal specimens (at least
three for an immunocompetent host) should be collected for microscopic examination. Serologic diagnosis is not helpful in acute
cryptosporidiosis.
In tissue sections, Cryptosporidium organisms can be found along
the microvillus region of the epithelia that line the gastrointestinal
tract. The highest concentration usually is detected in the jejunum.
Histologic section results reveal villus atrophy and blunting, epithelial
flattening, and inflammation of the lamina propria.

Treatment

Often the diarrheal illness attributable to cryptosporidiosis is self-­
limited in immunocompetent patients and requires no specific antimicrobial therapy. Treatment should focus on supportive care, including
rehydration orally or, if fluid losses are severe, intravenously. A 3-day
course of nitazoxanide (100 mg bid PO for 3 days for children 1-­3 years
of age; 200 mg bid PO for children 4-­11 years of age; 500 mg bid PO for
children ≥12 years of age) is approved for treatment of diarrhea caused
by Cryptosporidium. A recent meta-­analysis revealed a favorable clinical response to treatment with nitazoxanide compared with placebo,
although the parasitologic response was no different than the response
to placebo. Clinical studies have not definitively demonstrated that
nitazoxanide is superior to placebo in trials of HIV-­infected (with low
CD4 counts) or immunocompromised patients. However, given the
severity of the infection in these populations, nitazoxanide treatment

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 329 u Cryptosporidium, Cystoisospora, Cyclospora, and Microsporidia 2153
is usually initiated. Immune function should be optimized in immunocompromised patients, with combination antiretroviral therapy in
patients living with HIV and decreased immunosuppression in transplant recipients, if possible. Other agents that have been suggested for
treatment in clinical reports or small studies include orally administered human serum immunoglobulin or bovine colostrum, paromomycin, spiramycin, azithromycin, and roxithromycin or a combination
of antibiotics. Clofazimine was recently investigated as a potential
therapy among adults living with HIV; however, it failed to show efficacy based on clinical and parasitologic outcomes. Prevention measures include adequate hand hygiene, avoiding untreated ice or water,
especially in areas with poor sanitation, and exclusion of children with
diarrhea from public pools.

CYSTOISOSPORA

Like Cryptosporidium, Cystoisospora belli is implicated as a cause of
diarrhea in institutional outbreaks and in travelers and has also been
linked with contaminated water and food. Cystoisospora appears to be
more common in tropical and subtropical climates and in developing
areas, including South America, Africa, and Southeast Asia. Cystoisospora has not been associated with animal contact. It is also an infrequent cause of diarrhea in patients with AIDS in the United States but
may infect up to 15% of AIDS patients in Haiti.
The life cycle and pathogenesis of infection with Cystoisospora species are similar to those of Cryptosporidium organisms except that
oocysts excreted in the stool are not immediately infectious and must
undergo further maturation at temperatures below 37°C (98.6°F).
Thus direct person-­to-­person transmission is unlikely. The incubation period averages approximately one week. The most common
clinical manifestation is watery, nonbloody diarrhea. Symptoms
of infection are indistinguishable from those of cryptosporidiosis,
although fever may be a more common finding. Eosinophilia may
be present in up to 50% of cases, contrasting with other enteric protozoan infections. The diagnosis is established by detecting the oval,
22-­to 33-­μm long by 10-­to 19-­μm wide oocysts by using modified
acid-­fast staining of the stool. Fecal leukocytes are not detected.
Oocysts are shed in low numbers, underscoring the need for repeated
stool examinations. The presence of oocysts in the gastrointestinal
tract is almost always associated with clinical symptoms. The histologic appearance of the gastrointestinal epithelium reveals blunting
and atrophy of the villi, acute and chronic inflammation, and crypt
hyperplasia.
Cystoisosporiasis responds promptly to treatment with oral
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­
SMX: 5 mg TMP and
25 mg SMX/kg/dose [maximum: 160 mg TMP and 800 mg SMX/
dose] bid for 10 days). In patients with AIDS, relapses are common
and often necessitate higher doses of TMP/SMX and/or maintenance therapy. Combination antiretroviral therapy associated with
immune recovery may also result in improved symptoms. Ciprofloxacin or a regimen of pyrimethamine alone or with folinic acid
is effective in patients intolerant of sulfonamide drugs. In endemic
areas, Cystoisospora can be avoided by ensuring water used for
drinking, food preparation, and washing fresh produce has been
filtered or boiled.

CYCLOSPORA

Cyclospora cayetanensis is a coccidian parasite similar to but larger
than Cryptosporidium. The organism infects both immunocompromised and immunocompetent individuals and is more common in
children younger than 18 months of age. The pathogenesis and pathologic findings of cyclosporiasis are similar to those of cystoisosporiasis.
Asymptomatic carriage of the organism has been found, but travelers
who harbor the organism almost always have diarrhea. Most cases of
cyclosporiasis in the United States are domestically acquired. Outbreaks of cyclosporiasis are linked with contaminated food and water
and occur most frequently during spring and summer months. Implicated foods include raspberries, lettuce, snow peas, basil, cilantro, and
other fresh food items. After fecal excretion, the oocysts must sporulate

outside the host to become infectious. This finding explains the lack of
person-­to-­person transmission.
The clinical manifestations of cyclosporiasis are similar to those
of cryptosporidiosis and cystoisosporiasis and follow an incubation period of approximately 7 days. Moderate Cyclospora illness is characterized by a median of 6 stools/day with a median
duration of 10 days (range: 3-­25 days). The duration of diarrhea in
immunocompetent persons is characteristically longer in cyclosporiasis than in the other intestinal protozoan illnesses. Associated
symptoms frequently include anorexia; fatigue; abdominal bloating
or gas; abdominal cramps or pain; nausea; muscle, joint, or body
aches; low-­grade fever; chills; headache; and weight loss. Vomiting
may occur. Bloody stools are uncommon. Biliary disease has been
reported. Intestinal pathology includes inflammation with villus
blunting.
The diagnosis is established by identification of oocysts in the stool
or molecular diagnostic testing. Oocysts are wrinkled spheres, measure
8-­10 μm in diameter, and resemble large Cryptosporidium organisms.
The organisms can be seen by using modified acid-­fast, auramine-­
phenol, or modified trichrome staining, but stain less consistently
than Cryptosporidium. They can also be detected with phenosafranin
stain and by autofluorescence using strong green or intense blue under
ultraviolet epifluorescence. Multiple stool samples enhance identification of the pathogen. Fecal leukocytes are not present. Commercially
available multiplex molecular test panels for gastrointestinal pathogens that include Cyclospora are now available and may become the
new standard. The sensitivity of molecular testing and the inclusion
of Cyclospora on multiplex molecular testing may be partly responsible for the increased number of reported cases in the United States
in recent years.
The treatment of choice for cyclosporiasis is TMP-­SMX (5 mg TMP
and 25 mg SMX/kg/dose bid [maximum 160 mg TMP and 800 mg
SMX/dose] for 10 days.) Ciprofloxacin or nitazoxanide is effective in
patients intolerant of sulfonamide drugs.

MICROSPORIDIA

Microsporidia are ubiquitous and infect most animal groups, including humans. They are classified as fungi, and multiple species of the
phylum Microsporidia have been linked with human disease in both
immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. The species most
commonly associated with gastrointestinal disease are Enterocytozoon
bieneusi and Encephalitozoon intestinalis. The global prevalence of
microsporidial infections among children is 7.5%, although prevalence
is likely higher among pediatric patients living with HIV, oncology
patients, and transplant recipients.
Although still not definitive, the source of human infections is
likely zoonotic. Like Cryptosporidium, there is concern for waterborne transmission through occupational and recreational contact
with contaminated water sources. There is also the potential for foodborne outbreaks; the organisms have been identified on vegetables
as a consequence of contaminated irrigation water. Vector-­borne
transmission is hypothesized because one species, Brachiola algerae,
typically infects mosquitoes. Finally, transplacental transmission has
been reported in animals but not in humans. Once infected, intracellular division produces new spores that can spread to nearby cells,
disseminate to other host tissues, or be passed into the environment
via feces. Spores also have been detected in urine and respiratory
epithelium, suggesting that some body fluids may also be infectious.
Once in the environment, microsporidial spores remain infectious
for up to 4 months.
Initially, microsporidial intestinal infection had been almost exclusively reported in patients with AIDS, but there are increasing reports
of microsporidial infections in transplant recipients, including donor-­
derived infections in solid organ transplant recipients. There is increasing evidence that immunocompetent individuals are also commonly
infected. Microsporidia-­associated diarrhea is intermittent, watery,
copious, and nonbloody. Abdominal cramping and weight loss may
be present; fever is unusual. Stromal keratitis and encephalitis may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2154 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
also be associated with microsporidia infections. Disseminated disease
involving most organs, including liver, heart, kidney, bladder, biliary
tract, lung, bone, skeletal muscle, central nervous system, skin, and
sinuses, has been reported.
Microsporidia stain with modified trichrome, hematoxylin-­eosin,
Giemsa, Gram, periodic acid–Schiff, and acid-­fast stains but are often
overlooked because of their small size (1-­5 μm) and the absence of
associated inflammation in surrounding tissues. Electron microscopy
remains the reference method of detection. An immunofluorescence
assay is available. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) offer a molecular identification of Enterocytozoon bieneusi,
Encephalitozoon intestinalis, Encephalitozoon hellem, and Encephalitozoon cuniculi using species-­specific PCR assays.
There is no proven therapy for microsporidial intestinal infections.
Albendazole (adult dose 400 mg bid PO for 3 weeks; for children,
7.5 mg/kg body weight [maximum 400 mg/dose] bid PO) is usually
effective against E. intestinalis infection but is ineffective against infection caused by some microsporidial species. Fumagillin (adult dose 20
mg tid PO for 2 weeks) was effective in a small controlled study of
adults with E. bieneusi infection, and topical therapy with this agent
was also demonstrated to be effective in HIV-­infected adults with keratoconjunctivitis. Fumagillin is not currently available in the United
States. Supportive care with hydration, correction of electrolyte imbalances, and nutrition should be used in gastrointestinal infection when
clinically indicated. Improvement in underlying HIV infection with
combination antiretroviral therapy also improves microsporidiosis
symptoms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 330

Trichomoniasis
(Trichomonas vaginalis)
Edsel Maurice T. Salvana and
Robert A. Salata
Trichomoniasis is caused by the protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis. It
is the second most common sexually transmitted infection worldwide. Vulvovaginitis is the symptomatic disease form, but T. vaginalis
has been implicated in pelvic inflammatory disease, pregnancy loss,
chronic prostatitis, and an increased risk of HIV transmission.

Trichomoniasis may be transmitted to neonates during passage
through an infected birth canal. Infection in this setting is usually self-­
limited, but rare cases of neonatal vaginitis and respiratory infection
have been reported.

PATHOGENESIS

T. vaginalis is an anaerobic, flagellated protozoan parasite. Infected
vaginal secretions contain 101 to 105 or more protozoa/mL. T. vaginalis is pear shaped and exhibits characteristic twitching motility in wet
mount (Fig. 330.1). Reproduction is by binary fission. It exists only as
vegetative cells; cyst forms have not been described. T. vaginalis has
hydrogenosomes, which are organelles that produce energy in anaerobic environments and have hydrogen as a waste product. Hydrogenosomes are derived from mitochondria, suggesting that T. vaginalis may
have had an aerobic ancestor.
Many types of adhesion molecules allow attachment of T. vaginalis to
host cells. Tv lipoglycan is a surface glycoconjugate that binds human
galectin-­1 and galectin-­3 and plays a major role in adhesion, pathogenicity, and immune modulation. In addition, hundreds of putative
membrane proteins, BspA proteins, and tetraspanins are involved in
cellular attachment. Adhesion is a prerequisite for cytolysis and, once
attached, the parasite secretes hydrolases, proteases, and cytotoxic molecules that destroy or impair the integrity of host cells.
Trichomonas is highly dependent on iron for its growth and metabolism. Cysteine proteinase mRNAs have been shown to interact with
other parasite proteins for posttranscriptional regulation in the absence
of iron-­regulatory proteins. The T. vaginalis genome is very large at 160
Mbps, with multiple repetitive sequences and transposable elements
making up over 60,000 genes and with apparently nonfunctional but
transcribed pseudogenes.
Macrophage migration and cytokine production have been shown
to be downregulated by the parasite in successful infection. Parasite-­
specific antibodies and lymphocyte priming occur in response to
infection, but durable protective immunity does not occur, possibly
also owing to degradation of antibodies by parasitic cysteine proteases.
Trichomonas infection has been linked to dysregulation of the vagina
microbiota and is frequently associated with concomitant bacterial
vaginosis. Trichomonas can host Mycoplasma genitalium as a symbiont,
and the presence of both microorganisms can significantly increase the
risk of bacterial vaginosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, and adverse
pregnancy outcomes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period in females is 5-­28 days. Symptoms may begin
or worsen with menses. Most infected women eventually develop
symptoms, although up to one third remain asymptomatic. Common
signs and symptoms include a copious malodorous gray, frothy vaginal
discharge, vulvovaginal irritation, dysuria, and dyspareunia. Physical
examination may reveal a frothy discharge with vaginal erythema and

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Over 156 million new cases of trichomoniasis occur annually around
the world. Most men and up to 30% of women are asymptomatic.
Although the disease is easily treated, sequelae of untreated infection remain a significant cause of morbidity because of high reinfection rates from untreated partners, underrecognition of asymptomatic
cases, and insensitive diagnostics.
Trichomoniasis is the most common parasitic infection in the
United States, with a prevalence of 2.6 million cases and 6.9 million incident infections per year. Among the factors associated
with a higher prevalence of infection are female sex, belonging to
underrepresented minorities, poverty, lower educational attainment,
younger age at first sex, multiple sexual partners, and a recent Chlamydia infection. Vaginal trichomoniasis is rare until menarche, and
its presence in a younger child should raise the possibility of sexual
abuse.

A

B

Fig. 330.1 Trichomonas vaginalis trophozoites stained with Giemsa
(A) and iron hematoxylin (B). (From the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: Laboratory identification of parasites of public health concern. Trichomoniasis [website]. https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/trichomonia
sis/index.html)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 331 u Leishmaniasis (Leishmania)

2155

cervical hemorrhages (strawberry cervix). The discharge usually has
a pH of >4.5. Abdominal discomfort is unusual and should prompt
evaluation for pelvic inflammatory disease (see Chapter 163).
Most infections in males are asymptomatic. Symptomatic males
usually have dysuria and scant urethral discharge. Trichomonads
occasionally cause epididymitis, prostatic involvement, and superficial
penile ulceration. Infection is often self-­limited, spontaneously resolving in about one third of men. Trichomonas has been implicated as a
cause of recurrent or relapsing urethritis and can be isolated in 3–20%
of men with nongonococcal urethritis. Treatment failures with standard therapy for gonorrhea and Chlamydia are frequently treated with
antitrichomonal therapy.

is a 7-­day course of metronidazole 500 mg twice daily. If this approach
fails, either metronidazole or tinidazole at 2 g daily for 7 days is recommended. Further treatment failure should be referred to an infectious
diseases specialist. Susceptibility testing is available from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Higher dose tinidazole
(2-­3 g for 14 days) in combination with intravaginal tinidazole or
paromomycin have been used in nitroimidazole-­resistant infections.
Metronidazole has not been shown to be teratogenic but is currently
classified as a category C drug. Treatment of trichomoniasis in pregnancy should always be considered, especially in symptomatic patients,
and may decrease the risk of perinatal transmission.

DIAGNOSIS

Prevention of T. vaginalis infection is best accomplished by treatment
of all sexual partners of an infected person, and by programs aimed
at prevention of all sexually transmitted infections (see Chapter 163).
No vaccine is available, and drug prophylaxis is not recommended. A
recent randomized controlled trial showed that T. vaginalis infection
with concurrent bacterial vaginosis responded better to metronidazole
treatment when intravaginal probiotics were co-­administered, consistent with findings that altered vaginal microflora plays a significant role
in T. vaginalis pathogenesis.

Trichomonads may be recognized in vaginal secretions by wet mount
microscopy, which has a sensitivity of 51–65% in vaginal specimens
and a lower sensitivity in specimens from men. Although Trichomonas
is sometimes seen on Pap smears and urine microscopy, these methods
are not considered reliable tests for disease. Culture of the organism
used to be the gold standard for detection, but this is increasingly being
replaced by nucleic acid amplification tests, which are more sensitive.
The APTIMA TV (Hologic/Gen-­Probe, Inc., Marlborough, MA) assay
and the BD Probe Tec TV Qx Amplified DNA Assay (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) are U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
cleared commercial NAATs for testing of samples from women. Xpert
TV (Cepheid Inc., Sunnyvale, CA) is a cartridge-­based near-­point-­of-­
care nucleic acid test that is FDA-­cleared for men and women, with
a sensitivity of 95% for self-­collected vaginal swabs and up to 100%
for symptomatic endocervical swabs. Three point-­of-­care kits for rapid
testing, Affirm VP III (BD Diagnostic Systems, Sparks, MD), OSOM
Trichomonas Rapid Test (Sekisui Diagnostics, Lexington, MA), and
Solana Trichomonas Assay (Quidel, San Diego, CA) are FDA cleared
for women and can yield results in 45 minutes or less. Patients with T.
vaginalis should be screened for other sexually transmitted infections.

COMPLICATIONS

Untreated trichomoniasis has been associated with pelvic inflammatory disease, premature delivery, low birthweight, endometritis, salpingitis, and vaginal cuff cellulitis. The association between trichomoniasis
and infertility is relatively weak, but there is some evidence that co-­
infection with other sexually transmitted infections increases the overall risk of pelvic inflammatory disease. T. vaginalis infection increases
the risk of acquisition and transmission of HIV. In HIV-­infected individuals, trichomoniasis is associated with higher viral loads in cervical
secretions and semen, as well as higher levels of infected lymphocytes
in urogenital fluids.

TREATMENT

In the United States, metronidazole and tinidazole are used; in other
countries, secnidazole, azanidazole, and ornidazole are also used. Both
metronidazole (single-­dose regimen of 2 g orally as a single dose for
adolescents and adults; alternative regimen, 500 mg orally bid for 7
days) and tinidazole (single 2 g dose orally in adolescents and adults)
are used as first-­line treatments. For children infected before adolescence, the recommended regimen is metronidazole 15 mg/kg/day
divided in three doses orally for 7 days; tinidazole is not approved for
dosing in younger children. For HIV-­infected patients, the 7-­day course
of metronidazole is superior to and recommended over the single-dose
regimen. Sexual partners should be treated simultaneously to prevent
reinfection. Recent studies have shown that single-­dose metronidazole
is less effective than a multidose regimen in women. A small number of patients with severe nitroimidazole hypersensitivity have been
treated with intravaginal suppositories of boric acid, nitazoxanide,
and paromomycin with varying degrees of success. Desensitization to
metronidazole with a validated protocol under an allergy specialist is
recommended if possible.
Treatment failures have been reported with metronidazole and tinidazole. Metronidazole resistance in Trichomonas is estimated to be
4.3–9.6%, and tinidazole resistance is about 1%. Second-­line treatment

PREVENTION

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 331

Leishmaniasis
(Leishmania)
Peter C. Melby
The leishmaniases are a diverse group of diseases caused by intracellular protozoan parasites of the genus Leishmania, which are transmitted
by phlebotomine sand flies. Multiple species of Leishmania are known
to cause human disease involving the skin and mucosal surfaces and
the visceral reticuloendothelial organs (Table 331.1). Cutaneous disease is usually localized and mild but may cause cosmetic disfigurement. Rarely, cutaneous infection can disseminate or involve the skin
diffusely. Mucosal and visceral forms of leishmaniasis are associated
with significant morbidity and mortality.

ETIOLOGY

Leishmania organisms are members of the Trypanosomatidae family
and include two subgenera, Leishmania (Leishmania) and Leishmania
(Viannia). The parasite is dimorphic, existing as a flagellate promastigote in the insect vector and as an aflagellate amastigote that resides
and replicates within mononuclear phagocytes of the vertebrate host.
Within the sand fly vector, the promastigote changes from a noninfective procyclic form to an infective metacyclic stage (Fig. 331.1). Amplification of the number of metacyclic promastigotes in the infected sand
fly occurs following a second blood meal. Fundamental to metacyclogenesis are changes that take place in the terminal polysaccharides of
the surface lipophosphoglycan, which allow forward migration of the
infective parasites to be inoculated in the host skin during a blood meal.
Metacyclic lipophosphoglycan also plays an important role in the entry
and survival of Leishmania in the vertebrate host cells. Once within the
macrophage, the promastigote transforms to an amastigote and resides
and replicates within a phagolysosome. The parasite is resistant to the
acidic, hostile environment of the macrophage and eventually ruptures
the cell and goes on to infect other macrophages. Infected macrophages
have a diminished capacity to initiate and respond to an inflammatory
response, thus providing a safe haven for the intracellular parasite.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL
SUBGENUS FORM

MAIN CLINICAL
FEATURES

NATURAL
PROGRESSION

RISK GROUPS

MAIN
RESERVOIR

HIGH-­BURDEN
COUNTRIES OR
REGIONS

ESTIMATED
ANNUAL WORLDWIDE
INCIDENCE

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Leishmania
donovani*

Leishmania

VL, PKDL

Persistent fever,
splenomegaly, weight
loss, and anemia in
VL; multiple painless
macular, papular, or
nodular lesions in PKDL

VL is fatal within 2 yr;
PKDL lesions self-­heal
in up to 85% of cases in
Africa but rarely in Asia

Predominantly
adolescents and
young adults for VL;
young children in
Sudan and no clearly
established risk
factors for PKDL

Humans

India, Bangladesh,
Ethiopia, Sudan,
and South Sudan

50,000-­90,000 VL cases;
unknown number of
PKDL cases

Leishmania
tropica*

Leishmania

CL, LR,
rarely
VL

Ulcerating dry lesions,
painless, and frequently
multiple

CL lesions often self-­
heal within 1 yr

No well-­defined risk
groups

Humans, but
zoonotic
foci exist

Eastern Mediterranean,
Middle East,
northeastern and
southern Africa

200,000-­400,000 CL

Leishmania
aethiopica*

Leishmania

CL, DCL,
DsCL,
oronasal
CL

Localized cutaneous
nodular lesions;
occasionally oronasal;
rarely ulcerates

Self-­healing, except for
DCL, within 2-­5 yr

Limited evidence;
adolescents

Hyraxes

Ethiopia, Kenya

20,000-­40,000 CL

Leishmania
major*

Leishmania

CL

Rapid necrosis, multiple
wet sores, severe
inflammation

Self-­healing in >50% of
cases within 2-­8 mo;
multiple lesions slow
to heal, and severe
scarring

No well-­defined risk
groups

Rodents

Iran, Saudi Arabia,
North Africa,
Middle East, Central
Asia, West Africa

230,000-­430,000 CL

Leishmania
infantum*

Leishmania

VL, CL

Persistent fever and
splenomegaly in
VL; typically single
nodules and minimal
inflammation in CL

VL is fatal within 2 yr;
CL lesions self-­heal
within 1 yr and confers
individual immunity

Children <5 yr old and
immunocompromised
adults for VL; older
children and young
adults for CL

Dogs, hares,
humans

China, Southern
Europe, Brazil, and
South America for
VL and CL; Central
America for CL

6,200-­12,000 cases of Old
World VL and 4,500-­
6,800 cases of New
World VL; unknown
number of CL cases

Leishmania
mexicana†

Leishmania

CL, DCL,
DsCL

Ulcerating lesions, single
or multiple

Often self-­healing in
3-­4 mo

No well-­defined risk
groups

Rodents,
marsupials

South America

Limited number of cases,
included in the 187,
200-­300,000 total cases
of New World CL‡

Leishmania
amazonensis†

Leishmania

CL, DCL,
DsCL

Ulcerating lesions, single
or multiple

Not well described

No well-­defined risk
groups

Possums,
rodents

South America

Limited number of cases,
included in the 187,
200-­300,000 total cases
of New World CL‡

Leishmania
braziliensis†

Viannia

CL, MCL,
DCL, LR

Ulcerating lesions can
progress to mucocutaneous
form; local lymph nodes are
palpable before and early
on in the onset of the lesions

Might self-­heal in 6 mo;
2.5% of cases progress
to MCL

No well-­defined risk
groups

Dogs,
humans,
rodents,
horses

South America

Majority of the 187,
200-­300,000 total cases
of New World CL‡

Leishmania
guyanensis†

Viannia

CL, DsCL,
MCL

Ulcerating lesions, single or
multiple that can progress
to mucocutaneous form;
palpable lymph nodes

Might self-­heal within
6 mo

No well-­defined risk
groups

Possums,
sloths,
anteaters

South America

Limited number of cases,
included in the 187,
200-­300,000 total cases
of New World CL‡

*Old World leishmaniasis.
†New World leishmaniasis.
‡Estimates are of all New World leishmaniases, with Leishmania braziliensis comprising the vast majority of these cases.
CL, Cutaneous leishmaniasis; DCL, diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis; DsCL, disseminated cutaneous leishmaniasis; LR, leishmaniasis recidivans; MCL, mucocutaneous leishmaniasis; PKDL, post–kala-­azar dermal leishmaniasis; VL, visceral leishmaniasis.
Adapted from Burza S, Croft SL, Boelaert ML. Leishmaniasis. Lancet. 2018;392:951–966. Table 1.

2156 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Table 331.1  Clinical and Epidemiologic Characteristics of Main Leishmania Species

Chapter 331 u Leishmaniasis (Leishmania)
Sandfly stages

1

2157

Human stages

Sandfly takes a blood meal and
regurgitates promastigotes
into skin

8 Divide in gut
and migrate
to proboscis

2 Promastigotes are
phagocytosed by
macrophages

3 Promastigotes transform into
amastigotes inside
macrophages
7 Amastigotes transform into
promastigote stage in gut

4 Amastigotes multiply in
cells, including
macrophages, of various
tissues
6

Ingestion of parasitized cell

5 Sandfly takes a blood meal

Fig. 331.1 Leishmania life cycle. (From Reithinger R,

Dujardin JC, Louzir H, et al. Cutaneous leishmaniasis.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2007;7:581–596. Fig. 5.)

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The leishmaniases are estimated to affect 10-­20 million people in
endemic tropical and subtropical regions on all continents except Australia and Antarctica (Fig. 331.2). The different forms of the disease
are distinct in their causes, epidemiologic characteristics, transmission,
and geographic distribution. The leishmaniases may occur sporadically
throughout an endemic region or may occur in epidemic waves. With
only rare exceptions, the Leishmania organisms that primarily cause
cutaneous disease do not cause visceral disease.
Localized cutaneous leishmaniasis (LCL) in the Old World is
caused by L. (Leishmania) major and L. (L.) tropica in North Africa, the
Middle East, Central Asia, and the Indian subcontinent. L. (L.) aethiopica is a cause of LCL and diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis (DCL) in
Kenya and Ethiopia. In the New World, L. (L.) mexicana causes LCL
in a region stretching from Texas through Central America. L. (L.)
amazonensis, L. (L.) pifanoi, L. (L.) garnhami, and L. (L.) venezuelensis cause LCL in South America, the Amazon basin, and northward.
These parasites can also cause DCL. Members of the Viannia subgenus
(L. [Viannia] braziliensis, L. [V.] panamensis, L. [V.] guyanensis, and L.
[V.] peruviana) cause LCL and mucosal leishmaniasis (ML) from the
northern highlands of Argentina northward to Central America. Some
species, particularly L. (V.) braziliensis, rarely cause disseminated
leishmaniasis (DL). Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) in the Old World is
caused by L. (L.) donovani in Kenya, Sudan, India, Pakistan, and China
and by L. (L.) infantum in the Mediterranean basin, Middle East, and
central Asia. L. tropica also has been recognized as an uncommon cause
of visceral disease in the Middle East and India. VL in the New World
is caused by L. (L.) infantum (formerly also called L. chagasi), which is
distributed from Mexico (rare) through Central and South America. L.
infantum can also cause LCL in the absence of visceral disease in this
same geographic distribution.
The maintenance of Leishmania in most endemic areas is through
a zoonotic transmission cycle. In general, the dermotropic strains in
both the Old and the New World are maintained in rodent reservoirs,
and the domestic dog is the usual reservoir for L. infantum. The transmission between reservoir and sand fly is highly adapted to the specific ecologic characteristics of the endemic region. Human infections
occur when activities bring them in contact with the zoonotic cycle.
Anthroponotic transmission, in which humans are the presumed reservoir for vector-­borne transmission, occurs with L. tropica in some
urban areas of the Middle East and Central Asia, and with L. donovani
in India and Sudan. Congenital transmission of L. donovani or L. infantum has been reported.
There is a resurgence of leishmaniasis in long-­standing endemic
areas as well as in new foci. Tens of thousands of cases of LCL occurred
in outbreaks in Syria and Kabul, Afghanistan; severe epidemics with

>100,000 deaths from VL have occurred in India and Sudan. VL is
most prevalent among the poorest of the poor, with substandard housing contributing to the vector-­borne transmission and undernutrition
leading to increased host susceptibility. The emergence of the leishmaniases in new areas is the result of (1) movement of a susceptible
population into existing endemic areas, usually because of agricultural
or industrial development or timber harvesting; (2) increase in vector and/or reservoir populations as a result of agriculture development
projects and/or climate change; (3) increase in anthroponotic transmission resulting from rapid urbanization in some focuses; and (4)
increase in sand fly density resulting from a reduction in vector control
programs.

PATHOLOGY

Histopathologic analysis of the skin lesions of LCL and DL show intense
chronic granulomatous inflammation involving the epidermis and dermis with relatively few amastigotes. Occasionally, neutrophils and even
microabscesses can be seen. The lesions of DCL are characterized by
dense infiltration with vacuolated macrophages containing abundant
amastigotes. ML is characterized by an intense granulomatous reaction
with prominent tissue necrosis, which may include adjacent cartilage
or bone. In VL there is prominent reticuloendothelial cell hyperplasia in the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes. Amastigotes
are abundant in the histiocytes and Kupffer cells. Late in the course of
disease, splenic infarcts are common, centrilobular necrosis and fatty
infiltration of the liver occur, the normal marrow elements are replaced
by parasitized histiocytes, and erythrophagocytosis is present.

PATHOGENESIS

Cellular immune mechanisms determine resistance or susceptibility
to infection with Leishmania. Resistance is mediated by interleukin
(IL)-­12–driven generation of a T helper 1 (Th1) cell response, with
interferon (IFN)-­γ inducing classic macrophage (M1) activation and
parasite killing. Susceptibility is associated with expansion of IL-­4–
producing Th2 cells and/or the production of IL-­10 and transforming
growth factor (TGF)-­β, which are inhibitors of macrophage-­mediated
parasite killing, and the generation of regulatory T cells and arginase-­
producing (M2) macrophages. An exuberant innate inflammatory
response involving inflammasome activation and IL-­1β production in
lesions is associated with greater local pathology and delayed healing.
Patients with ML exhibit a hyperresponsive cellular immune reaction
that contributes to the prominent tissue destruction seen in this form
of the disease. Patients with DCL or active VL demonstrate reduced
or altered Leishmania-­specific cellular immune responses, with prominent generation of IL-­10, but these responses recover after successful
therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2158 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Number of new cases
of visceral leishmaniasis
reported
≥1000
500–999
100–499
<100
0

No autochthonous cases reported
No data
Not applicable

Fig. 331.2 Status of endemicity of visceral leishmaniasis worldwide in 2016. (From World Health Organization. Recognizing Neglected Tropical
Diseases Through Changes on the Skin: A Training Guide for Front-­Line Health Workers. Geneva: WHO; 2018.)

Within endemic areas, people who have had a subclinical infection can be identified by a positive delayed-­type hypersensitivity
skin response to leishmanial antigens (Montenegro skin test) or by
antigen-­induced production of IFN-­γ in a whole blood assay. Subclinical infection occurs considerably more frequently than does
active cutaneous or visceral disease. Host factors (genetic background, concomitant disease, nutritional status), parasite factors
(virulence, size of the inoculum), and possibly vector-­specific factors (vector genotype, immunomodulatory salivary constituents)
influence the expression as either subclinical infection or active
disease. Within endemic areas, the prevalence of skin test positivity
increases with age, and the incidence of clinical disease decreases
with age, indicating that immunity is acquired in the population
over time. Individuals with prior active disease or subclinical infection are usually immune to a subsequent clinical infection; however, latent infection can lead to active disease if the patient is
immunosuppressed.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The different forms of the disease are distinct in their causes, epidemiologic features, transmission, and geographic distribution.

Localized Cutaneous Leishmaniasis

LCL (Oriental sore) can affect individuals of any age, but children are
the primary victims in many endemic regions. It may present as one or
a few papular, nodular, plaque-­like, or ulcerative lesions that are usually
located on exposed skin, such as the face and extremities (Fig. 331.3).
Rarely, >100 lesions have been recorded. The lesions typically begin
as a small papule at the site of the sand fly bite, which enlarges to 1-­3
cm in diameter and may ulcerate over the course of several weeks to
months. The shallow ulcer is usually nontender and surrounded by a
sharp, indurated, erythematous margin. There is no drainage unless
a bacterial superinfection develops. Lesions caused by L. major and
L. mexicana usually heal spontaneously after 3-­6 months, leaving a
depressed scar. Lesions on the ear pinna caused by L. mexicana, called
chiclero ulcer because they were common in chicle harvesters in Mexico and Central America, often follow a chronic, destructive course.
In general, lesions caused by L. (Viannia) species tend to be larger and
more chronic. Regional lymphadenopathy and palpable subcutaneous
nodules or lymphatic cords, the so-­called sporotrichoid appearance,

are also more common when the patient is infected with organisms of
the Viannia subgenus. If lesions do not become secondarily infected,
there are usually no complications aside from the residual cutaneous
scar.

Diffuse Cutaneous Leishmaniasis

DCL is a rare form of leishmaniasis caused by organisms of the L. mexicana complex in the New World and L. aethiopica in the Old World.
DCL manifests as large, non-­ulcerating macules, papules, nodules, or
plaques that often involve large areas of skin and may resemble lepromatous leprosy. The face and extremities are most often involved. Dissemination from the initial lesion usually takes place over several years.
These patients are anergic to the Montenegro skin test, and it is thought
that an immunologic defect underlies this severe form of cutaneous
leishmaniasis.

Disseminated Leishmaniasis

In rare cases, parasites can spread (likely by the hematogenous
route) in an immunocompetent host from a primary lesion to cause
DL. This is defined as >10 lesions (usually in the hundreds) involving
at least two noncontiguous areas of the skin. DL has been most often
attributed to L. (V.) braziliensis. The lesions are typically inflammatory papules or ulcers, in contrast to the nodular and plaquelike lesions of DCL, and about one-­third of patients have mucosal
involvement.

Mucosal Leishmaniasis

ML (espundia) is an uncommon but serious manifestation of leishmanial infection resulting from hematogenous spread of parasites
to the nasal or oropharyngeal mucosa from a cutaneous infection. It
is usually caused by parasites in the L. (Viannia) complex. Approximately half of the patients with mucosal lesions have had active cutaneous lesions within the preceding 2 years, but ML may not develop
until many years after resolution of the primary lesion. ML occurs in
<5% of individuals who have, or have had, LCL caused by L. (V.) braziliensis. Patients with ML typically have nasal mucosal involvement
and present with nasal congestion, discharge, and recurrent epistaxis.
Oropharyngeal and laryngeal involvement is less common but associated with severe morbidity. Marked soft tissue, cartilage, and even bone
destruction occurs late in the course of disease and may lead to visible

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 331 u Leishmaniasis (Leishmania)
deformity of the nose or mouth, nasal septal perforation, and tracheal
narrowing with airway obstruction.

Visceral Leishmaniasis

VL (kala-­azar) typically affects children <5 years old in the New
World and Mediterranean region (L. infantum) and older children and
young adults in Africa and Asia (L. donovani). After inoculation of
the organism into the skin by the sand fly, the child may have a completely asymptomatic infection or an oligosymptomatic illness that
either resolves spontaneously or evolves into active kala-­azar. Children
with asymptomatic infection are transiently seropositive but show
no clinical evidence of disease. Children who are oligosymptomatic
have mild constitutional symptoms (malaise, intermittent diarrhea,
poor activity tolerance) and intermittent fever; most will have a mildly
enlarged liver. In most of these children the illness will resolve without therapy, but in approximately 25% it will evolve to active kala-­azar
within 2-­8 months. Extreme incubation periods of several years have
rarely been described. During the first few weeks to months of disease evolution, the fever is intermittent, there is weakness and loss of
energy, and the spleen begins to enlarge. The classic clinical features of
high fever, marked splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and severe cachexia
typically develop 3-­6 months after the onset of the illness, but a rapid
clinical course over 1 month has been noted in up to 20% of patients in
some series (Fig. 331.4). At the terminal stages of kala-­azar, the hepatosplenomegaly is massive, there is gross wasting, the pancytopenia
is profound, and jaundice, edema, and ascites may be present. Anemia may be severe enough to precipitate heart failure. Bleeding episodes, especially epistaxis, are frequent. The late stage of the illness is
often complicated by secondary bacterial infections, which frequently
are a cause of death. A younger age at the time of infection, HIV co-­
infection, and underlying malnutrition are risk factors for the development, rapid evolution, and severe disease of active VL. Death occurs
in >90% of patients without specific antileishmanial treatment and in
4–10% of treated patients. VL is a known cause of hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis in endemic areas.
VL is an opportunistic infection associated with HIV infection.
Most cases have occurred in southern Europe and Brazil, often as
a result of needle sharing associated with illicit drug use, with the
potential for many more cases as the endemic regions for HIV and VL
converge. Leishmaniasis may also result from reactivation of a long-­
standing subclinical infection. Frequently there is an atypical clinical presentation of VL in HIV-­infected individuals with prominent

A

B

2159

involvement of the gastrointestinal tract and absence of the typical
hepatosplenomegaly.
A small percentage of patients previously treated for VL develop diffuse skin lesions, a condition known as post–kala-­azar dermal leishmaniasis. These lesions may appear during or shortly after therapy
(Africa) or up to several years later (India). The lesions of post–kala-­
azar dermal leishmaniasis are hypopigmented, erythematous, or nodular and usually involve the face and torso. They may persist for several
months or for many years.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Patients with cutaneous leishmaniasis or ML generally do not have
abnormal laboratory results unless the lesions are secondarily
infected with bacteria. Laboratory findings associated with classic
kala-­azar include anemia (hemoglobin, 5-­8 mg/dL), thrombocytopenia, leukopenia (2,000-­3,000 cells/μL), elevated hepatic transaminase levels, and hyperglobulinemia (>5 g/dL) that is mostly
immunoglobulin G.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Diseases that should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
LCL include sporotrichosis, blastomycosis, chromomycosis, lobomycosis, cutaneous tuberculosis, atypical mycobacterial infection,
leprosy, ecthyma, syphilis, yaws, and neoplasms. Infections such as
syphilis, tertiary yaws, histoplasmosis, and paracoccidioidomycosis,
as well as sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, midline granuloma, and carcinoma, may have clinical features similar to those of
ML. VL should be strongly suspected in the patient with prolonged
fever, weakness, cachexia, marked splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, cytopenias, and hypergammaglobulinemia who has had potential exposure in an endemic area. The clinical picture may also be consistent
with that of malaria, typhoid fever, miliary tuberculosis, schistosomiasis, brucellosis, amebic liver abscess, infectious mononucleosis,
lymphoma, and leukemia.

DIAGNOSIS

The development of one or several slowly progressive, nontender, nodular, or ulcerative lesions in a patient who had potential exposure in an
endemic area should raise suspicion of LCL.
Serologic tests for diagnosis of cutaneous or mucosal disease generally have low sensitivity and specificity and offer little for diagnosis.
Serologic testing by enzyme immunoassay, indirect fluorescence assay,
or direct agglutination is very useful in VL because of the very high
level of antileishmanial antibodies. An immunochromatographic strip
test using a recombinant antigen (K39) has a diagnostic sensitivity and
specificity for VL of 80–90% and 95%, respectively. Serodiagnostic tests
have positive findings in only about half the patients co-­infected with
HIV.

C

Fig. 331.3 Cutaneous disease. A, Old World infection (Leishmania

major) acquired in Iraq; note five papular and nodular lesions on neck.
B, New World infection (Leishmania panamensis) in Colombia; purely
ulcerative lesion is characteristic of New World disease. C, Healed infection in patient shown in B 70 days after 20 days of meglumine antimonate treatment; note paper-­thin scar tissue over flat reepithelialized
skin. (A, Courtesy P. Weina; B, Courtesy J. Soto. A-­C, Modified from
Murray HW, Berman JD, Davies CR, et al. Advances in leishmaniasis.
Lancet. 2005;366:1561–1577.)

A

B

Fig. 331.4 Visceral leishmaniasis (Leishmania donovani) in Bihar

State, India. A, Hepatosplenomegaly and wasting in a young man. B,
Children with burn marks over enlarged spleen or liver evidence of a
local shaman’s unsuccessful remedy. (A, Courtesy D. Sacks; B, Courtesy
R. Kenney; A and B, Adapted from Murray HW, Berman JD, Davies CR,
et al. Advances in leishmaniasis. Lancet. 2005;366:1561–1577.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2160 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Definitive diagnosis of leishmaniasis is established by the demonstration of amastigotes in tissue specimens or isolation of the organism
by culture. Amastigotes can be identified in Giemsa-­stained tissue sections, aspirates, or impression smears in about half the cases of LCL but
only rarely in the lesions of ML. Culture of a tissue biopsy or aspirate,
best performed by using Novy-­MacNeal-­Nicolle biphasic blood agar
medium, yields a positive finding in only approximately 65% of cases
of cutaneous leishmaniasis. Identification of parasites in impression
smears, histopathologic sections, or culture medium is more readily
accomplished in DCL than in LCL. In patients with VL, smears or cultures of material from splenic, bone marrow, or lymph node aspirations
are usually diagnostic. In experienced hands, splenic aspiration has a
higher diagnostic sensitivity, but it is rarely performed in the United
States because of the risk for bleeding complications. A positive culture
result allows speciation of the parasite, usually by isoenzyme analysis
by a reference laboratory, which may have therapeutic and prognostic
significance.

TREATMENT

Specific antileishmanial therapy should be individualized for each
patient. It is not routinely indicated for immunocompetent persons
having uncomplicated simple LCL (single or few lesions, lesion diameter <1 cm, no mucosal involvement) caused by strains that have a high
rate of spontaneous resolution and self-­healing (L. major, L. mexicana).
Lesions that are extensive, severely inflamed, or located where a scar
would result in disability (near a joint) or cosmetic disfigurement
(face or ear), that involve the lymphatics, or that do not begin healing
within 3-­4 months should be treated. Cutaneous lesions suspected or
known to be caused by members of the Viannia subgenus (New World)
should be treated because of the low rate of spontaneous healing and
the potential risk for development of mucosal or disseminated disease.
Similarly, patients with lesions caused by L. tropica (Old World), which
are typically chronic and nonhealing, should be treated. All patients
with VL or ML should receive therapy.
The pentavalent antimony compounds (sodium stibogluconate
[Pentostam, GlaxoSmithKline, Uxbridge, UK] and meglumine antimoniate [Glucantime, Aventis, Strasbourg, France]) have been the
mainstay of antileishmanial chemotherapy for >40 years. These drugs
have similar efficacies, toxicities, and treatment regimens. Currently,
for sodium stibogluconate (available in the United States from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA), the recommended regimen is 20 mg/kg/day intravenously (IV) or intramuscularly (IM) for 20 days (for LCL and DCL) or 28 days (for ML and VL).
Repeated courses of therapy may be necessary in patients with severe
cutaneous lesions, ML, DCL, DL, or VL. An initial clinical response to
therapy usually occurs in the first week of therapy, but complete clinical
healing (reepithelialization and scarring for LCL and ML, and regression of splenomegaly and normalization of cytopenias for VL) is usually not evident for weeks to a few months after completion of therapy.
Cure rates with this regimen of 90–100% for LCL, 50–70% for ML, and
80–100% for VL were common in the 1990s, but treatment failures,
especially in children, have become common in parts of India, East
Africa, and Latin America.
Relapses are common in patients who do not have an effective antileishmanial cellular immune response (DCL or HIV
co-­infection). Adverse effects of antimony therapy are dose and
duration dependent and include fatigue, arthralgias, and myalgias
(50%), abdominal discomfort (30%), elevated hepatic transaminase
level (30–80%), elevated amylase and lipase levels (almost 100%),
mild hematologic changes (slightly decreased leukocyte count,
hemoglobin level, and platelet count) (10–30%), and nonspecific
T-­wave changes on electrocardiography (30%). Sudden death from
cardiac toxicity has rarely been reported with use of very high doses
of pentavalent antimony.
Amphotericin B desoxycholate and liposomal amphotericin B are
very useful in the treatment of VL, ML, or DL, and in some regions

have replaced antimony as first-­line therapy, especially in HIV-­infected
patients. However, the prohibitively high cost of these drugs precludes
their use in many resource-­poor regions of the world. Amphotericin B
desoxycholate at doses of 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg every day or every other day
for 14-­20 doses achieved a cure rate for VL of close to 100%, but
renal toxicity associated with amphotericin B was common. Liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome, Gilead Sciences, Foster City,
CA) is especially attractive for treatment of leishmaniasis because
the drug is concentrated in the reticuloendothelial system and is less
nephrotoxic. It is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of VL at a recommended dose for immunocompetent patients of 3 mg/kg on days 1-­5, 14, and 21 (total dose 21
mg/kg) and should be considered for first-­line therapy in the United
States. It is highly effective, with a 90–100% cure rate for VL in immunocompetent children, including those who were refractory to antimony therapy. Therapy for immunocompromised patients should be
prolonged (recommended total dose 40 mg/kg). A single high dose
of liposomal amphotericin B (10 mg/kg) was found to be effective
in India (approximately 95% efficacy) but was less effective in East
Africa (58% efficacy).
Parenteral treatment of VL with the aminoglycoside paromomycin (aminosidine) has efficacy (95%) similar to that of amphotericin B in India. A dose-­sparing regimen of the combination of
sodium stibogluconate and paromomycin is effective and used in
East Africa. Miltefosine, a membrane-­activating alkyl phospholipid, has been approved as the first oral treatment for VL and has a
cure rate of 80–90% in Indian patients with VL when administered
orally at 50-­100 mg/day (or 2.5 mg/kg for children <12 years old)
for 28 days. Miltefosine is indicated for cutaneous infection caused
by L. braziliensis, L. guyanensis, and L. panamensis; ML caused
by L. braziliensis; and VL caused by L. donovani. Gastrointestinal
adverse effects were frequent but did not require discontinuation of
the drug. An increased rate of relapse (up to 20%) has been seen in
children treated with miltefosine. Dose-­sparing combination regimens are being actively investigated for treatment of VL. Treatment
of LCL with oral drugs has had only modest success. Ketoconazole
has been effective in treating adults with LCL caused by L. major,
L. mexicana, and L. panamensis, but not L. tropica or L. braziliensis.
Fluconazole in high doses (up to 8 mg/kg/day) for 4-­8 weeks was
demonstrated to be effective in treating LCL in studies in both the
Old and New World; however, the experience in young children is
limited. Miltefosine, 2.5 mg/kg/day orally for 20-­28 days, was effective in 70–90% of patients with LCL in the Americas. Local therapy,
including heat, cryotherapy, and topical 15% paromomycin ointment has been effective treatment for LCL in selected areas in both
the Old and the New World. Enhanced drug development efforts
and clinical trials of new drugs are clearly needed, especially in
children.

PREVENTION

Personal protective measures should include avoidance of exposure to
the nocturnal sand flies and, when necessary, the use of insect repellent and permethrin-­impregnated mosquito netting. Where peridomiciliary transmission is present, community-­based residual insecticide
spraying has had some success in reducing the prevalence of leishmaniasis, but long-­term effects are difficult to maintain. Control or
elimination of infected reservoir hosts (e.g., seropositive domestic
dogs) has had limited success. Where anthroponotic transmission is
thought to occur, as in south Asia, early recognition, diagnosis, and
treatment of cases and vector control measures are essential for progress toward elimination. Several vaccines have been demonstrated to
have efficacy in experimental models, and vaccination of humans or
domestic dogs may have a role in the control of the leishmaniases in
the future.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 332 u African Trypanosomiasis (Sleeping Sickness; Trypanosoma brucei Complex)

Chapter 332

African Trypanosomiasis
(Sleeping Sickness;
Trypanosoma brucei
Complex)
Edsel Maurice T. Salvana and
Robert A. Salata
Sixty-­five million people in 36 countries are at risk for infection with
Trypanosoma brucei complex, the causative agent of sleeping sickness.
Also known as human African trypanosomiasis (HAT), this disease
is restricted to sub-­Saharan Africa, the range of the tsetse fly vector. It is
a disease of extreme poverty, with the highest disease burden observed
in remote rural areas. HAT comes in two geographically and clinically
distinct forms. Trypanosoma brucei gambiense causes a chronic infection and affects people who live in western and central Africa (West
African sleeping sickness, Gambian trypanosomiasis). Trypanosoma
brucei rhodesiense is a zoonosis that presents as an acute illness lasting
several weeks and usually occurs in residents or travelers from eastern and southern Africa (East African sleeping sickness, Rhodesian
trypanosomiasis).

ETIOLOGY

HAT is a vector-­borne disease caused by parasitic, extracellular, flagellated kinetoplastid protozoans of two subspecies of T. brucei. It is transmitted to humans through the bite of Glossina, commonly known as
the tsetse fly.
Humans usually contract East African HAT when they venture
from towns to rural areas to visit woodlands or livestock, highlighting the importance of zoonotic reservoirs in this disease. West African HAT is contracted closer to settlements and only requires a small
vector population, making it difficult to eradicate. Animal reservoirs
occur, but the main source of infection remains chronically infected
human hosts.

LIFE CYCLE

T. brucei undergoes several stages of development in the insect and
mammalian host. On ingestion with a blood meal, nonproliferative
short stumpy (SS) forms of the parasite transform into procyclic
forms in the insect’s midgut. These procyclic forms proliferate and
undergo further development into epimastigotes, which then become
infective metacyclic forms that migrate to the insect’s salivary glands.
The life cycle within the tsetse fly takes 15-­35 days. On inoculation
into the mammalian host, the metacyclic stage transforms into proliferative long slender (LS) forms in the bloodstream and the lymphatics, eventually penetrating the central nervous system (CNS).
LS forms appear in waves in the peripheral blood, with each wave
followed by a febrile crisis and heralding the formation of a new
antigenic variant. Once a critical density of LS forms is reached, a
quorum-­sensing mechanism causes most of these to transform into
nonproliferative SS forms that are ingested by Glossina and start the
cycle anew. Quorum sensing controls peak parasitemia to ensure that
the host survives infection long enough for the parasite to complete
its life cycle.
Direct transmission to humans has been reported, either vertically
to infants or mechanically through contact with tsetse flies with viable LS forms on their mouthparts from a recent blood meal from an
infected host.

2161

EPIDEMIOLOGY

HAT occurs mainly in sub-­
Saharan Africa between latitudes 14
degrees north and 29 degrees south, where the annual rainfall creates optimal climatic conditions for Glossina. In 2009, new HAT cases
annually fell below 10,000 as a result of intensive control efforts. In
2018, new cases fell to 977, the lowest level in 80 years since the start
of systematic data collection. In the last 10 years, 70% of cases were
reported from the Democratic Republic of Congo. Gambian trypanosomiasis is targeted for sustainable elimination as a public health
problem by 2030.
T. brucei rhodesiense infection is restricted to the eastern third of the
endemic area in tropical Africa, stretching from Ethiopia to the northern boundaries of South Africa. T. brucei gambiense, which accounts
for 95% of HAT cases, occurs mainly in the western half of the continent’s endemic region. Rhodesian HAT, which has an acute and often
fatal course, greatly reduces chances of transmission to tsetse flies. The
ability of T. brucei rhodesiense to multiply rapidly in the bloodstream
and infect other species of mammals helps maintain its life cycle. HAT
is infrequently reported in non-­endemic countries, usually in returning travelers or migrants.

PATHOGENESIS

At the site of the Glossina bite, tsetse fly salivary antigens, peptides,
and proteins promote an immune-­tolerant microenvironment that
facilitates parasite invasion. Injected metacyclic parasites transform
into LS forms, which rapidly divide by binary fission. The parasites,
along with the attendant inflammation, cellular debris, and metabolic
products, may give rise to a hard, painful, red nodule known as a
trypanosomal chancre within 5-­15 days postinoculation. Parasites
directionally migrate from the skin to the lymphatics via an unknown
mechanism and pass into the draining lymph node and onward into
the main lymphatic ducts. Dissemination into the blood and lymphatic systems follows, with subsequent localization to the CNS.
Histopathologic findings in the brain are consistent with meningoencephalitis. The appearance of morula cells of Mott (large, strawberry-­
like cells, supposedly derived from plasma cells) is a characteristic
finding in chronic disease.
Mechanisms underlying virulence in HAT are still incompletely
understood but seem to be mediated by a complex interplay of trypanosomal, human, and Glossina factors. T. brucei gambiense utilizes at least three mechanisms to evade lysis by human sera. These
include reduced binding to trypanolytic factor 1 (TLF1) via reduced
expression and mutation of a haptoglobin-­hemoglobin receptor;
expression of a specific glycoprotein TgsGP, which reduces trypanosomal membrane fluidity; and a cysteine protease-­mediated
reduction of sensitivity to apolipoprotein L-­1 (APOL1). T. brucei
rhodesiense, on the other hand, expresses a protein known as serum
resistance–associated protein (SRA), which counteracts trypanolytic APOL1 in human serum. APOL1 and the hemoglobin binding
protein haptoglobin-­related protein (HPR) are major components
of two high-­density lipoprotein complexes called TLF1 and TLF2,
which protect humans against non-­human trypanosomes. Trypanosomes also secrete a host of biologically active molecules that can
dampen immune responses.
Antigenic variation of variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) on the
trypanosome surface has long been recognized as a major factor in
evading acquired immunity during infection. This antigenic diversity
is generated by a tightly controlled system of DNA double-­stranded
breaks with associated homologous recombination. VSG also inhibits
complement activation and antibody-­mediated aggregation, facilitating establishment and maintenance of infection. Soluble VSG is hypersecreted, especially at the peak of parasitemia, and may serve as a decoy
for antibodies and complement factor, diverting immune responses
away from trypanosomes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical presentations vary not only because of the two subspecies
of organisms but also because of differences in host response in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2162 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
indigenous population of endemic areas and in newcomers or visitors.
Visitors usually suffer more from the acute symptoms, but if untreated,
death usually follows for natives and visitors alike. Symptoms usually
occur within 2-­3 weeks of infection. The clinical syndromes of HAT are
trypanosomal chancre, hemolymphatic stage, and meningoencephalitic stage.

Trypanosomal Chancre

The site of the tsetse fly bite may be the first presenting feature. A nodule or chancre (3-­4 cm) develops in 2-­3 days and becomes a painful,
hard, red nodule surrounded by an area of erythema and swelling
within 1 week. Nodules are typically seen on the lower limbs and sometimes also on the head. They subside spontaneously in about 2 weeks,
leaving no permanent scar.

Hemolymphatic Stage (Stage 1)

The most common presenting features of acute HAT occur at the
time of invasion of the bloodstream by the parasites, 2-­3 weeks
after infection. Patients usually present with irregular episodes of
fever, each lasting up to 7 days, accompanied by headache, sweating,
and generalized lymphadenopathy. Attacks may be separated by
symptom-­free intervals of days or even weeks. Painless, nonmatted
lymphadenopathy, most often of the posterior cervical and supraclavicular nodes, is one of the most constant signs, particularly in
the Gambian form. A common feature of trypanosomiasis is the
presence of blotchy, irregular, nonpruritic, erythematous macules,
which may appear any time after the first febrile episode, usually
within 6-­8 weeks. The majority of macules have a normal central
area, giving the rash a circinate outline. This rash is seen mainly on
the trunk and is evanescent, fading in one place only to appear at
another site. Examination of the blood during this stage may show
anemia, leukopenia with relative monocytosis, and elevated levels
of immunoglobulin M (IgM). Cardiac manifestations of HAT have
also been reported but are generally limited to nonspecific ST-­T
wave electrocardiographic abnormalities. Histopathologic characterization shows a lymphomonohistiocytic infiltrate in the interstitium, with no penetration of the myocardial cells, unlike that for
American trypanosomiasis (see Chapter 333). The perimyocarditis
is usually self-­limited and does not typically progress to congestive
heart failure.

Meningoencephalitic Stage (Stage 2)

Neurologic symptoms and signs are nonspecific, including irritability, insomnia, and irrational and inexplicable anxieties with frequent
changes in mood and personality. Neurologic symptoms may precede
invasion of the CNS by the organisms. In untreated T. brucei rhodesiense infections, CNS invasion occurs within 3-­6 weeks and is associated with recurrent bouts of headache, fever, weakness, and signs of
acute toxemia. Death occurs in 6-­9 months as a result of secondary
infection or cardiac failure.
In Gambian HAT, cerebral symptoms appear within 2 years after the
acute symptoms. An increase in drowsiness during the day and insomnia at night reflect the continuous progression of infection and may be
accompanied by anemia, leukopenia, and muscle wasting. The chronic,
diffuse meningoencephalitis without localizing symptoms is the form
referred to as sleeping sickness. Drowsiness and an uncontrollable
urge to sleep are the major features of this stage and become almost
continuous in the terminal stages. Tremor or rigidity with stiff and
ataxic gait suggest involvement of the basal ganglia. Psychotic changes
occur in one third of untreated patients. Although most untreated disease is fatal, in rare cases, individuals remain asymptomatic, clear parasitemia, and become seronegative.

DIAGNOSIS

Definitive diagnosis can be established during the early stages by examination of a fresh, thick blood smear, which permits visualization of the

A

B

Fig. 332.1 Trypanosoma brucei sp. trypomastigotes in thick blood
smear stained with Giemsa (A) and thin blood smear stained with
Wright-­Giemsa (B). (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:
Laboratory identification of parasites of public health concern. Trypanosomiasis, African [website], 2018. https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/trypanoso
miasisafrican/index.html)

motile active forms (Fig. 332.1). HAT can also be detected from blood
using a variety of sensitive techniques, such as quantitative buffy coat
smears and mini anion exchange resins. Dried, Giemsa-­stained smears
should be examined for the detailed morphologic features of the organisms. If a thick blood or buffy coat smear is negative, concentration
techniques may help. Aspiration of an enlarged lymph node can also
be used to obtain material for parasitologic examination. If positive,
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should also be examined for the organisms.
The presence of trypanosomes, or ≥5 white blood cells (WBCs)/μL, or
both, is indicative of stage 2 disease. If trypanosomes are absent in the
CSF, some authorities use a count of 10-­20 WBCs/μL as a cutoff for
diagnosing late-­stage disease.
The card agglutination trypanosomiasis test (CATT) is of value for
epidemiologic purposes and for screening for T. brucei gambiense. Lateral flow formats of CATT have enabled point-­of-­care testing. Because
CATT detects antibodies against particular VSG molecules, it cannot
distinguish present from past infection.
Polymerase chain reaction–based tests have been shown to be highly
sensitive and specific, but these tests require laboratory facilities. Field-­
based loop-­mediated isothermal amplification tests have been developed and validated. Other areas of active research for diagnostics
include new biomarkers, cytokine profiles, proteomics, and polysomnography, which are being used not only to identify disease but to differentiate disease stages.

TREATMENT

The choice of chemotherapeutic agents for treatment depends on the
stage of the infection and the causative organisms.

Stage 1 Treatment

Hematogenous forms of both Rhodesian and Gambian HAT have
been traditionally treated with either suramin or pentamidine. Suramin is a polysulfonated symmetric naphthalene derivative given as a
10% solution for intravenous (IV) administration. A test dose (10 mg
for children; 100-­200 mg for adults) is initially administered to detect
rare idiosyncratic reactions of shock and collapse. The dose for subsequent IV injections is 20 mg/kg (maximum 1 g) administered on days
1, 3, 7, 14, and 21. Suramin is nephrotoxic; thus a urinalysis should be
performed before each dose. Marked proteinuria, blood, or casts is a
contraindication to continuation of suramin. Resistance is rare but has
been reported.
Pentamidine isethionate (4 mg/kg/day intramuscularly [IM]
daily or on alternate days for 7-­10 days) concentrates to high levels
in trypanosomes and is highly trypanocidal. It is better tolerated than
suramin but carries significant risk of hypoglycemia, nephrotoxicity,
hypotension, leukopenia, and liver enzyme elevation. Because of its

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 333 u American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas Disease; Trypanosoma cruzi)
potency, long half-­life, and toxicity, short-­course treatment is desirable
and is being investigated.
Fexinidazole has recently been approved for oral treatment of
stage 1 and 2 Gambian HAT in 6 years of age and older and weighing at least 20 kg. Dosing is weight based over 10 days. For 35 kg and
above, a loading dose of 1,800 mg for 4 days followed by a maintenance dose of 1,200 mg over 6 days is recommended. For 20 kg to
<35 kg, the loading dose is 1,200 mg over 4 days and 600 mg maintenance over 6 days. Common side effects include gastrointestinal
upset, asthenia, headache, tremors, and dizziness. Some patients may
develop neutropenia.

Stage 2 Treatment

Combination eflornithine and nifurtimox (NECT) is the current
treatment of choice for T. brucei gambiense CNS infection. Eflornithine
is given at 400 mg/kg/day IV divided every 12 hours for 7 days, along
with nifurtimox, 15 mg/kg/day orally divided every 8 hour for 10 days.
If nifurtimox is unavailable, eflornithine monotherapy can be given at
400 mg/kg/day IV divided every 6 hours for 14 days. Adverse reactions to these regimens include fever, hypertension, and seizures, with
NECT having less frequent events.
Fexinidazole is a safe and effective, all oral alternative to NECT for
stage 2 Gambian HAT. However, it is associated with lower efficacy in
severe disease (86.9% with fexinidazole vs 98.7% for NECT). Dosing
and duration are the same as for stage 1 disease.
Melarsoprol is an arsenical compound and is the only effective
treatment for late T. brucei rhodesiense disease. Treatment of children
is initiated at 0.36 mg/kg IV once daily, with gradually escalating
doses every 1-­5 days to 3.6 mg/kg once daily; treatment is usually 10
doses (18-­25 mg/kg total dose). Treatment of adults is with melarsoprol 2-­3.6 mg/kg IV once daily for 3 days; and after 1 week, 3.6
mg/kg once daily for 3 days, which is repeated after 10-­21 days. An
alternative regimen is 2.2 mg/kg once daily for 10 days. Guidelines
recommend 18-­25 mg/kg total over 1 month. Reactions such as fever,
abdominal pain, and chest pain are rare but may occur during or
shortly after administration. Serious toxic effects include encephalopathy and exfoliative dermatitis.
Following on the success of fexinidazole, other candidate oral
drugs for HAT are being studied. This includes acoziborole, which
is currently in clinical trials as a single-­dose oral treatment for stage
2 HAT.

PREVENTION

A vaccine or consistently effective prophylactic therapy is not available and is particularly challenging because of the antigenic variation
caused by VSGs. Virus-­like particles are being explored as an adjuvant
to hurdle the complexities of the immunologic response. A single injection of pentamidine (3-­4 mg/kg IM) provides protection against Gambian trypanosomiasis for at least 6 months, but the effectiveness against
the Rhodesian form is uncertain.
Vector control programs against Glossina have been essential in
controlling disease, coupled with the use of screens, traps, insecticides, and sanitary measures. Neutral-­colored clothing may reduce
tsetse fly bites. Control of infection in animal reservoirs with mass
administration of trypanocidal drugs in cattle has met with some
success.
The full genome of T. brucei with about 9,000 genes has been
sequenced. Approximately 10% of these genes encode VSGs. CRISPR-­
Cas9-­based gene editing has helped identify genes relevant to the
disease and its possible prevention, as well as the design of new anti-­
trypanosomal drugs, including those that target specific metabolic
pathways.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2163

Chapter 333

American Trypanosomiasis
(Chagas Disease;
Trypanosoma cruzi)
Edsel Maurice T. Salvana and
Robert A. Salata
American trypanosomiasis or Chagas disease is caused by the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi. Its natural vectors are the reduviid insects,
specifically triatomines, variably known as wild bedbugs, assassin
bugs, or kissing bugs. It can also be transmitted orally from contaminated food, vertically from mother to child, and through blood transfusion or organ transplantation. Signs and symptoms of acute Chagas
disease are usually nonspecific, whereas chronic disease may manifest as cardiomyopathy or severe gastrointestinal (GI) dilation and
dysfunction.

ETIOLOGY

American trypanosomiasis is caused by T. cruzi, a parasitic, flagellated
kinetoplastid protozoan. The main vectors for T. cruzi are insects of the
family Reduviidae, subfamily Triatominae, which includes Triatoma
infestans, Rhodnius prolixus, and Panstrongylus megistus.

LIFE CYCLE

T. cruzi has three recognizable morphogenetic phases: amastigotes,
trypomastigotes, and epimastigotes (Figs. 333.1 and 333.2). Amastigotes are intracellular forms found in mammalian tissues that are
spherical and have a short flagellum but form clusters of oval shapes
(pseudocysts) within infected tissues. Trypomastigotes are spindle-­
shaped, extracellular, nondividing forms that are found in blood and
are responsible for both transmission of infection to the insect vector and cell-­to-­cell spread of infection. Epimastigotes are found in the
midgut of the vector insect and multiply in the midgut and rectum of
arthropods, differentiating into metacyclic forms. Metacyclic trypomastigotes are the infectious form for humans and are released onto
the skin of a human when the insect defecates close to the site of a bite,
entering through the damaged skin or mucous membranes. Once in
the host, these multiply intracellularly as amastigotes, which then differentiate into bloodstream trypomastigotes and are released into the
circulation when the host cell ruptures. Blood-­borne trypomastigotes
circulate until they enter another host cell or are taken up by the bite
of another insect, completing the life cycle. There is some variability
in these stages. Reverse transitions can occur; epimastigote-­like forms
have been found in the mammalian hosts, and trypomastigotes have
been observed to replicate. Amastigotes can also quickly transform
into quiescent forms upon drug exposure and can maintain persistent
infection despite treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Natural transmission of Chagas disease occurs in North and South
America, most frequently in continental Latin America. The disease
may arise elsewhere because of migration and transmission through
contaminated blood. World Health Organization (WHO) and Pan-­
American Health Organization–led efforts in large-­
scale vector
control, blood donor screening to prevent transmission through
transfusion and case finding, and treatment of chronically infected

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2164 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

A

B

Fig. 333.1 Stages of Trypanosoma
cruzi. A, Amastigote. B, Trypomastigote. C, Epimastigotes. (From Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention.
Laboratory identification of parasites
of public health concern. Trypanosomiasis, American [website], 2018. https
://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/trypanosomiasis
american/index.html)

C

Trypomastigotes transform into
epimastigotes, and epimastigotes
replicate by binary fission (midgut)
Triatoma infestans

Epimastigotes migrate to the
hindgut and rectum, and differentiate
into metacyclic trypomastigotes that
Foregut
are released by defecation
Infective metacyclic trypomastigotes
Rhodnius prolixus
released onto skin of a mammalian
host in feces
Metacyclic trypomastigotes enter the host
through rubbing or scratching of the bite
wound, or through permissive mucosal or
Triatomine insect
Triatoma dimidiata Bloodmeal
conjunctival surfaces
Mammalian host

Trypomastigote
in blood smear

Recruitment and fusion of
lysosomes from the host cell
are needed for trypomastigotes
to penetrate local cells

Trypomastigotes
in bloodstream

Skin or mucosa

Signs of portal of entry

Infection of
new cells
Cell lysis

Trypomastigote in
lysosome-derived
membrane-bound
vacuole

Spread of infection

Escape from
vacuole
Transformation of
amastigotes into
trypomastigotes

After decades

Replication of
amastigotes by
binary fission

Romaña sign

Differentiation
into amastigotes

Myocardial cell full of amastigotes
Megaesophagus

Megacolon

Cardiomyopathy

Chronic phase of Chagas disease

Chagoma
Acute phase of Chagas disease

Fig. 333.2 Vector-­borne transmission and life cycle of Trypanosoma cruzi. (From Rassi A Jr, Rassi A, Marin-­Neto JA. Chagas disease. Lancet.
2010;375:1388–1400. Fig. 1.)

mothers and newborn infants have effectively halted transmission
in a number of areas of South America. The number of cases has
dropped from a peak of 24 million in 1984 to a current estimate of
6-­7 million. Incident cases are estimated at 30,000 infections per year,
including 8,000 newborns from vertical transmission. Chagas disease
causes 10,000-­12,000 deaths annually. This is likely an underestimate
as long-­term complications of Chagas disease as a cause of death
may not be properly attributed to undiagnosed, chronically infected
persons.
Infection is divided into two main phases: acute and chronic (Table
333.1). Acute infection can manifest as fever, lymphadenopathy,
organomegaly, myocarditis, and meningoencephalitis but is otherwise

asymptomatic in up to 95% of infected individuals. Chronic infection in 60–70% of patients is indeterminate, meaning the patient is
asymptomatic but has a positive antibody titer. Approximately 30% of
infected persons proceed to chronic determinate or symptomatic T.
cruzi infection.
The T. cruzi genome has been fully sequenced and contains 12,000
genes, the most widely expanded among trypanosomatids, and may
reflect its ability to invade virtually any nucleated cell type within
reach. Significant variability is present, along with extensive epigenetic modification of surface proteins, which may contribute to immune
evasion. Seven genetic lineages, known as discrete typing units (DTUs)
are recognized. These are referred to as TcI through TcVI, and Tcbat for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 333 u American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas Disease; Trypanosoma cruzi)

2165

Table 333.1  Clinical Features and Diagnosis of Chagas Disease
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION

CLINICAL SIGNS/SYMPTOMS

DIAGNOSIS

Endemic countries

• Incubation period: 1-­2 wk
• Signs of portal of entry: indurated cutaneous
lesion (chagoma) or palpebral edema
(Romaña sign)
• Most cases are mild disease (95–99%) and
unrecognized
• Persistent fever, fatigue, lymphadenopathy,
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, morbilliform
rash, edema
• In rare cases, myocarditis or
meningoencephalitis
• Anemia, lymphocytosis, elevated AST/ALT
concentrations
• Risk of mortality: 0.2–0.5%

• Direct parasitologic methods:
patent parasitemia up to 90
days
• Microscopic examination of
fresh blood, Giemsa-­stained
thin and thick blood films, or
buffy coat
• Concentration methods:
microhematocrit and Strout
method PCR techniques
• Serology is not useful

Congenital

Endemic and nonendemic
countries

• Incubation period: birth to several weeks
• Most are asymptomatic or have mild disease
• Prematurity, low birthweight, abortion,
neonatal death
• Fever, jaundice, edema, hepatomegaly,
splenomegaly, respiratory distress syndrome,
myocarditis, meningoencephalitis
• Anemia and thrombocytopenia
• Risk of mortality: <2%

• Direct parasitologic methods
• Concentration methods:
microhematocrit, Strout
method
• Direct microscopy also useful
• PCR: most sensitive technique
• Serology: after 9 mo or later

Oral

Restricted areas of endemic
countries (Amazon basin) and
local outbreaks

• Incubation period: 3-­22 days
• Fever, vomiting, periocular edema,
dyspnea, fever, myalgia, prostration, cough,
splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, chest pain,
abdominal pain, digestive hemorrhage
• Risk of mortality: 1–35%

Same as for vectorial

Transfusion and
transplant

Endemic and nonendemic
countries

• Incubation period: 8-­160 days; persistent
fever
• Clinical characteristics similar to those of
vectorial cases (excluding portal of entry
signs)
• Risk of mortality is variable and depends on
the severity of baseline disease

• Same as for vectorial
• PCR techniques usually yield
positive results days to weeks
before trypomastigotes are
detectable in blood
• Tissue samples are needed in
some circumstances

Reactivation in HIV-­
infected patients

Endemic and nonendemic
countries

• Behaves as other opportunistic infections
• Reactivation with <200 CD4 cells/μL (mostly
with <100)
• Affects CNS (75–90%) as single or multiple
space-­occupying lesions or as severe
necrohemorrhagic meningoencephalitis
• Cardiac involvement (10–55%): myocarditis,
pericardial effusion or worsening of previous
cardiomyopathy
• Risk of mortality: 20%

• Direct parasitologic methods,
as in vectorial cases
• Parasite can be found in CSF,
other body fluids, and tissue
samples
• PCR: not useful for diagnosis of
reactivation
• Serology: indicative of chronic
infection and helpful in cases of
suspected disease

Reactivation in other
immunosuppressed
patients

Endemic and nonendemic
countries

• Reactivation after transplantation or in
patients with hematologic malignancies
• Clinical characteristics similar to those of
patients who undergo transfusion and those
with panniculitis and other skin disorders
• Risk of mortality is variable and depends
on severity of baseline disease and prompt
diagnosis

• Direct parasitologic methods,
as in vectorial cases
• Parasite can be found in tissue
samples
• PCR: increasing parasite load
detected with real-­time PCR
in serial specimens could be
indicative of a high risk of
reactivation

Endemic and nonendemic
countries

• Asymptomatic
• Normal chest radiograph and 12-­lead ECG

• Serology: detection of IgG
• PCR: low sensitivity

ACUTE FORMS*
Vectorial

CHRONIC FORMS
Indeterminate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2166 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 333.1  Clinical Features and Diagnosis of Chagas Disease—cont’d
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION
Cardiac and
gastrointestinal

Endemic and nonendemic
countries

CLINICAL SIGNS/SYMPTOMS
• Cardiac manifestations: fatigue, syncope,
palpitations, dizziness, stroke; late
manifestations: chest pain (atypical),
dyspnea, edema, left ventricular dysfunction,
congestive heart failure; alterations in
12-­lead ECG, echocardiography, or other
heart function tests
• Gastrointestinal: dysphagia, regurgitation,
severe constipation (dilated esophagus or
colon); alterations in esophageal manometry,
barium swallow, or barium enema

DIAGNOSIS
• Serology: detection of IgG
• PCR: low sensitivity

*Including reactivation in immunosuppressed patients.
ALT, Alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
From Pérez-­Molina J, Molina I. Chagas disease. Lancet. 2018;391:82–92. Table 2.

the seventh DTU. DTUs may differ in geographic distribution and predominant vector and hosts and may also vary in disease manifestations
and response to treatment. A recent meta-­analysis showed that TcI, the
most widespread DTU, may be less susceptible to benznidazole.
T. cruzi infection is primarily a zoonosis, and humans are incidental
hosts. T. cruzi has a large sylvan reservoir and has been isolated from
numerous animal species. The presence of reservoirs and vectors of T.
cruzi and the socioeconomic and educational levels of the population
are the most important risk factors for vector-­borne transmission to
humans. Insect vectors are found in rural, wooded areas and acquire
infection through ingestion of blood from humans or animals with circulating trypomastigotes.
Housing conditions are very important in the transmission chain.
Incidence and prevalence of infection depend on the adaptation of
the triatomines to human dwellings, as well as the vector capacity of
the species. Animal reservoirs of reduviid bugs include dogs, cats,
rats, opossum, guinea pigs, monkeys, bats, and raccoons. Humans
often become infected when land in enzootic areas is developed
for agricultural or commercial purposes. An estimated 240,000 to
350,000 immigrants from endemic countries living in the United
States are likely infected with T. cruzi. Seventy-­six cases of autochthonous transmission in the United States have also been reported
from 2000 to 2018; more than half of the cases were described in
Texas.
The risk of congenital Chagas disease transmission is 1–5%. Heavy
parasite loads are associated with higher risk of vertical transmission.
Transplacental infection is associated with premature birth, fetal wastage, hepatomegaly, and anemia. Infected infants are mostly asymptomatic at birth, although 10–40% may have signs suggestive of congenital
infection. Untreated infected infants are at risk for developing Chagas
cardiomyopathy later in life.
Disease transmission can occur through blood transfusions in
endemic areas from asymptomatic blood donors. The risk for transmission through a single blood transfusion from a chagasic donor is
13–23%. Blood screening for Chagas disease in the United States has
detected 2,462 confirmed cases between 2007 and 2019 (www.aabb.org).
Percutaneous injection from laboratory accidents is a documented
mode of transmission. Oral transmission through contaminated food
can occur. Although transmission from breastfeeding is uncommon,
women with acute infections should not nurse until they have been
treated.

PATHOGENESIS
Acute Disease

At the site of entry or puncture site, neutrophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and monocytes infiltrate. T. cruzi organisms are engulfed by

macrophages and are sequestered in membrane-­bound vacuoles. Trypanosomes lyse the phagosomal membrane, escape into the cytoplasm,
and replicate. A local tissue reaction, the chagoma, develops and the
process extends to a local lymph node (see Fig. 333.2). Blood forms
appear, and the process disseminates. A multitude of innate response
mechanisms are deployed at the beginning of infection but are largely
ineffective for controlling invasion. However, this initial response is
essential for setting up the more potent subsequent adaptive response.
Peak parasite numbers are seen after 2-­3 weeks and drop quickly when
the adaptive immune response comes into play. This response, while
efficient at clearing up to 95% of the parasites, is not sterilizing and
parasites can persist in more susceptible tissues such as muscle and
ganglion cells.

Chronic Disease

The pathophysiology of chronic Chagas disease involves several mechanisms and most significantly affects two main target organs: the heart
and the GI tract. Development of pathology in these organs is linked
to parasite tropism and persistence in susceptible tissue types against
the background of an otherwise effective T. cruzi–specific systemic
immune response.
In the case of cardiac pathology, parasite-­dependent myocardial
damage plays some role because of invasion of myocardial cells. The
extent of injury seems to be less severe compared to acute disease,
and its actual proportional contribution to overall tissue destruction
is unclear. Additional damage comes from chronic immune-­mediated
myocardial injury as a result of delayed type IV hypersensitivity to parasite persistence in myocardial cells. This causes mononuclear myocarditis and myocytolysis, leading to fibrosis and contributing to the
development of cardiomyopathy. Dysautonomia due to direct damage
to ganglion cells and antineuronal autoimmune reactions leads to the
development of cardiomyopathy as an effect of excess catecholamine
stimulation. This phenomenon in turn increases myocardial irritability
resulting in a higher risk of malignant arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. Microvascular disturbances also further exacerbate cardiac
damage from intimal proliferation and fibrosis due to parasite-­induced
perivascular inflammation and cell necrosis.
In patients with GI tract involvement, myenteric plexus destruction leads to pathologic organ dilation. There is a diminution in the
Auerbach and the Meissner plexus, as well as preganglionic lesions
and a reduction in the number of dorsal motor nuclear cells of the
vagus nerve. Loss of ganglia in the esophagus results in abnormal
dilation.
Antibodies involved in resistance to T. cruzi invasion are related to
the phase of infection. IgG antibodies to several major surface antigens
mediate immunophagocytosis of T. cruzi by macrophages. Activation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 333 u American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas Disease; Trypanosoma cruzi)
of autoreactive T-­and B-­cell clones (with B-­cell clones resulting in
the production of autoantibodies) is a well-­described phenomenon
during T. cruzi infection. However, the contribution of this activation to pathology seems to be dependent on persistence of infection. Conditions that depress cell-­mediated immunity increase the
severity of T. cruzi infection. There is evidence that host genetic
factors play a significant role in progression and severity of chronic
disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acute Chagas disease in children is usually asymptomatic or is associated with mild febrile illness characterized by malaise, facial edema,
and lymphadenopathy (see Table 333.1). Infants often demonstrate
local signs of inflammation at the site of parasite entry, which is then
referred to as a chagoma. Approximately 50% of children come to
medical attention with the Romaña sign (unilateral, painless eye
swelling), conjunctivitis, and preauricular lymphadenitis. Patients
complain of fatigue and headache. Fever can persist for 4-­5 weeks.
More severe systemic presentations can occur in children <2 years old
and may include lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and meningoencephalitis. A cutaneous morbilliform eruption can accompany
the acute syndrome. Anemia, lymphocytosis, hepatitis, and thrombocytopenia have also been described.
The heart, central nervous system (CNS), peripheral nerve ganglia,
and reticuloendothelial system are often heavily parasitized. The heart
is the primary target organ. The intense parasitism can result in acute
inflammation and in four-­chamber cardiac dilation.
Intrauterine infection in pregnant women can cause spontaneous abortion or premature birth. In children with congenital infection, severe anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, and seizures can
mimic congenital cytomegalovirus infection, toxoplasmosis, and
erythroblastosis fetalis. T. cruzi can be visualized in the cerebrospinal fluid in cases of meningoencephalitis. Children usually undergo
spontaneous remission in 8-­12 weeks and enter the indeterminate
chronic phase with lifelong low-­grade parasitemia and development
of antibodies to many T. cruzi cell surface antigens. In acute disease, mortality is 5–10%, with deaths caused by acute myocarditis,
with resultant heart failure, or meningoencephalitis. Acute Chagas disease should be differentiated from malaria, schistosomiasis,
visceral leishmaniasis, brucellosis, typhoid fever, and infectious
mononucleosis.
Autonomic dysfunction and peripheral neuropathy can occur.
CNS involvement in Chagas disease is uncommon. If granulomatous
encephalitis occurs during acute infection, it is usually fatal.
Chronic Chagas disease may be asymptomatic or symptomatic.
The most common presentation of chronic T. cruzi infection is cardiomyopathy, manifested by congestive heart failure, arrhythmia,
and thromboembolic events. ECG abnormalities include partial or
complete atrioventricular block and right bundle branch block. Left
bundle branch block is unusual. Myocardial infarction has been
reported and may be secondary to left apical aneurysm embolization or necrotizing arteriolitis of the microvasculature. Left ventricular apical aneurysms are pathognomonic of chronic chagasic
cardiomyopathy.
GI manifestations of chronic Chagas disease occur in 8–10% of
patients. Characteristically, this involvement presents clinically as
megaesophagus and megacolon. Sigmoid dilation, volvulus, and
fecalomas are often found in megacolon. Megaesophagus presents as dysphagia, odynophagia, and cough. The esophagus can
reach up to 26 times its normal weight and hold up to 2 L of excess
fluid. Esophageal body abnormalities occur independently of lower
esophageal dysfunction. Megaesophagus can lead to esophagitis
and cancer of the esophagus. Aspiration pneumonia and pulmonary
tuberculosis are also more common in patients with megaesophagus.

Immunocompromised Persons

T. cruzi infections in immunocompromised persons may be caused
by transmission from an asymptomatic donor of blood products or

2167

reactivation of prior infection. Organ donation to allograft recipients
can result in a devastating form of the illness. Cardiac transplantation
for Chagas cardiomyopathy has resulted in reactivation, despite prophylaxis and postoperative treatment with benznidazole. HIV infection also leads to reactivation in about 20% of cases; cerebral lesions are
more common in these patients and can mimic Toxoplasma encephalitis. Myocarditis is also frequently observed, and secondary prophylaxis
may be of benefit in some HIV–co-­infected patients. In immunocompromised patients at risk for reactivation, serologic testing and close
monitoring are necessary.

DIAGNOSIS

A careful history with attention to geographic origin and travel is
important. A peripheral blood smear or a Giemsa-­stained smear
during the acute phase of illness may show motile trypanosomes,
which is diagnostic for Chagas disease (see Fig. 333.1). These are
only seen in the first 6-­12 weeks of illness. Buffy coat smears may
improve yield.
Most persons seek medical attention during the chronic phase of
the disease, when parasites are not found in the bloodstream and
clinical symptoms are not diagnostic. Serologic testing is used for
diagnosis, most commonly enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), indirect hemagglutination, and indirect fluorescent antibody testing. No single serology test is sufficiently reliable to make
the diagnosis, so repeat or parallel testing using a different method
or antigen is required to confirm the result of an initial positive
serologic test, and in the case of discordant results, a third test may
be employed. Two tests, the Ortho T. cruzi ELISA Test System and
the Abbott Prism Chagas Assay, are approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for screening of blood donors but not
for clinical samples. For clinical samples in suspected Chagas cases
in the United States, contact the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) for further guidance. Confirmatory tests include
the radiologic immunoprecipitation assay (Chagas RIPA, currently
for research or limited clinical testing only) and Western blot assays
based on trypomastigote excreted-­
secreted antigens (TESA-­
WB).
The Abbott Enzyme Strip Assay Chagas (ESA-­Chagas) using recombinant T. cruzi antigens is the only FDA-­approved confirmatory test
in the United States.
Nonimmunologic methods of diagnosis are available. Mouse
inoculation and xenodiagnosis (allowing uninfected reduviid bugs
to feed on a patient’s blood and examining the intestinal contents
of those bugs 30 days after the meal) are cumbersome and not routinely performed. Parasites can be cultured in Novy-­MacNeal-­Nicolle
(NNN) media. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests of nuclear and
kinetoplast DNA sequences have been developed and can be highly
sensitive in acute disease but are less reliable in chronic disease. PCR
has been used as an early indicator of treatment failure in therapeutic clinical trials, and to detect reactivation in chronically infected
patients at risk because of immunosuppression. PCR is not sufficiently sensitive for blood screening. Moreover, there is significant
variability among methods and parasite strains. Diagnosis of congenital transmission in newborns cannot be made at birth with serology
because of the presence of maternal antibodies in the first 6 months
of life. Microscopic examination, parasite culture, or PCR can be
used. However, a serologic test at 6-­12 months is recommended to
exclude infection definitively.

TREATMENT

Biochemical differences between the metabolism of American trypanosomes and that of mammalian hosts have been exploited for chemotherapy. Trypanosomes are very sensitive to oxidative radicals and do
not possess catalase or glutathione reductase/glutathione peroxidase,
which are key enzymes in scavenging free radicals. All trypanosomes
also have an unusual, reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH)–dependent disulfide reductase. Drugs that stimulate hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) generation or prevent its utilization
are potential trypanosomicidal agents. Other biochemical pathways

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2168 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
that have been targeted include ergosterol synthesis using azole compounds and the hypoxanthine-­
guanine phosphoribosyltransferase
pathway using allopurinol.
Drug treatment for T. cruzi infection is currently limited to nifurtimox and benznidazole. Both are effective against trypomastigotes
and amastigotes and have been used to eradicate parasites in the acute
stages of infection. Treatment responses vary according to the phase
of Chagas disease, duration of treatment, dose, age of the patient, and
geographic origin of the patient. For acute disease, the average cure
rate is about 60–80%. Cure of chronic disease is difficult to assess due
to the different definitions of cure, whether with a negative serology or
quantitative PCR. Other drugs that have been tried include posaconazole, ravuconazole, and fexinidazole but have not been as successful
as traditional treatment.
Benznidazole, a nitroimidazole derivative, is the most effective
treatment for Chagas disease. Benznidazole’s primary mechanism of
action involves covalent binding with trypanosomal protein thiols and
low molecular weight thiols, resulting in depletion of these molecules
and disruption of the parasite metabolism. The recommended treatment regimen for children 2-­12 years old is 5-­8 mg/kg/day orally (PO),
which can be divided twice daily (bid) for 60 days. For those >12 years
old, 5-­7 mg/kg/day for 60 days is recommended. The tablets can be
administered as a slurry for children who have difficulty swallowing.
A recent meta-­analysis suggests a 30-­day regimen may be noninferior
to a 60-­day regimen. Cure rates for chronic disease as assessed by PCR
is 66–91% at the end of treatment, but this drops to 82% at 1 year, 55%
at 2 years, and 47% at 5 years. This drug is associated with significant
toxicity, including rash, photosensitivity, peripheral neuritis, granulocytopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
Nifurtimox generates highly toxic oxygen metabolites through the
action of nitroreductases, which produce unstable nitroanion radicals,
which in turn react with oxygen to produce peroxide and superoxide
free radicals. The FDA recently approved nifurtimox for the treatment
of Chagas disease in pediatric patients from birth to <18 years of age
and weighing at least 2.5 kg. The recommended total daily dose in
pediatric patients is 10-­20 mg/kg/day orally divided into three doses
for 60 days for children <40 kg, and 8-­10 mg/kg/day orally divided into
three doses for children >40 kg. Nifurtimox has been associated with
weakness, anorexia, GI disturbances, toxic hepatitis, tremors, seizures,
and hemolysis in patients with glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency.
With the adoption by WHO of control and elimination strategies
for Chagas disease, both acute and chronic disease should be treated.
Serologic conversion is seen as an appropriate treatment response for
chronic disease, although some patients who achieve this still eventually develop symptoms. One study reported cure rates as high as
97% for chronic disease in patients <16 years old and supports early
and aggressive case findings and treatment. Infants suspected of congenitally acquired Chagas disease should be properly evaluated and
treated immediately upon confirmation of the diagnosis. Women who
give birth to infants with congenital Chagas disease should be offered
treatment to prevent congenital transmission in subsequent pregnancies. Continuing efforts for elimination will necessitate development
of more accurate diagnostics and more effective drugs, particularly for
chronic disease.
Treatment of congestive heart failure is generally in line with recommendations for management of dilated cardiomyopathy from
other causes. β-­
Adrenergic blockers have been validated in the
management of these patients. Digitalis toxicity occurs frequently
in patients with Chagas cardiomyopathy. Pacemakers may be necessary in cases of severe heart block. Although cardiac transplantation has been used successfully in chagasic patients, it is reserved for
those with the most severe disease manifestations. Plasmapheresis
to remove antibodies with adrenergic activity has been proposed for
refractory patients; this approach has worked in patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy from other causes, but its application to Chagas disease is unproved.

A light, balanced diet is recommended for megaesophagus. Surgery
or dilation of the lower esophageal sphincter treats megaesophagus;
pneumatic dilation is the superior mode of therapy. Nitrates and nifedipine have been used to reduce lower esophageal sphincter pressure
in patients with megaesophagus. Treatment of megacolon is surgical
and symptomatic.
In accidental infection when parasitic penetration is certain, treatment should be immediately initiated and continued for 10-­15 days.
Blood is usually collected and serologic samples tested for seroconversion at 15, 30, and 60 days.

PREVENTION

Massive coordinated vector control programs under the auspices of
WHO and the Pan-­American Health Organization and the institution of widespread blood donor screening and targeted surveillance of
chronically infected mothers and infants at risk have effectively eliminated or at least drastically reduced transmission in most endemic
countries. Chagas disease remains linked to poverty; thus improvement of living conditions is likewise essential to successful control
and eradication. Education of residents in endemic areas, use of bed
nets, use of insecticides, and destruction of adobe houses that harbor
reduviid bugs are effective methods to control the bug population. Synthetic pyrethroid insecticides help keep houses free of vectors for up to
2 years and have low toxicity for humans. Paints incorporating insecticides have also been used.
Because immigrants can carry this disease to nonendemic areas,
serologic testing should be performed in blood and organ donors
from endemic areas. Potential seropositive donors can be identified by
determining whether they have been or have spent extensive time in an
endemic area. Questionnaire-­based screening of potentially infected
blood and organ donors from areas endemic for infection can reduce
the risk for transmission. Seropositivity should be considered a contraindication to organ donation, particularly for heart transplantation.
Prophylactic and therapeutic vaccine development is being pursued
but is hampered by the ability of the parasite to evade immune mechanisms and persist in different body compartments. Nucleic acid–based
techniques and viral vectors are being explored, along with novel adjuvants and strategies for addressing significant genetic variability among
the DTUs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 334

Malaria (Plasmodium)
Chandy C. John and Robert O. Opoka
Malaria is a vector-­borne disease caused by intraerythrocytic protozoa of the genus Plasmodium and transmitted by an infective female
Anopheles mosquito. Malaria is an acute illness characterized by paroxysms of fever, chills, sweats, fatigue, anemia, and splenomegaly. It has
played a major role in human history, causing harm to more people
than perhaps any other infectious disease. Although substantial progress has been made in combating malaria in endemic areas, with a 22%
reduction in malaria incidence since 2010, malaria remains one of the
leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide, with an estimated 229 million cases and 409,000 deaths in 2019. Malarial deaths
in areas of high malaria transmission occur primarily in children <5
years of age, but in areas of low transmission, a large percentage of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)
deaths may occur in older children and adults. Although malaria is
not endemic in the United States, 1,500-­2,000 imported cases are seen
in the United States each year. Physicians practicing in non-­endemic
areas should consider the diagnosis of malaria in any febrile child who
has returned from a malaria-­endemic area within the previous year,
because delay in diagnosis and treatment can result in severe illness
or death.

ETIOLOGY

Malaria is caused by intracellular Plasmodium protozoa transmitted
to humans by female Anopheles mosquitoes. Before 2004, only four
species of Plasmodium were known to cause malaria in humans: P.
falciparum, P. malariae, P. ovale, and P. vivax. In 2004, P. knowlesi (a
primate malaria species) was also shown to cause human malaria,
and cases of P. knowlesi infection have been documented in Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, and the Philippines. Malaria also can
be transmitted through blood transfusion and use of contaminated needles and transplacentally from a pregnant woman to her
fetus. The risk for blood transmission is low in the United States,
but may occur through transfusion of whole blood, packed red
blood cells (RBCs), platelets, and leukocytes and through organ
transplantation.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Malaria is a major worldwide problem, occurring in 87 countries that
comprise approximately half the world’s population (Fig. 334.1). Worldwide malaria cases decreased from an estimated 238 million cases in
2010 to 229 million cases of in 2019. The principal areas of transmission are Africa, Asia, and South America. P. falciparum and P. malariae
are found in most malarious areas. P. falciparum is the predominant
species in Africa, Haiti, and New Guinea. P. vivax predominates in
Bangladesh, Central America, India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. P. vivax
and P. falciparum predominate in Southeast Asia, South America, and
Oceania. P. ovale is the least common species and is transmitted primarily in Africa. Transmission of malaria has been eliminated in most
of North America (including the United States), Europe, and most of
the Caribbean, as well as Australia, Chile, Israel, Japan, Lebanon, and
Taiwan. In 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) certified that
China had eliminated malaria, a landmark achievement for this area of
>1 billion people.
P. falciparum is the parasite most commonly associated with severe
illness and death, typically among young children. P. falciparum is
the predominant species in Africa, Haiti, and New Guinea. Over 99%
of cases in Africa are caused by P. falciparum, and 94% of all malaria
deaths occur in Africa. Previously malarial deaths were predominantly

2169

in children under 5 years of age but over the years more older children
are being affected, with the percentage of total malaria deaths among
children age under 5 years dropping from 84% in 2000 to 67% in 2019.
P. vivax, contributes to about 3.3% of global malaria. P. vivax is responsible for 75% of malaria cases in central America and 50% of cases in
Southeast Asia (World Malaria Report 2019).
Most cases of malaria in the United States occur among previously
infected visitors to the United States from endemic areas and among
U.S. citizens who travel to endemic areas without appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Due to the increase in global travel, the number
of imported malaria cases has been increasing over the last 40
years, with 2,161 cases reported in 2017. Most cases were acquired
in Africa (87%), with Asia (8%), South America (1.9%), and Central America (1.5%) contributing most remaining cases. Among all
cases, P. falciparum accounted for the majority of infections (1,523;
70.5%), followed by P. vivax (216; 10.0%), P. ovale (119; 5.5%), and
P. malariae (55; 2.6%). Among all reported cases of malaria in 2017,
a total of 312 (14.4%) were classified as severe malaria, and 6 of
these 312 persons (1.9%) died. Cases peak during the summer travel
months. Children comprised 18% of all malaria cases in the United
States in 2017, and 39% of pediatric cases occurred in U.S. resident
children, 70% of whom were visiting friends or relatives. Severe
malaria was more slightly common in children (18.4%) than adults
(13.6%).
Local transmission of malaria can rarely occur in the United States,
as demonstrated in 2003, when eight cases were diagnosed among
non-­travelers in Palm Beach, Florida, and as demonstrated again in
2023 in Florida, Texas, and Maryland. These cases may result from
transmission from untreated and often asymptomatic infected individuals from malaria-­endemic countries who travel to the United
States and infect local mosquitoes or from infected mosquitoes from
malaria-­endemic areas that are transported to the United States on
airplanes. Transfusion-­transmitted malaria can also occur in the
United States.

PATHOGENESIS

Plasmodium species exist in a variety of forms and have a complex life
cycle that enables them to survive in different cellular environments
in the human host (asexual phase) and the mosquito (sexual phase)
(Fig. 334.2). A marked amplification of Plasmodium, from approximately 102 to as many as 1014 organisms, occurs during a two-­step process in humans, with the first phase in hepatic cells (pre-­erythrocytic
phase) and the second phase in the RBCs (erythrocytic phase). The
pre-­erythrocytic phase begins with inoculation of sporozoites into
the bloodstream by a female Anopheles mosquito. Within minutes the

Endemic country
Non-endemic country

Fig. 334.1 Spatial distribution of malaria
in the Eastern and Western hemispheres.
In this map, countries with areas endemic
for malaria are shaded completely even
if transmission occurs only in a small part
of the country. For more specific within-­
country malaria transmission information,
see the Yellow Fever & Malaria Information, by Country section in in the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
link in this caption. (From Tan RK, Arguin
PM. Malaria. In Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Yellow Book
2020: Health Information for International
Travel. New York: Oxford University Press;
2017. Maps 4.8 and 9 https://wwwnc.c
dc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2020/travel-­
related-­infectious-­diseases/malaria#5217)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2170 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

i

Infective Stage

d

Diagnostic Stage

Human Liver Stages
Liver cell

Infected
liver cell

Mosquito Stages
Ruptured
12
oocyst

11 Oocyst

i

Release of
sporozoites

2
1
i
Mosquito takes
a blood meal
(injects sporozoites)

A

Exo-erythrocytic Cycle

4

Ruptured schizont

3

Schizont

C

Sporogonic Cycle

Human Blood Stages
5

10 Ookinete

Immature
trophozoite
(ring stage)

8

Macrogametocyte

Mosquito takes
a blood meal
(ingests gametocytes)

d

B

Erythrocytic Cycle

Mature d
trophozoite

Microgamete entering
macrogamete 9
P. falciparum

6

Ruptured
schizont

Exflagellated
microgametocyte

Schizont d

7

Gametocytes d
P. vivax
P. ovale
P. malariae

7

Gametocytes

Fig. 334.2 Life cycle of Plasmodium spp. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Laboratory diagnosis of malaria: Plasmodium spp.
https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/malaria/index.html)

sporozoites enter the hepatocytes of the liver, where they develop and
multiply asexually as a schizont. After 1-­2 weeks, the hepatocytes
rupture and release thousands of merozoites into the circulation.
The tissue schizonts of P. falciparum, P. malariae, and apparently P.
knowlesi rupture once and do not persist in the liver. There are two
types of tissue schizonts for P. ovale and P. vivax. The primary type
ruptures in 6-­9 days, and the secondary type remains dormant in the
liver cell for weeks, months, or as long as 5 years before releasing
merozoites and causing relapse of infection. The erythrocytic phase
of Plasmodium asexual development begins when the merozoites
from the liver penetrate erythrocytes. Once inside the erythrocyte,
the parasite transforms into the ring form, which then enlarges to
become a trophozoite. These latter two forms can be identified with
Giemsa stain on blood smear, the primary means of confirming the
diagnosis of malaria (Fig. 334.3). The trophozoite multiplies asexually to produce a number of small erythrocytic merozoites that are
released into the bloodstream when the erythrocyte membrane ruptures, which is associated with fever. Over time, some of the merozoites develop into male and female gametocytes that complete the
Plasmodium life cycle when they are ingested during a blood meal by
the female anopheline mosquito. The male and female gametocytes
fuse to form a zygote in the stomach cavity of the mosquito. After a
series of further transformations, sporozoites enter the salivary gland

of the mosquito and are inoculated into a new host with the next
blood meal.
Pathophysiology and pathogenesis in malaria differ according to
species. Infection with all species leads to fever, caused by the host
immune response when erythrocytes rupture and release merozoites into the circulation, and anemia, caused by hemolysis and bone
marrow suppression. Severe malaria is more common in P. falciparum because of several processes, including higher-­density parasitemia, which may lead to excessive production of proinflammatory
cytokines; cytoadherence of P. falciparum-­infected erythrocytes to
the vascular endothelium; and polyclonal activation, resulting in
both hypergammaglobulinemia and the formation of immune complexes. Cytoadherence of infected erythrocytes to vascular endothelium can lead to obstruction of blood flow and capillary damage,
with resultant vascular leakage of blood, protein, and fluid and tissue
anoxia. Parasite anaerobic metabolism may also lead to hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis. The cumulative effects of these pathologic processes may lead to cerebral, cardiac, pulmonary, renal, and
hepatic failure.
Immunity after Plasmodium sp. infection is incomplete, preventing severe disease but still allowing future infection. In some cases,
parasites circulate in small numbers for a long time but are prevented
from rapidly multiplying and causing severe illness. Repeated episodes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)

A

B

E

C

F

2171

D

G

H

Fig. 334.3 Giemsa-­stained thick (A) and thin (B-­H) smears used for the diagnosis of malaria and the speciation of Plasmodium parasites. A, Multi-

ple signet-­ring Plasmodium falciparum trophozoites that are visualized outside erythrocytes. B, A multiply infected erythrocyte containing signet-­ring
P. falciparum trophozoites, including an accolade form positioned up against the inner surface of the erythrocyte membrane. C, Banana-­shaped
gametocyte unique to P. falciparum. D, Ameboid trophozoite characteristic of P. vivax. Both P. vivax– and P. ovale–infected erythrocytes exhibit
Schüffner dots and tend to be enlarged compared with uninfected erythrocytes. E, P. vivax schizont. Mature P. falciparum parasites, by contrast, are
rarely seen on blood smears because they sequester in the systemic microvasculature. F, P. vivax spherical gametocyte. G, P. ovale trophozoite. Note
Schüffner dots and ovoid shapes of the infected erythrocyte. H, Characteristic band-­form trophozoite of P. malariae, containing intracellular pigment
hemozoin. (A, B, and F, from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. DPDx: Laboratory identification of parasites of public health concern. htt
ps://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/malaria/index.html; C, D, E, G, and H, courtesy David Wyler, Newton Centre, MA.)

of infection occur because the parasite has developed a number of
immune-­evasive strategies, such as intracellular replication, vascular cytoadherence that prevents infected erythrocytes from circulating through the spleen, rapid antigenic variation, and alteration of
the host immune system resulting in partial immune suppression.
The human host response to Plasmodium infection includes natural
immune mechanisms that prevent infection by other Plasmodium
spp., such as those of birds or rodents, as well as several alterations
in erythrocyte physiology that prevent or modify malarial infection.
Erythrocytes containing hemoglobin S (sickle erythrocytes) resist
malaria parasite growth, erythrocytes lacking Duffy blood group
antigen are relatively resistant to P. vivax, and erythrocytes containing hemoglobin F (fetal hemoglobin) and ovalocytes are resistant
to P. falciparum. In hyperendemic areas, newborns rarely become ill
with malaria, in part because of passive maternal antibody and high
levels of fetal hemoglobin. Children 3 months to 2-­5 years of age have
little specific immunity to malaria species and therefore suffer yearly
attacks of debilitating and potentially fatal disease. Immunity is subsequently acquired, and severe cases of malaria become less common. Severe disease may occur during pregnancy, particularly first
pregnancies or after extended residence outside the endemic region.
Both T-­cell and antibody responses are important in development of
biologic and clinical immunity to Plasmodium spp.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children and adults are asymptomatic during the initial phase of infection, the incubation period of malaria infection. The usual incubation
periods are 9-­14 days for P. falciparum, 12-­17 days for P. vivax, 16-­18
days for P. ovale, and 18-­40 days for P. malariae. The incubation period
can be as long as 6-­12 months for P. vivax and can also be prolonged
for patients with partial immunity or incomplete chemoprophylaxis. A
prodrome lasting 2-­3 days is noted in some patients before parasites are
detected in the blood. Prodromal symptoms include headache, fatigue,
anorexia, myalgia, slight fever, and pain in the chest, abdomen, and
joints.

Children with malaria often lack the typical paroxysms seen in
adults (high fever, followed by shaking chills and then diaphoresis)
and may have nonspecific symptoms, including fever (may be low
grade but is often >40°C [104°F]), headache, drowsiness, anorexia,
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Although the rupture of schizonts
that occurs every 48 hours with P. vivax and P. ovale and every 72
hours with P. malariae can result in a classic pattern of fevers every
other day (P. vivax and P. ovale) or every third day (P. malariae), periodicity is less apparent with P. falciparum and mixed infections and
may not be apparent early on in infection, when parasite broods have
not yet synchronized. Patients with primary infection, such as travelers from non-­endemic regions, also may have irregular symptomatic episodes for 2-­3 days before regular paroxysms begin, so most
travelers presenting with malaria lack a classic malaria fever pattern.
Distinctive physical signs may include fever, pallor as a consequence
of anemia, and splenomegaly or hepatomegaly. Typical laboratory
findings include anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a normal or raised
leukocyte count.
P. falciparum is the most severe form of malaria and is associated with higher-­density parasitemia and a number of complications (Fig. 334.4). The most common serious complication is severe
anemia, which also is associated with other malaria species. Serious
complications that appear unique to P. falciparum include cerebral
malaria, respiratory distress from metabolic acidosis, acute renal
failure, hypotension, and bleeding diatheses (Table 334.1) (see
“Severe Malaria”).
The diagnosis of P. falciparum malaria in a nonimmune individual
constitutes a medical emergency. Severe complications and death can
occur if appropriate therapy is not instituted promptly. In contrast to
malaria caused by P. ovale, P. vivax, and P. malariae, which usually
result in parasitemias of <2%, malaria caused by P. falciparum can be
associated with parasitemia levels as high as 60%. The differences in
parasitemia reflect that P. falciparum infects both immature and mature
erythrocytes, whereas P. ovale and P. vivax primarily infect immature
erythrocytes and P. malariae infects only mature erythrocytes. Like P.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2172 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Proportion of patients (%)

100
Jaundice
Acidosis
Coma
Renal failure

80
60

Table 334.1  World Health Organization Criteria for
Severe Malaria, 2021

Anemia
Convulsions
Shock

SEVERE MALARIA
CRITERION

40
20
0

0

5

10

20

A

30

40

50

60

Impaired
consciousness

Glasgow Coma Scale score <11 in adults or
Blantyre coma score <3 in children

Prostration

Generalized weakness so that a person
is unable to sit, stand, or walk without
assistance

Multiple convulsions

More than two episodes of convulsions
within 24 hr

Acidosis

A base deficit of >8 mEq/L, a plasma
bicarbonate level of <15 mmol/L, or
venous plasma lactate ≥5 mmol/L. Severe
acidosis manifests clinically as respiratory
distress (rapid, deep, labored breathing)

Hypoglycemia

Blood or plasma glucose <40 mg/dL (<2.2
mmol/L)

Severe malarial
anemia

Hemoglobin concentration ≤5 g/dL or
hematocrit ≤15% in children <12 years
of age (<7 g/dL and <20%, respectively,
in those ≥12 years) with parasite count
>10,000/μL

Renal impairment
(acute kidney injury)

Plasma or serum creatinine >3 mg/dL (265
μmol/L) or blood urea >20 mmol/L

Jaundice

Plasma or serum bilirubin >50 μmol/L (3
mg/dL) with a parasite count >100,000/μL
(approximately 2%).

Pulmonary edema

Radiographically confirmed or oxygen
saturation <92% on room air with
respiratory rate >30/min, often with chest
indrawing and crepitation on auscultation

Significant bleeding

Includes recurrent or prolonged bleeding
from the nose, gums, or venipuncture
sites; hematemesis, or melena

Shock

Compensated shock is defined as capillary
refill ≥3 sec or temperature gradient
on leg (mid to proximal limb) but no
hypotension. Decompensated shock is
defined as systolic blood pressure <70 mm
Hg in children or <80 mm Hg in adults,
with evidence of impaired perfusion (cool
peripheries or prolonged capillary refill)

Hyperparasitemia

P. falciparum parasitemia >10% (>500,000/μL)

Age (years)

Coma or
convulsions
6%
23%
19%

43%

7%

13%

6%

Uremia

Acidosis

B
Fig. 334.4 Manifestations of severe falciparum malaria by age (A) and

mortality in children associated with central nervous system involvement, acidosis, and uremia (B). Data from 3,228 prospectively studied
African children with severe falciparum malaria. Uremia here is defined
as a blood urea nitrogen >7.14 mmol/L. Surface areas denote the relative prevalence of the different severity signs, which frequently coexist.
The percentages denote the observed mortality associated with the
presenting signs. (From White NJ, Pukrittayakamee S, Hien TT, et al.
Malaria. Lancet. 2014;383:723–735.)

falciparum, P. knowlesi has a 24-­hour replication cycle and can also lead
to very high density parasitemia.
P. vivax malaria has long been considered less severe than P. falciparum malaria, but recent reports suggest that in some areas it is as
frequent a cause of severe disease and death as P. falciparum. Severe
disease and death from P. vivax are usually caused by severe anemia
and sometimes splenic rupture. P. ovale malaria is the least common
type of malaria. It is similar to P. vivax malaria and usually is found
in conjunction with P. falciparum malaria. Case reports of worsening P. ovale disease with respiratory symptoms and pulmonary
infiltrates and/or effusions after antimalarial treatment have been
reported, but all resolved with completion of treatment. P. malariae
is the mildest and most chronic of all malaria infections. Nephrotic
syndrome is a rare complication of P. malariae infection that is not
observed with any other human malaria species. Nephrotic syndrome associated with P. malariae infection is poorly responsive
to corticosteroids. Low-­level, undetected P. malariae infection may
be present for years and is sometimes unmasked by immunosuppression or physiologic stress such as splenectomy or corticosteroid treatment. P. knowlesi malaria is most often uncomplicated but
can lead to severe malaria and death if high-­density parasitemia is
present.

DEFINITION

The definition of severe P. vivax or P. ovale malaria is the same as that
of severe falciparum malaria except that there are no parasite density
thresholds. The definition of severe malaria due to P. knowlesi differs
from that of severe falciparum malaria; the threshold parasite density is
>100,000/μL (alone) or >20,000/μL in patients with jaundice.
Recrudescence after a primary attack may occur from the survival
of erythrocyte forms in the bloodstream. Long-­term relapse is caused
by release of merozoites from a pre-­erythrocytic source in the liver,
which occurs with P. vivax and P. ovale, or from persistence within
the erythrocyte, which occurs with P. malariae and rarely with P. falciparum. A history of typical symptoms in a person >4 weeks after return
from an endemic area is therefore more likely to be P. vivax, P. ovale,
or P. malariae infection than P. falciparum infection. In the most recent
survey of malaria in the United States (2013) by the CDC, among individuals in whom a malaria species was identified, 61% of cases were
caused by P. falciparum,14% by P. vivax, 2% by P. malariae, 4% by P.
ovale, and 2% by mixed-­species infection; 94% of P. falciparum infections were diagnosed within 30 days of arrival in the United States,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)

2173

and 99% within 90 days of arrival. In contrast, 54% of P. vivax cases
occurred >30 days after arrival in the United States.
Congenital malaria is acquired from the mother prenatally or perinatally but is rarely reported in the United States. Congenital malaria
usually occurs in the offspring of a nonimmune mother with P. vivax or
P. malariae infection, although it can be observed with any of the human
malaria species. The first sign or symptom typically occurs between 10
and 30 days of age (range: 14 hours to several months of age). Signs
and symptoms include fever, restlessness, drowsiness, pallor, jaundice,
poor feeding, vomiting, diarrhea, cyanosis, and hepatosplenomegaly.
Malaria in pregnancy is a major health problem in malaria-­endemic
countries, can be severe, and is associated with adverse outcomes in
the fetus or neonate, including intrauterine growth restriction and low
birthweight, even in the absence of transmission from mother to child.

or laboratory in 10 minutes. PCR is more sensitive than microscopy
but is technically more complex. It is available in some reference
laboratories and can be useful for confirmation and for diagnosis of
multiple species of malaria. The time delay in availability of results
typically precludes its use for acute diagnosis of malaria, but it is
useful to send where available, as it can confirm the diagnosis, allow
for detection of multiple infections, and detect malaria not detected
by standard microscopy because of low levels of parasitemia (particularly nonfalciparum malaria). PCR detection may detect asymptomatic parasitemia in children with very low level parasitemia (e.g.,
internationally adopted children from malaria-­endemic areas), with
greater sensitivity than microscopy, and may be the preferred method
of detection in these children, who, because they are asymptomatic,
do not require immediate treatment.

Severe Malaria

Differential Diagnosis

WHO has identified 12 complications of P. falciparum malaria that
define severe malaria (see Table 334.1 and Fig. 334.4). The most common complications in children are severe anemia, impaired consciousness (including cerebral malaria), respiratory distress (a result
of metabolic acidosis), acute kidney injury, multiple seizures, prostration, and jaundice. A more complete discussion of severe malaria is
provided in the treatment section (see “Treatment of Severe Malaria”),
where treatment for these complications is also described.

DIAGNOSIS

Any child who presents with fever or unexplained systemic illness and
has traveled or resided in a malaria-­endemic area within the previous year should be evaluated for malaria. Malaria should be considered regardless of the use of chemoprophylaxis. Important criteria that
suggest P. falciparum malaria include symptoms occurring <1 month
after return from an endemic area, >2% parasitemia, ring forms with
double-­chromatin dots, and erythrocytes infected with greater than
one parasite.
The diagnosis of malaria is established by identification of organisms
on Giemsa-­stained smears of peripheral blood (see Fig. 334.3) or by
rapid immunochromatographic assay (rapid diagnostic test). Giemsa
stain is superior to Wright stain or Leishman stain. Both thick and thin
blood smears should be examined. The concentration of erythrocytes
on a thick smear is 20-­40 times that on a thin smear and is used to
quickly scan large numbers of erythrocytes. The thin smear allows
for positive identification of the malaria species and determination of
the percentage of infected erythrocytes and is useful in following the
response to therapy. Identification of the species is best made by an
experienced microscopist and checked against color plates of the various Plasmodium spp. (see Fig. 334.3). Morphologically, it is impossible
to distinguish P. knowlesi from P. malariae, so polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection by a reference laboratory or the CDC is required.
Although P. falciparum is most likely to be identified from blood just
after a febrile paroxysm, most children with malaria will have a positive blood smear regardless of the time the smear is obtained. Most
guidelines recommend at least three negative blood smears to rule out
malaria in children in whom malaria is strongly suspected, because
low-­level parasitemia could potentially go undetected early in the illness. However, few data are available on the utility of repeated blood
smears for malaria detection, and most case reports and series document a positive initial smear.
The BinaxNOW Malaria test is approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for rapid diagnosis of malaria. This
immunochromatographic test for P. falciparum histidine-­rich protein
(HRP2) and aldolase is approved for testing for P. falciparum and P.
vivax. Aldolase is present in all five of the malaria species that infect
humans; thus a positive result for P. vivax could be because of P. ovale
or P. malariae infection. Sensitivity and specificity for P. falciparum
(94–99% and 94–99%, respectively) and P. vivax (87–93% and 99%,
respectively) are good, but sensitivity for P. ovale and P. malariae is
lower. Sensitivity for P. falciparum decreases at lower levels of parasitemia, so microscopy is still advised in areas where expert microscopy
is available. The test is simple to perform and can be done in the field

The differential diagnosis of malaria is broad. In a child traveler returning to or arriving in the United States from an endemic area, diseases
that may mimic malaria include viral infections such as influenza and
hepatitis, sepsis, pneumonia, meningitis, encephalitis, endocarditis,
gastroenteritis, pyelonephritis, babesiosis, brucellosis, leptospirosis,
tuberculosis, relapsing fever, typhoid fever, yellow fever, viral hemorrhagic fevers, amebic liver abscess, neoplasm, and collagen vascular
disease. There is also considerable clinical overlap between features of
malaria (uncomplicated or severe) and other common bacterial and
viral infections. Malaria in child travelers returning to or arriving in
the United States is typically the sole reason for the clinical symptoms
the child presents with, but the relatively nonspecific presentation may
require a larger workup and empiric treatment for other conditions
while awaiting testing results.

TREATMENT

Physicians caring for patients with malaria or traveling to endemic
areas need to be aware of current information regarding malaria
because resistance to antimalarial drugs has complicated therapy and
prophylaxis. The CDC website provides excellent guidance on diagnosis and treatment of malaria in individuals in the United States (https:
//www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/diagnosis.html). Specific
pages provide general guidelines (https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagn
osis_treatment/clinicians1.html), a treatment algorithm (https://www.
cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/Malaria_Management_Algorithm.pdf,
Fig. 334.5), a treatment table for all forms of uncomplicated and severe
malaria (https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/Malaria_Treatm
ent_Table.pdf, Tables 334.2-­334.6), and specific guidance on obtaining
artesunate, which is now available commercially in the United States
as an FDA-­approved drug (https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_tr
eatment/artesunate.html) and must be ordered emergently by hospitals that do not have in it stock. Severe malaria care requires infectious diseases consultation. In cases where treatment is unclear or
complex, calling the CDC Malaria Hotline is strongly recommended.
CDC expert malaria guidance is available to physicians 24 hours a day
(844-­856-­4713, from 9 am to 5 pm Eastern Time Monday-­Friday, and
770-­488-­7100 at all other times and on holidays; request to speak to the
CDC Malaria Branch Expert).

General Principles

Treatment for malaria should be based on laboratory confirmation of
the diagnosis. “Presumptive treatment,” i.e., without laboratory confirmation, may be required in children with severe disease in a setting
where prompt laboratory diagnosis is not available. Once the diagnosis of malaria has been made, appropriate antimalarial treatment
should be initiated immediately. Treatment is influenced by multiple
factors, including infecting Plasmodium species; clinical status of
the patient; expected drug susceptibility of the infecting parasite as
determined by the geographic area where the infection was acquired;
and previous use of antimalarials, including those taken for malaria
chemoprophylaxis.
Fever without an obvious cause in any patient who has left a P. falciparum–endemic area within 30 days and is nonimmune should be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fever and history of travel to malaria-endemic
area, or clinical suspicion of malaria
Evaluation
Disposition
Perform thick and thin blood smears
and read on the same day**

No

Medication

Yes

Blood smear
positive?

Repeat blood smears every
12–24 hours
(total of 3 times)

From smear: calculate parasite density
and determine species

No
Blood smear
positive?

Yes

Evaluate clinical status and
disease severity

Consider alternate
diagnosis

P. falciparum, P. knowlesi,
or species not yet
identified†

Uncomplicated
malaria

P. ovale or P. vivax acquired in
area without chloroquine
resistance

P. malariae

Admit to hospital and monitor
for disease progression

Chloroquine or
Hydroxychloroquine‡

P. vivax
acquired in area
with
chloroquine
resistance

Artemether-lumefantrine
or
Atovaquone-proguanil
or
Quinine plus tetracycline
or doxycycline or
clindamycin
or, if no other options,
mefloquine

P. knowlesi

Chloroquine or
Hydroxychloroquine‡

Chloroquine or
Hydroxychloroquine‡

Admit to intensive care unit
Call CDC

Chloroquine or
Hydroxychloroquine‡

P. falciparum or species
not yet identified†

P. falciparum
acquired in area with
no chloroquine
resistance

Severe malaria and/or patient
unable to tolerate oral medication,
regardless of species†

Intravenous artesunate
If needed, interim treatment:
Artemether-lumefantrine
or
Atovaquone-proguanil
or
Quinine
or, if no other options,
mefloquine

Monitor parasite density
every 12–24 hours
P. falciparum acquired
in area with
chloroquine resistance

P. falciparum
acquired in area with
mefloquine resistance

Artemether-lumefantrine
(preferred)
or
Atovaquone-proguanil
or
Quinine plus tetracycline
or doxycycline or
clindamycin
or, if no other options,
mefloquine

Artemether-lumefantrine
(preferred)
or
Atovaquone-proguanil
or
Quinine plus tetracycline
or doxycycline or
clindamycin

PLUS

If not G6PD deficient by
quantitative testing:
Primaquine (any prior regimen
for acute infection) or
Tafenoquine (only if
chloroquine used for acute
infection; not for children
<16 years old)

Administer follow on treatment
after intravenous artesunate:†
Artemether-lumefantrine
or
Atovaquone-proguanil
or
Quinine and doxycycline
(or clindamycin)
or, if no other options,
mefloquine

Fig. 334.5 Algorithm for approach to patient with malaria in the United States. Treatment for special populations (children and pregnant women)

can be found in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Treatment Guidelines and Treatment Table at https://www.cdc.gov/malaria
/resources/pdf/Malaria_Treatment_Table.pdf. **If rapid diagnostic test performed, smear should also be performed with results available as soon
as possible. †If species later identified as P. vivax or P. ovale, add primaquine if not glucose-­6-­phosphate (G6PD) deficient by quantitative testing.
Tafenoquine can only be used if chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine used for acute infection. ‡Drug options for chloroquine-­resistant P. falciparum
may be used. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/algorithm.pdf)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)
considered a medical emergency. Thick and thin blood smears should
be obtained immediately, and all children with symptoms of severe disease should be hospitalized. If negative, blood films should be repeated
every 12 hours until three smears are documented as negative. If the
patient is severely ill, antimalarial therapy should be initiated immediately. Outpatient therapy generally is not given to nonimmune children
but may be considered in immune or semi-­immune children who have
low-­level parasitemia (<1%), no evidence of complications defined by
WHO, no vomiting, and a lack of toxic appearance; who are able to
contact the physician or emergency department at any time; and in
whom follow-­up within 24 hours is ensured.

TREATMENT OF UNCOMPLICATED MALARIA
P. falciparum or Species Not Identified: Acquired in
Areas with Chloroquine Resistance

Treatment regimens for children with uncomplicated malaria in the
United States are summarized in Tables 334.2-­334.5. For P. falciparum
infections acquired in areas with chloroquine resistance, four treatment options are available. These include artemether-­lumefantrine
(Coartem), which is the preferred option if readily available, and
atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone). These are fixed-­dose combination
therapies that can be used for pediatric patients >5 kg. Quinine sulfate plus doxycycline, tetracycline, or clindamycin is the next treatment
option. For the quinine sulfate combination options, quinine sulfate
plus either doxycycline or tetracycline is generally preferred to quinine
sulfate plus clindamycin because there are more data on the efficacy of
quinine plus doxycycline or tetracycline. Quinine should be given for
3 days, except for infections acquired in Southeast Asia where 7 days
of treatment is required. The fourth option, mefloquine, is associated
with rare but potentially severe neuropsychiatric reactions when used
at treatment dose, and it is recommended only if the other options cannot be used.
For infections attributed to “species not identified” in areas with
chloroquine resistance that are subsequently diagnosed as being due
to P. vivax or P. ovale, additional treatment with primaquine or tafenoquine should be administered, as described in the section on P. vivax
and P. ovale treatment.

P. falciparum or Species Not Identified: Acquired in
Areas Without Chloroquine Resistance

For P. falciparum infections acquired in areas without chloroquine-­
resistant strains, which include Central America west of the Panama
Canal, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic, patients can be treated with
oral chloroquine. Alternatively, hydroxychloroquine may be used at
recommended doses. In addition, any of the regimens listed for the
treatment of chloroquine-­resistant malaria may be used for the treatment of chloroquine-­sensitive P. falciparum malaria. Prompt initiation
of an effective regimen is vitally important as delay of initiation of treatment may increase the risk of progression to severe disease in patients
with P. falciparum infection. If infections initially attributed to “species
not identified” are subsequently diagnosed as being due to P. vivax or
P. ovale, additional treatment with primaquine or tafenoquine should
be administered, as outlined in the sections on P. vivax and P. ovale.

P. vivax and P. ovale

Chloroquine (or hydroxychloroquine) remains an effective choice
for P. vivax and P. ovale infections except for P. vivax infections
acquired in Papua New Guinea or Indonesia, as there is high prevalence of chloroquine-­resistant P. vivax in these countries. Rare cases of
chloroquine-­resistant P. vivax have also been documented in Burma
(Myanmar), India, and Central and South America. Persons acquiring P. vivax infections from regions other than Papua New Guinea or
Indonesia should initially be treated with chloroquine. If chloroquine
is not available, or if the infection was acquired in an area with a high
frequency of chloroquine resistance (Indonesia or Papua New Guinea),
artemether-­lumefantrine, atovaquone-­proguanil, quinine sulfate plus
doxycycline or tetracycline or clindamycin, or mefloquine should
be used (mefloquine should be used only if the other drugs are not
available or contraindicated). If chloroquine is given and the patient

2175

has an inadequate response including persistence or worsening of
clinical symptoms or no decrease in parasite density, treatment should
be changed to one of the regimens recommended for chloroquine-­
resistant P. vivax infections.
In addition to requiring the acute phase treatment of blood-­stage
parasites, P. vivax and P. ovale infections can relapse due to hypnozoites, which are dormant forms that remain in the liver. To eradicate
the hypnozoites, patients should be treated with either tafenoquine
(Krintafel) or primaquine phosphate. If primaquine phosphate is used,
the CDC recommends a dose of 30 mg (base) by mouth daily for 14
days for adults, and a dose of 0.5 mg/kg (base) by mouth, to a maximum of 30 mg (base) daily for children.

P. malariae and P. knowlesi

There has been no widespread evidence of chloroquine resistance in P.
malariae and P. knowlesi species; therefore chloroquine (or hydroxychloroquine) may still be used for both of these species. In addition,
any of the regimens listed previously for the treatment of chloroquine-­
resistant P. falciparum may be used for the treatment of P. malariae
and P. knowlesi infections. Due to the risk of complications among
patients with P. knowlesi, clinicians should consider hospitalization to
monitor clinical response and check parasite density every 12-­24 hours
until clinical presentation improves and a decrease in parasite density
becomes apparent.

TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA
General Principles

Death due to severe malaria can occur within hours of presentation,
so prompt assessment and initiation of effective antimalarial therapy
is essential. Equally important is the concurrent administration of supportive therapy to manage life-­threatening complications of the disease. Supportive measures such as oxygen therapy, blood transfusion,
rehydration, control of convulsions, correction of metabolic derangements like hypoglycemia, and institution of antibiotics in children with
features of sepsis should be instituted as indicated by clinical findings.
Children with severe malaria should be managed in an intensive care
unit (ICU).
The risk of death due to severe malaria is greatest in the first 24 hours
after clinical presentation. Independent predictors for fatality among
African children with severe malaria include acidosis, impaired consciousness, elevated blood urea nitrogen, and acute kidney injury. Early
diagnosis and prompt initiation of antimalarial medication and appropriate supportive care can reduce mortality.
Drug treatment guidelines in this chapter are based on treatment
for children in the United States (Table 334.6). Children in other areas
have other drugs and treatments available, and local or WHO guidelines for malaria treatment are available at https://www.who.int/public
ations/i/item/guidelines-­for-­malaria.

Intravenous Antimalarial Therapy for Severe Malaria

Treatment of severe malaria involves initial treatment with intravenous
(IV) artesunate, followed by a full dose of effective artemisinin combination therapy (ACT). In the United States, the only FDA-­approved
treatment for severe malaria is IV artesunate. Quinidine, which was
previously approved for treatment of severe malaria, ceased to be manufactured in 2019. Artesunate dosing need not be adjusted for hepatic
or renal failure, nor for concomitant or previous therapy with other
medications. Artesunate is well tolerated with few side effects. Adverse
effects include nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and dizziness, although
these may be due to malaria rather than drug toxicity. In nonimmune
patients, delayed onset of anemia has been noted in some cases, so
patients treated with IV artesunate should be monitored for delayed
hemolytic anemia, and repeat hemoglobin testing at 7, 14, and 30 days
should be considered.
In the United States, IV artesunate was approved by the FDA
through the CDC as part of an expanded-­use investigational new drug
(IND) protocol in May 2020. As of June 2021, the drug can be obtained
through major drug distributors. Healthcare providers treating
patients meeting the following criteria and who are unable to obtain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2176 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 334.2  Treatment of Uncomplicated Malaria: Plasmodium falciparum or Unknown Species1–3 (If Later Diagnosed as
P. vivax or P. ovale, See Table 334.3 for Antirelapse Treatment)
DRUG SUSCEPTIBILITY
(BASED ON WHERE ACQUIRED)
Chloroquine resistant or unknown resistance
(All malaria-­endemic regions except those
in Central America west of Panama Canal,
Haiti, and Dominican Republic)

RECOMMENDED ADULT REGIMENS

RECOMMENDED PEDIATRIC REGIMENS4

A.	Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem)5
(1 tab: 20 mg artemether and 120 mg
lumefantrine)
Adults: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course:
Day 1: Initial dose and second dose 8 hr later
Days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid

A.	Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem)5
(1 tab: 20 mg artemether and 120 mg
lumefantrine)
5 to <15 kg: 1 tab PO per dose
15 to <25 kg: 2 tabs PO per dose
25 to <35 kg: 3 tabs PO per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course:
Day 1: Initial dose and second dose 8 hr later
Days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid

B.	Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone)6
(Adult tab: 250 mg atovaquone and 100 mg
proguanil)
4 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
C.	Quinine sulfate7 plus doxycycline,8
tetracycline,8 or clindamycin9
Quinine sulfate: 542 mg base (650 mg salt) PO
tid × 3 or 7 days7
Doxycycline: 100 mg PO bid × 7 days
Tetracycline: 250 mg PO qid × 7 days
Clindamycin: 20 mg/kg/day PO divided tid ×
7 days
D.	Mefloquine10
Dose 1: 684 mg base (750 mg salt) PO
Dose 2 at 6-­12 hr: 456 mg base (500 mg salt)
PO

B.	Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone)6
(Adult tab: 250 mg atovaquone and 100 mg
proguanil; Peds tab: 62.5 mg atovaquone and
25 mg proguanil)
5 to <8 kg: 2 peds tabs PO qd × 3 days
8 to <10 kg: 3 peds tabs PO qd × 3 days
10 to <20 kg: 1 adult tab PO qd × 3 days
20 to <30 kg: 2 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
30 to <40 kg: 3 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
≥40 kg: 4 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
C.	Quinine sulfate7 plus doxycycline,8
tetracycline,8 or clindamycin9
Quinine sulfate: 8.3 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/
kg) PO tid × 3 or 7 days7
Doxycycline: 2.2 mg/kg PO bid × 7 days
Tetracycline: 25 mg/kg/day PO divided qid ×
7 days
Clindamycin: 20 mg /kg/day PO divided tid ×
7 days
D.	Mefloquine10
Dose 1: 13.7 mg base/kg (15 mg salt/kg) PO
Dose 2 at 6-­12 hr: 9.1 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/
kg) PO

Chloroquine sensitive11
(Central America west of Panama Canal, Haiti,
and Dominican Republic)

Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen and generics)
Dose 1: 600 mg base (1,000 mg salt) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48
hr: 300 mg base (500 mg salt) PO per dose
OR
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil and generics)
Dose 1: 620 mg base (800 mg salt) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48
hr: 310 mg base (400 mg salt) PO per dose

Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen and generics)
Dose 1: 10 mg base/kg (16.7 mg salt/kg) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and
48 hr: 5 mg base/kg (8.3 mg salt/kg) PO per
dose
OR
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil and generics)
Dose 1: 10 mg base/kg (12.9 mg salt/kg) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and
48 hr: 5 mg base/kg (6.5 mg salt/kg) PO per
dose

1qd, once a day; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid, four times a day; PO, by mouth; tab(s), tablet(s).
2If an antimalarial is taken for chemoprophylaxis, a different drug should be used for treatment.
3Option A preferred, Options B and C adequate alternatives and should be used if more readily available than Option A. Option D should be used only if other options not available.
4Not to exceed adult dose.
5Artemether-­lumefantrine can be used in second and third trimesters of pregnancy and, if no other options available, in first trimester as well. Not for infants <5 kg or women

breastfeeding infants <5 kg.
6Atovaquone-­proguanil not recommended during pregnancy, in infants <5 kg, or in women breastfeeding infants <5 kg. May be considered if other treatment options not available

or not tolerated, and benefits outweigh risks.
7Quinine to be given for 3 days, except for infections acquired in Southeast Asia, where 7 days of treatment are required. Quinine available in the United States has 324 mg (salt) per

capsule, therefore two capsules for adult dosing. Pediatric dosing may need compounding pharmacy.
8Doxycycline or tetracycline combined with quinine preferred due to more efficacy data, but not recommended during pregnancy or in children <8 yr old unless no other options and

benefits outweigh risks.
9Clindamycin with quinine preferred option for pregnant women and children <8 yr old.
10Mefloquine not recommended for infections acquired in Southeast Asia due to drug resistance. Not recommended if other options available or in patients with neuropsychiatric

history.
11Regimens used to treat chloroquine-­resistant P. falciparum infections may be used if chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine not available.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Malaria Treatment Tables. https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/Malaria_Treatment_Table.pdf

commercially available artesunate within 24 hours should call the CDC
Malaria Hotline to obtain IV artesunate.
If artesunate is not immediately available, oral antimalarials can
be given while waiting to obtain IV artesunate. Choices include
artemether-­lumefantrine (preferred), atovaquone-­proguanil, quinine
sulfate, and mefloquine (Table 334.2).

FOLLOW-­UP ORAL ANTIMALARIAL THERAPY FOR
SEVERE MALARIA

Parenteral artesunate should be given for three doses over 24 hours at 0,
12, and 24 hours. If parasite density is <1% at 20 hours and the patient
can take oral medication, treatment should be completed with an effective oral medication, such as artemether-­
lumefantrine (preferred),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)

2177

Table 334.3  Treatment of Uncomplicated Malaria: P. vivax or P. ovale1,2
DRUG SUSCEPTIBILITY
(BASED ON WHERE
ACQUIRED)

RECOMMENDED ADULT REGIMENS
(BOTH ACUTE AND ANTIRELAPSE TREATMENTS
RECOMMENDED)

RECOMMENDED PEDIATRIC REGIMENS3
(BOTH ACUTE AND ANTIRELAPSE TREATMENTS
RECOMMENDED)

Chloroquine sensitive
(All malaria-­endemic regions
except Papua New Guinea and
Indonesia)

Acute treatment4:
Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen and generics)
Dose 1: 600 mg base (1,000 mg salt) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr:
300 mg base (500 mg salt) PO per dose
OR
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil and generics)
Dose 1: 620 mg base (800 mg salt) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr:
310 mg base (400 mg salt) PO per dose
AND
Antirelapse treatment5:
Primaquine phosphate6–8
30 mg base PO qd × 14 days
OR
Tafenoquine (Krintafel)6,7,9
300 mg PO × 1 dose

Acute treatment4:
Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen and generics)
Dose 1: 10 mg base/kg (16.7 mg salt/kg) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr: 5 mg
base/kg (8.3 mg salt/kg) PO per dose
OR
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil and generics)
Dose 1: 10 mg base/kg (12.9 mg salt/kg) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr: 5 mg
base/kg (6.5 mg salt/kg) PO per dose
AND
Antirelapse treatment5:
Primaquine phosphate6–8
0.5 mg base/kg PO qd × 14 days
OR
Tafenoquine (Krintafel)6,7,9
300 mg PO × 1 dose, only for patients ≥16 yr old

Chloroquine resistant
(Papua New Guinea and
Indonesia)

Acute treatment:
A.	Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem)10
(1 tab: 20 mg artemether and 120 mg
lumefantrine)
Adults: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course:
Day 1: Initial dose and second dose 8 hr later
Days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid

Acute treatment:
A.	Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem)10
(1 tab: 20 mg artemether and 120 mg lumefantrine)
5 to <15 kg: 1 tab PO per dose
15 to <25 kg: 2 tabs PO per dose
25 to <35 kg: 3 tabs PO per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course:
Day 1: Initial dose and second dose 8 hr later
Days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid

B.	Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone)11
(Adult tab: 250 mg atovaquone and 100 mg
proguanil)
4 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
C.	Quinine sulfate12 plus doxycycline,13
tetracycline,13 or clindamycin14
Quinine sulfate: 542 mg base (650 mg salt) PO tid
× 3 days
Doxycycline: 100 mg PO bid × 7 days
Tetracycline: 250 mg PO qid × 7 days
Clindamycin: 20 mg/kg/day PO divided tid × 7
days
D.	Mefloquine15

Dose 1: 684 mg base (750 mg salt) PO
Dose 2 at 6-­12 hr: 456 mg base (500 mg salt) PO
AND
Antirelapse treatment16:
Primaquine phosphate17,18,19
30 mg base PO qd × 14 days

B.	Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone)11
(Adult tab: 250 mg atovaquone and 100 mg proguanil;
peds tab: 62.5 mg atovaquone and 25 mg proguanil)
5 to <8 kg: 2 peds tabs PO qd × 3 days
8 to <10 kg: 3 peds tabs PO qd × 3 days
10 to <20 kg: 1 adult tab PO qd × 3 days
20 to <30 kg: 2 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
30 to <40 kg: 3 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
≥40 kg: 4 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
C.	Quinine sulfate12 plus doxycycline,13 tetracycline,13
or clindamycin14
Quinine sulfate: 8.3 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/kg) PO tid
× 3 days
Doxycycline: 2.2 mg/kg PO q12h × 7 days
Tetracycline: 25 mg/kg/day PO divided qid × 7 days
Clindamycin: 20 mg/kg/day PO divided tid × 7 days
D.	Mefloquine10
Dose 1: 13.7 mg base/kg (15 mg salt/kg) PO
Dose 2 at 6-­12 hr: 9.1 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/kg) PO
AND
Antirelapse treatment16:
Primaquine phosphate17–19
0.5 mg base/kg PO qd × 14 days

1qd, once a day; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid, four times a day; PO, by mouth; tab(s), tablet(s).
2If an antimalarial is taken for chemoprophylaxis, a different drug should be used for treatment.
3Not to exceed adult dose.
4Regimens used to treat chloroquine-­resistant P. vivax infections may be used if chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine not available.
5Either option for antirelapse treatment recommended if chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine used for acute treatment. If regimens other than either chloroquine or

hydroxychloroquine are used for acute treatment, primaquine is the only option for antirelapse treatment.
6Primaquine and tafenoquine associated with hemolytic anemia in those with glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Before use, quantitative G6PD testing needed

to confirm normal activity. For those with intermediate G6PD deficiency, weekly primaquine may be used (45 mg/wk) for 8 wk with close monitoring for hemolysis. Those with G6PD
deficiency may be given chloroquine 300 mg (base) PO weekly for 1 yr from acute infection to prevent relapses.
7Primaquine and tafenoquine must not be used during pregnancy; pregnant patients with P. vivax and P. ovale infections should receive chloroquine 300 mg (base) PO weekly

after acute treatment for the remainder of pregnancy. After delivery, patients with normal G6PD activity can be given primaquine or tafenoquine depending on breastfeeding,
or continue with chloroquine prophylaxis for a total of 1 yr from acute infection. Primaquine can be used during breastfeeding if infant found to also have normal G6PD activity;
tafenoquine not recommended during breastfeeding.
8Dose of primaquine in patients ≥70 kg should be adjusted to a total dose of 6 mg/kg, divided into doses of 30 mg per day.
9Tafenoquine can only be used if chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine administered for acute treatment due to limited data on efficacy when used in combination with other regimens.
10Artemether-­lumefantrine can be used in second and third trimesters of pregnancy and, if no other options available, in first trimester as well. Not for infants <5 kg or women
breastfeeding infants <5 kg.
11Atovaquone-­proguanil not recommended during pregnancy, in infants <5 kg, or in women breastfeeding infants <5 kg. May be considered if other treatment options not available
or not tolerated, and benefits outweigh risks.
12Quinine available in the United States has 324 mg (salt) per capsule, therefore, two capsules for adult dosing. Pediatric dosing may need compounding pharmacy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2178 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 334.3  Treatment of Uncomplicated Malaria: P. vivax or P. ovale1,2—cont’d
13Doxycycline or tetracycline combined with quinine preferred due to more efficacy data, but not recommended during pregnancy or in children <8 yr old unless no other options

and benefits outweigh risks.
14Clindamycin with quinine preferred option for pregnant women and children <8 yr old.
15Use only if no other options available. Not for use in patients with neuropsychiatric history.
16Primaquine is the only option if regimens other than either chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine are used for treatment of acute infection.
17Primaquine associated with hemolytic anemia in those with glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Before use, quantitative G6PD testing needed to confirm

normal activity. For those with intermediate G6PD deficiency, weekly primaquine may be considered (45 mg/wk) for 8 wk with close monitoring for hemolysis. Those with G6PD
deficiency may be given chloroquine 300 mg (base) PO weekly for 1 yr from acute infection to prevent relapses.
18Primaquine must not be used during pregnancy; pregnant patients with P. vivax and P. ovale infections should receive chloroquine 300 mg (base) PO weekly after acute treatment

for the remainder of pregnancy. After delivery, patients with normal G6PD activity can be given primaquine depending on breastfeeding or continue with chloroquine prophylaxis
for a total of 1 yr from acute infection. Primaquine can be used during breastfeeding if infant found to also have normal G6PD activity.

19Dose of primaquine in patients ≥70 kg should be adjusted to a total dose of 6 mg/kg, divided into doses of 30 mg/day.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Malaria Treatment Tables. https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/Malaria_Treatment_Table.pdf

Table 334.4  Treatment of Uncomplicated Malaria: P. malariae or P. knowlesi1,2
DRUG SUSCEPTIBILITY
(BASED ON WHERE ACQUIRED)
Chloroquine sensitive
(All malaria-­endemic regions, no known
resistance)

RECOMMENDED ADULT REGIMENS

RECOMMENDED PEDIATRIC REGIMENS3

A.	Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen and generics)
Dose 1: 600 mg base (1,000 mg salt) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr:
300 mg base (500 mg salt) PO per dose
OR
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil and generics)
Dose 1: 620 mg base (800 mg salt) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr:
310 mg base (400 mg salt) PO per dose

A.	Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen and generics)
Dose 1: 10 mg base/kg (16.7 mg salt/kg) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr:
5 mg base/kg (8.3 mg salt/kg) PO per dose
OR
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil and generics)
Dose 1: 10 mg base/kg (12.9 mg salt/kg) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24, and 48 hr:
5 mg base/kg (6.5 mg salt/kg) PO per dose

B.	Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem)4
(1 tab: 20 mg artemether and 120 mg lumefantrine)
Adults: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course:
Day 1: Initial dose and second dose 8 hr later
Days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid

B.	Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem)4
(1 tab: 20 mg artemether and 120 mg
lumefantrine)
5 to <15 kg: 1 tab PO per dose
15 to <25 kg: 2 tabs PO per dose
25 to <35 kg: 3 tabs PO per dose
≥35 kg: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course:
Day 1: Initial dose and second dose 8 hr later
Days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid

C.	Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone)5
(Adult tab: 250 mg atovaquone and 100 mg
proguanil)
4 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
D.	Quinine sulfate6 plus doxycycline,7
tetracycline,7 or clindamycin8
Quinine sulfate: 542 mg base (648 mg salt) PO tid
× 3 days
Doxycycline: 100 mg PO bid × 7 days
Tetracycline: 250 mg PO qid × 7 days
Clindamycin: 20 mg/kg/day PO divided tid × 7
days
E.	Mefloquine9
Dose 1: 684 mg base (750 mg salt) PO
Dose 2 at 6-­12 hr: 456 mg base (500 mg salt) PO

C.	Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone)5
(Adult tab: 250 mg atovaquone and 100 mg
proguanil; peds tab: 62.5 mg atovaquone and
25 mg proguanil)
5 to <8 kg: 2 peds tabs PO qd × 3 days
8 to <10 kg: 3 peds tabs PO qd × 3 days
10 to <20 kg: 1 adult tab PO qd × 3 days
20 to <30 kg: 2 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
30 to <40 kg: 3 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
≥40 kg: 4 adult tabs PO qd × 3 days
D.	Quinine sulfate6 plus doxycycline,7
tetracycline,7 or clindamycin8
Quinine sulfate: 8.3 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/kg)
PO tid × 3 days
Doxycycline: 2.2 mg/kg PO bid × 7 days
Tetracycline: 25 mg/kg/day PO divided qid × 7
days
Clindamycin: 20 mg /kg/day PO divided tid × 7
days
E.	Mefloquine9
Dose 1: 13.7 mg base/kg (15 mg salt/kg) PO
Dose 2 at 6-­12 hr: 9.1 mg base/kg (10 mg salt/
kg) PO

1qd, once a day; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid, four times a day; PO, by mouth; tab(s), tablet(s).
2If an antimalarial is taken for chemoprophylaxis, a different drug should be used for treatment.
3Not to exceed adult dose.
4Artemether-­lumefantrine can be used in second and third trimesters of pregnancy and, if no other options available, in first trimester as well. Not for infants <5 kg or women

breastfeeding infants <5 kg.
5Atovaquone-­proguanil not recommended during pregnancy, in infants <5 kg, or in women breastfeeding infants <5 kg. May be considered if other treatment options not available

or not tolerated, and benefits outweigh risks.
6Quinine available in the United States has 324 mg (salt) per capsule, therefore, two capsules for adult dosing. Pediatric dosing may need compounding pharmacy.
7Doxycycline or tetracycline combined with quinine preferred due to more efficacy data, but not recommended during pregnancy or in children <8 yr old unless no other options and

benefits outweigh risks.
8Clindamycin with quinine preferred option for pregnant women and children <8 yr old.
9Use only if no other options available. Not for use in patients with neuropsychiatric history.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Malaria Treatment Tables. https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/Malaria_Treatment_Table.pdf

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)
Table 334.5  Treatment of Uncomplicated Malaria in
Pregnant Women1,2
SPECIES AND DRUG
SUSCEPTIBILITY
(BASED ON WHERE
ACQUIRED)

RECOMMENDED ADULT
REGIMENS

Chloroquine resistant3
P. falciparum (All malaria-­
endemic regions except
Central America west of
Panama Canal, Haiti, and
Dominican Republic)
P. vivax or P. ovale
(Papua New Guinea and
Indonesia)

Preferred for second and third
trimesters:
Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem)4
(1 tab: 20 mg artemether and 120 mg
lumefantrine)
Adults: 4 tabs PO per dose
Three-­day course:
Day 1: Initial dose and second dose 8
hr later
Days 2 and 3: 1 dose bid
All trimesters: Quinine sulfate plus
clindamycin
Quinine sulfate: 542 mg base (650 mg
salt) PO tid × 3 or 7 days5
Clindamycin: 20 mg/kg/day PO
divided tid × 7 days
If no other options, all trimesters:
Mefloquine
Dose 1: 684 mg base (750 mg salt) PO
Dose 2 at 6-­12 hr: 456 mg base (500
mg salt) PO
AND if P. vivax or P. ovale:
Chloroquine 500 mg salt (300 mg
base) weekly until delivery, then
consider antirelapse treatment (Table
334.3 for options and dosing)
Antirelapse treatment with either
primaquine or tafenoquine
contraindicated during pregnancy

Chloroquine sensitive
P. falciparum (Central
America west of Panama
Canal, Haiti, and
Dominican Republic)
P. vivax or P. ovale (All
malaria-­endemic regions
except Papua New
Guinea and Indonesia)
P. malariae or P. knowlesi

Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen and
generics)
Dose 1: 600 mg base (1,000 mg salt)
PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24,
and 48 hr: 300 mg base (500 mg salt)
PO per dose
OR
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil and
generics)
Dose 1: 620 mg base (800 mg salt) PO
Doses 2-­4 (3 additional doses) at 6, 24,
and 48 hr: 310 mg base (400 mg salt)
PO per dose
Options above for chloroquine-­
resistant malaria parasites
AND if P. vivax or P. ovale:
Chloroquine 500 mg salt (300 mg
base) weekly until delivery, then
consider antirelapse treatment (Table
334.3 for options and dosing)
Antirelapse treatment with either
primaquine or tafenoquine
contraindicated during pregnancy

1bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; PO, by mouth; tab(s), tablet(s).
2If an antimalarial is taken for chemoprophylaxis, a different drug should be used for

treatment.
3Atovaquone-­proguanil not listed due to insufficient data on its safety during

pregnancy but may be considered if other treatment options not available or not
tolerated, and benefits outweigh risks.
4Artemether-­lumefantrine may be considered during first trimester if other treatment
options not available or not tolerated, and benefits outweigh risks.
5Quinine to be given for 3 days for P. falciparum and P. vivax infections, except for
P. falciparum infections acquired in Southeast Asia where 7 days of treatment is
required.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Malaria Treatment Tables. https://ww
w.cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/Malaria_Treatment_Table.pdf

2179

atovaquone-­proguanil, quinine sulfate, or mefloquine (mefloquine only if
the other options are not available) (Table 334.6). If parasite density is >1%,
continue IV artesunate daily up to 6 more days until the parasite density is
<1%. After this, the oral regimen can be completed (Table ­334.6).

Supportive Care for Severe Malaria

It is the malaria-­associated complications that might kill the patient, so
intensive nursing care, preferably in an ICU where possible, is required.
Clinical observations should be made as frequently as possible and should
include monitoring of vital signs, coma score, and urine output. Blood glucose should be monitored every 4 hours, if possible, particularly in unconscious patients.
Severe malarial anemia (SMA) is defined as the presence of P. falciparum parasitemia in an individual with a hemoglobin of <5 g/dL. In
endemic areas, WHO includes a parasitemia cutoff of >10,000 parasites
per microliter for this definition. SMA is the most common severe complication of malaria in children and is the leading cause of anemia leading to
hospital admission in African children. The etiology of SMA is complex,
involving increased destruction and removal of infected and uninfected
RBCs and reduced RBC production due to bone marrow dyserythropoiesis. Timely blood transfusion is critical, and mortality in this condition is
low with timely transfusion. However, SMA is not benign; it contributes
to significant long-­term morbidity, including impaired neurocognitive
function, repeated hospitalizations, and postdischarge mortality.
Cerebral malaria is defined as the presence of coma in a child with P.
falciparum parasitemia and an absence of other reasons for coma. Children with altered mental status who are not in a coma fall into the larger
category of impaired consciousness. Cerebral malaria is most common in
children in areas of midlevel transmission and in adolescents or adults in
areas of very low transmission. It is less frequently seen in areas of very
high transmission. Cerebral malaria often develops after the patient has
been ill for several days but may develop precipitously. Cerebral malaria
has a fatality rate of 15–40% and is associated with long-­term cognitive
impairment in children. Repeated seizures are frequent in children with
cerebral malaria. Hypoglycemia is common, but children with true cerebral malaria fail to arouse from coma even after receiving a dextrose infusion that normalizes their glucose level. Physical findings may include high
fever, seizures, muscular twitching, rhythmic movement of the head or
extremities, contracted or unequal pupils, retinal hemorrhages, hemiplegia, absent or exaggerated deep tendon reflexes, and a positive Babinski
sign. Lumbar puncture reveals increased pressure and mildly increased
cerebrospinal fluid protein, typically with no cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
pleocytosis. and a normal CSF glucose. Studies suggest that funduscopic
findings of malaria retinopathy (retinal hemorrhages, peripheral whitening, macular whitening, vessel changes) are relatively specific for cerebral
malaria, so children with cerebral malaria who do not have malaria retinopathy should be carefully assessed for other causes of coma. However,
they should still be treated for cerebral malaria because a growing body of
evidence suggests that even in these children, P. falciparum is a contributor to their comatose state. Beyond antimalarial medications, treatment of
cerebral malaria is largely supportive and includes evaluation and treatment of seizures and hypoglycemia. A study using MRI to assess children
with cerebral malaria documented that cerebral edema with increased
intracranial pressure is the leading cause of death in children with cerebral malaria, and treatment with mannitol and corticosteroids has not
improved outcomes in these children.
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is best characterized by signs
of acute respiratory distress and deep acidotic breathing. The acidosis
is partly due to impaired tissue perfusion secondary to RBC sequestration and reduced oxygen-­carrying capacity. RDS is a poor prognostic
indicator in severe malaria and in children it appears to be caused by
metabolic acidosis rather than intrinsic pulmonary disease. The kidney is important in acid metabolism and excretion and is believed to
contribute to the acidosis seen in severe malaria. To date, no successful interventions for treatment of metabolic acidosis in children with
severe malaria have been described, and primary therapy of malaria
appears to be the most effective way to address acidosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2180 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 334.6  Treatment of Severe Malaria1–5
SPECIES AND DRUG SUSCEPTIBILITY
(BASED ON WHERE ACQUIRED)
All species, drug susceptibility not relevant for
acute treatment of severe malaria
If P. vivax or P. ovale infections, in addition
to acute treatment listed here, antirelapse
treatment needed (Table 334.3)

RECOMMENDED ADULT REGIMEN

RECOMMENDED PEDIATRIC REGIMEN

IV artesunate: Commercially available. If not in stock or available within 24 hr, contact CDC
Malaria Hotline: (770) 488-7100 or (855) 856-4713 (toll free) Mon–Fri, 9 am–5 pm EST;
(770) 488-7100 after hours, weekends, and holidays.
1 dose = 2.4 mg/kg
IV doses (3 in total) at 0, 12, and 24 hr
PLUS reassessment and follow-­on the following treatment
If IV artesunate not readily available, give oral antimalarials while obtaining IV artesunate.
When IV artesunate arrives, discontinue oral antimalarial and initiate IV treatment. Interim
treatment options (Table 334.2 for dosing):
• Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem) (preferred), or
• Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone), or
• Quinine sulfate, or
• Mefloquine (only if no other options available)
If oral therapy not tolerated, consider administration via nasogastric (NG) tube or after an
antiemetic
Reassessment and follow-­on treatment:
Reassess parasite density at least 4 hr after the third dose
Parasite density ≤1% and patient able to tolerate oral medications: Give a complete follow-­on
oral regimen. Options include (Table 334.2 for dosing):
• Artemether-­lumefantrine (Coartem) (preferred), or
• Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone), or
• Quinine plus doxycycline or, in children <8 yr old and pregnant women, clindamycin, or
• Mefloquine (only if no other options available)
Parasite density >1%: Continue IV artesunate, same dose, qd up to 6 more dys until parasite
density ≤1%. When parasite density ≤1%, give complete follow-­on oral regimen as listed
previously (Table 334.2 for dosing)
Parasite density ≤1% but patient unable to take oral medication: Continue IV artesunate, same
dose, qd up to 6 more days until patient able to take oral therapy

1qd, once a day; IV, intravenous.
2If an antimalarial is taken for chemoprophylaxis, a different drug should be used for treatment.

3Laboratory-­confirmed or suspected malaria cases with ≥1 clinical criteria for severe disease (impaired consciousness/convulsions/coma, severe anemia [hemoglobin <7 mg/dL],

acute kidney injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome, circulatory shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, acidosis, jaundice [plus at least one other sign]); and/or parasite
density ≥5%. Information on how to estimate parasite density available at www.cdc.gov/dpdx.
4Parasite density should be repeated every 12-­24 hr until negative.
5Exchange transfusion no longer recommended based on a systematic review of the literature and analysis of US malaria surveillance data showing no added benefit.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Malaria Treatment Tables. https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/resources/pdf/Malaria_Treatment_Table.pdf

Seizures are a common complication of severe malaria, occurring in
up to 70% of children with severe malaria; subclinical seizures occur in
15–20% of cases. Most of the seizures are associated with cerebral malaria,
but it is important to evaluate for other common causes of seizure such as
hypoglycemia and fever and to treat accordingly. Benzodiazepines are first-­
line therapy for seizures. Diazepam (0.4 mg/kg) can be administered IV or
per rectum; lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) can be administered IV or intraosseously. These doses can be repeated once if seizures do not cease within 5
minutes of the initial dose. Benzodiazepines should not be combined due
to risk of respiratory depression. For persistent seizures, phenobarbital or
phenytoin are the standard medications used. Phenobarbitone is given at
dose of 15-­20 mg/kg, slow IV push) while phenytoin is given at a dose of
18 mg/kg diluted in 100 mL normal saline, infused over 20 minutes. Phenytoin may be preferred for seizure treatment, particularly in hospitals or
clinics where ventilatory support is not available. However, no comparative
trials of the two drugs have been performed. Routine seizure prophylaxis
should not be given in children with rapid resolution of seizures during
their hospital course. There are currently no drugs recommended for seizure prophylaxis in children with severe malaria. Phenobarbital prophylaxis decreased seizure activity but increased mortality in one major study
of children with severe malaria, probably because the respiratory depression associated with phenobarbital may have been exacerbated by benzodiazepine therapy.
Hypoglycemia is a complication of malaria that is more common
in children, pregnant women, and patients receiving quinine therapy.
Patients may have a decreased level of consciousness that can be confused
with cerebral malaria. Any child with impaired consciousness and malaria
should have a glucose level checked, and if glucometers are not immediately available, an empirical bolus of dextrose should be given. Hypoglycemia is associated with increased mortality and neurologic sequelae.
Shock is a rare complication that manifests as hypotension, hypothermia, rapid weak pulse, shallow breathing, pallor, and vascular

collapse. It is most likely caused by bacterial superinfection, because
up to 15% of children in endemic areas with severe malaria may have
concurrent bacteremia. Death may occur within hours. Any child with
severe malaria and hypotension or hypoperfusion should have a blood
culture obtained and should be treated empirically for bacterial sepsis.
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is increasingly being recognized as an
important complication of severe malaria and an independent predictor
of mortality, occurring in >40% of children with severe malaria in one
study of Ugandan children. The WHO 2023 definition of renal impairment in children with severe malaria (creatinine of ≥3.0 mg/dL) uses
almost certainly too high a creatinine cutoff value, as severe AKI associated with increased mortality has been seen in children with much lower
creatinine levels. Ongoing work seeks to use Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria to establish better creatinine values
to define AKI and renal impairment in children with severe malaria.
Although data suggest AKI is related to reduced kidney perfusion, additional studies are needed to evaluate the spectrum of AKI over hospitalization to define the etiology and pathophysiology of AKI in pediatric
severe malaria. In adults, use of acetaminophen has been associated with
decreased AKI, and studies are investigating this possibility in children.
Other urinary tract complications in children include blackwater fever
(or dark urine syndrome), which has reemerged as a clinical problem
in some areas of Africa. The syndrome is thought to be associated in
part with increased use of artemisinin derivatives and is associated with
increased risk of readmission or death.
Prostration is defined as the inability to sit, stand, or eat without
support, in the absence of impaired consciousness. Prostration has
also been associated with increased mortality in some studies, but the
pathophysiology of this process is not well understood.
In children, abnormal bleeding and pulmonary edema are uncommon, though the latter may sometimes be seen after treatment in P.
vivax or P. ovale malaria.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)
Long-­Term Complications of Malaria

Neurocognitive impairment and behavioral and mental health problems occur in children after episodes of cerebral malaria and severe
malarial anemia. Epilepsy also occurs in a subset of children after severe
malaria. The mechanisms leading to brain injury and subsequent neurocognitive complications due to severe malaria are still being investigated.
Clinical predictors of neurocognitive impairment in children with cerebral malaria include duration of coma, number of seizures, acute kidney
injury, and severe malarial anemia. CSF cytokines and metabolites like
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α and kynurenic acid, as well as plasma and
CSF levels of tau, a marker of neuronal injury, are elevated acutely in children with cerebral malaria who subsequently develop cognitive impairment. Additional studies are needed to delineate the mechanisms leading
to neurocognitive complications in severe malaria, particularly in children without overt clinical signs suggestive of brain injury. Interventions
to rehabilitate children with cognitive impairment have provided only
short-­term improvement in specific areas of function, and further studies in this area are needed.
Hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly (HMS) is a chronic complication of P. falciparum malaria in which massive splenomegaly persists
after treatment of acute infection. Major criteria include splenomegaly
(>10 cm), IgM >2 SD above local mean, high levels of antibodies to a
blood-­stage P. falciparum antigen, and a clinical response to an antimalarial drug. HMS occurs exclusively in children in endemic areas with
repeated exposure to malaria and is thought to be caused by an impaired
immune response to P. falciparum antigens. Prolonged antimalarial
prophylaxis (for at least 1 year, typically with chloroquine, quinine, or
mefloquine) is required to treat this syndrome if the child remains in
a malaria-­endemic area. Spleen size gradually regresses on antimalarial
prophylaxis but often increases again if prophylaxis is stopped.

PREVENTION

Malaria prevention consists of reducing exposure to infected mosquitoes and chemoprophylaxis. The most accurate and current information on areas in the world where malaria risk and drug resistance exist

2181

can be obtained by contacting local and state health departments or the
CDC or consulting Health Information for International Travel, which
is published by the U.S. Public Health Service.
Travelers to endemic areas should remain in well-­screened areas
from dusk to dawn, when the risk for transmission is highest. They
should sleep under permethrin-­treated mosquito netting and spray
insecticides indoors at sundown. During the day, travelers should wear
clothing that covers the arms and legs, with trousers tucked into shoes
or boots. Mosquito repellent should be applied to thin clothing and
exposed areas of the skin, with applications repeated as noted on the
repellent instructions, and at least every 4 hours. A child should not
be taken outside from dusk to dawn, but if at risk for exposure, a solution with 25–35% N,N-­diethyltoluamide (DEET) (not >40%) should
be applied to exposed areas, except for the eyes, mouth, or hands.
Hands are excluded because they are often placed in the mouth. DEET
should then be washed off as soon as the child comes back inside. The
American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that DEET solutions be
avoided in children <2 months old. Adverse reactions to DEET include
rashes, toxic encephalopathy, and seizures, but these reactions occur
almost exclusively with inappropriate application of high concentrations of DEET. Picaridin is an alternative and sometimes better tolerated repellent. Even with these precautions, a child should be taken to
a physician immediately if the child develops illness when traveling to
a malarious area.
Chemoprophylaxis is necessary for all visitors to and residents of
the tropics who have not lived there since infancy, including children
of all ages (Tables 334.7 and 334.8). Healthcare providers should consult the latest information on resistance patterns before prescribing
prophylaxis for their patients. Chloroquine is given in the few remaining areas of the world free of chloroquine-­resistant malaria strains. In
areas where chloroquine-­resistant P. falciparum exists, atovaquone-­
proguanil, mefloquine, or doxycycline may be given as chemoprophylaxis. Atovaquone-­proguanil is generally recommended for shorter
trips (up to 2 weeks) because it must be taken daily. Pediatric tablets
are available and are generally well tolerated, although the taste is

Table 334.7  Drugs Used in the Prophylaxis of Malaria
DRUG

USAGE

ADULT DOSE

PEDIATRIC DOSE

COMMENTS

Atovaquone-­
proguanil

Prophylaxis in
all areas

Adult tablets contain
250 mg atovaquone
and 100 mg proguanil
hydrochloride. 1 adult
tablet orally, daily

Pediatric tablets contain 62.5
mg atovaquone and 25 mg
proguanil hydrochloride.
5-­8 kg: ½ pediatric tablet daily
>8-­10 kg: ¾ pediatric tablet
daily
>10-­20 kg: 1 pediatric tablet
daily
>20-­30 kg: 2 pediatric tablets
daily
>30-­40 kg: 3 pediatric tablets
daily
>40 kg: 1 adult tablet daily

Begin 1-­2 days before travel to malarious
areas. Take daily at the same time each
day while in the malarious area and
for 7 days after leaving such areas.
Contraindicated in people with severe
renal impairment (creatinine clearance
<30 mL/min). Atovaquone-­proguanil
should be taken with food or a milky
drink. Not recommended for prophylaxis
for children weighing <5 kg, pregnant
women, and women breastfeeding
infants weighing <5 kg. Partial tablet
doses may need to be prepared by a
pharmacist and dispensed in individual
capsules

Chloroquine

Prophylaxis
300 mg base (500 mg
only in
salt) orally, once/wk
areas with
chloroquine-­
sensitive
malaria

5 mg/kg base (8.3 mg/kg
salt) orally, once/wk, up to
maximum adult dose of 300
mg base

Begin 1-­2 wk before travel to malarious
areas. Take weekly on the same day of
the week while in the malarious area and
for 4 wk after leaving such areas. May
exacerbate psoriasis

Doxycycline

Prophylaxis in
all areas

≥8 yr of age: 2.2 mg/kg up to
adult dose of 100 mg/day

Begin 1-­2 days before travel to malarious
areas. Take daily at the same time
each day while in the malarious area
and for 4 wk after leaving such areas.
Contraindicated in children <8 yr of age
and pregnant women

100 mg orally, daily

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2182 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 334.7  Drugs Used in the Prophylaxis of Malaria—cont’d
DRUG

USAGE

ADULT DOSE

PEDIATRIC DOSE

COMMENTS

Hydroxychloroquine

An alternative 310 mg base (400 mg
to
salt) orally, once/wk
chloroquine
for
prophylaxis
only in
areas with
chloroquine-­
sensitive
malaria

5 mg/kg base (6.5 mg/kg
salt) orally, once/wk, up to a
maximum adult dose of 310
mg base

Begin 1-­2 wk before travel to malarious
areas. Take weekly on the same day of
the week while in the malarious area and
for 4 wk after leaving such areas

Mefloquine

Prophylaxis in
areas with
mefloquine-­
sensitive
malaria

228 mg base (250 mg
salt) orally, once/wk

≤9 kg: 4.6 mg/kg base (5 mg/kg
salt) orally, once/wk
>9-­19 kg: ¼ tablet once/wk
>19-­30 kg: ½ tablet once/wk
>30-­45 kg: ¾ tablet once/wk
>45 kg: 1 tablet once/wk

Begin ≥2 wk before travel to malarious
areas. Take weekly on the same day of
the week while in the malarious area
and for 4 wk after leaving such areas.
Contraindicated in people allergic to
mefloquine or related compounds
(quinine, quinidine) and in people with
active depression, a recent history of
depression, generalized anxiety disorder,
psychosis, schizophrenia, other major
psychiatric disorders, or seizures. Use
with caution in people with psychiatric
disturbances or a previous history
of depression. Not recommended
for people with cardiac conduction
abnormalities

Primaquine1

Prophylaxis
for short-­
duration
travel to
areas with
principally P.
vivax

30 mg base (52.6 mg
salt) orally, daily

0.5 mg/kg base (0.8 mg/kg salt)
up to adult dose orally, daily

Begin 1-­2 days before travel to malarious
areas. Take daily at the same time each
day while in the malarious area and for 7
days after leaving such areas

Presumptive
antirelapse
therapy
(PART or
terminal
prophylaxis)
to decrease
the risk for
relapses of P.
vivax and P.
ovale

30 mg base (52.6 mg
salt) orally, daily

0.5 mg/kg base (0.8 mg/kg salt)
up to adult dose orally, daily

PART indicated for people with prolonged
exposure to P. vivax, P. ovale, or both:
daily for 14 days after departure from the
malarious area
Contraindicated in people with G6PD
deficiency. Also contraindicated during
pregnancy and lactation, unless the
infant being breastfed has a documented
normal G6PD level

Prophylaxis in
all areas

200 mg orally

Not indicated in children <16
yr old

Begin taking daily for 3 days before travel
to malarious areas. Then, take weekly
while at the malarious area, and for 1 wk
after leaving the malarious area

Presumptive
antirelapse
therapy
(PART or
terminal
prophylaxis)
to decrease
the risk for
relapses of P.
vivax and P.
ovale

300 mg orally once

300 mg orally once for children
≥16 yr old

PART indicated for people who had
prolonged exposure to P. vivax, P. ovale,
or both: Administered as a single dose
Contraindicated in people with G6PD
deficiency. Also contraindicated during
pregnancy and lactation unless the infant
being breastfed has a documented
normal G6PD level

Tafenoquine1

1All people who take primaquine or tafenoquine should have a documented normal G6PD level before starting the medication.

PART, presumptive antirelapse therapy; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase.
From Tan KR, Arguin PM: Malaria. In Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Yellow Book 2020: Health Information for International Travel. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2017. Table 4.10. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2020/travel-­related-­infectious-­diseases/malaria#5217

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 334 u Malaria (Plasmodium)

2183

Table 334.8  Considerations When Choosing a Drug for Malaria Prophylaxis
DRUG

REASONS TO CONSIDER USE OF THIS DRUG

REASONS TO CONSIDER AVOIDING USE OF THIS DRUG

Atovaquone-­proguanil

• Good for last-­minute travelers because the drug
is started 1-­2 days before travel
• Some people prefer to take a daily medicine
• Good choice for shorter trips because the traveler
takes the medicine for only 7 days after traveling
rather than 4 wk.
• Well tolerated; side effects uncommon
• Pediatric tablets are available and may be more
convenient

• Cannot be used by women who are pregnant or
breastfeeding a child that weighs <5 kg
• Cannot be taken by people with severe renal impairment
• Tends to be more expensive than some of the other options
(especially for long trips)
• Some people (including children) would rather not take a
medicine every day

Chloroquine

• Some people would rather take medicine weekly
• Good choice for long trips because it is taken
only weekly
• Some people are already taking
hydroxychloroquine chronically for rheumatologic
conditions; in those instances, they may not have
to take an additional medicine
• Can be used in all trimesters of pregnancy

• Cannot be used in areas with chloroquine or mefloquine
resistance
• May exacerbate psoriasis
• Some people would rather not take a weekly medication
• For short trips, some people would rather not take
medication for 4 wk after travel
• Not a good choice for last-­minute travelers, because drug
needs to be started 1-­2 wk before travel

Doxycycline

• Some people prefer to take a daily medicine
• Good for last-­minute travelers because the drug
is started 1-­2 days before travel
• Tends to be the least expensive antimalarial
• People who are already taking doxycycline
chronically to prevent acne do not have to take an
additional medicine
• Doxycycline also can prevent some additional
infections (such as rickettsial infections and
leptospirosis), so it may be preferred by people
planning to hike, camp, and swim in fresh water

• Cannot be used by pregnant women and children age <8 yr
• Some people would rather not take a medicine every day
• For short trips, some people would rather not take
medication for 4 wk after travel
• Women prone to getting vaginal yeast infections when taking
antibiotics may prefer taking a different medicine
• People may want to avoid the increased risk of sun sensitivity
• Some people are concerned about the potential of getting
an upset stomach from doxycycline

Mefloquine

• Some people would rather take medicine weekly
• Good choice for long trips because it is taken
only weekly
• Can be used in all trimesters of pregnancy

• Cannot be used in areas with mefloquine resistance
• Cannot be used in patients with certain psychiatric conditions
• Cannot be used in patients with a seizure disorder
• Not recommended for people with cardiac conduction
abnormalities
• Not a good choice for last-­minute travelers because drug
needs to be started ≥2 wk before travel
• Some people would rather not take a weekly medication
• For short trips, some people would rather not take
medication for 4 wk after travel

Primaquine

• It is the most effective medicine for preventing P.
vivax, so it is a good choice for travel to places
with >90% P. vivax
• Good choice for shorter trips because you
only have to take the medicine for 7 days after
traveling rather than 4 wk
• Good for last-­minute travelers because the drug
is started 1-­2 days before travel
• Some people prefer to take a daily medicine

• Cannot be used in patients with G6PD deficiency
• Cannot be used in patients who have not been tested for
G6PD deficiency
• There are costs and delays associated with getting a G6PD
test; however, it only has to be done once. Once a normal
G6PD level is verified and documented, the test does not
have to be repeated the next time primaquine is considered
• Cannot be used by pregnant women
• Cannot be used by women who are breastfeeding, unless the
infant has also been tested for G6PD deficiency
• Some people (including children) would rather not take a
medicine every day
• Some people are concerned about the potential of getting
an upset stomach from primaquine

Tafenoquine

• One of the most effective drugs for prevention
of P. vivax malaria but also prevents P. falciparum
• Good choice for shorter trips because the traveler
takes the medicine once, 1 wk after traveling
rather than 4 wk
• Good for last-­minute travelers because the drug
is started 3 days before travel

• Cannot be used in people with G6PD deficiency
• Cannot be used in patients who have not been tested for
G6PD deficiency
• There are costs and delays associated with getting a G6PD
test; however, it only has to be done once. Once a normal
G6PD level is verified and documented, the test does not
have to be repeated the next time tafenoquine or primaquine
is considered
• Cannot be used by children
• Cannot be used by pregnant women
• Cannot be used by women who are breastfeeding
• Not recommended in those with psychotic disorders

From Tan KR, Arguin PM: Malaria. In Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Yellow Book 2020: Health Information for International Travel. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2017. Table 4.9. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2020/travel-­related-­infectious-­diseases/malaria#5217

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2184 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
sometimes unpleasant to very young children. For longer trips, mefloquine is preferred, because it is given only once a week. Mefloquine
does not have a pediatric formulation and has an unpleasant taste that
usually requires that the cut tablet be disguised in another food, such
as chocolate syrup. Mefloquine should not be given to children if they
have a known hypersensitivity to mefloquine, are receiving cardiotropic drugs, have a history of convulsive or certain psychiatric disorders,
or travel to an area where mefloquine resistance exists (the borders of
Thailand with Myanmar and Cambodia, western provinces of Cambodia, and eastern states of Myanmar). Atovaquone-­proguanil is started
1-­2 days before travel, and mefloquine is started 2 weeks before travel.
It is important that these doses are given, both to allow therapeutic
levels of the drugs to be achieved and to be sure that the drugs are tolerated. Doxycycline is an alternative for children >8 years old. It must be
given daily and should be given with food. Side effects of doxycycline
include photosensitivity and vaginal yeast infections. Primaquine is a
daily prophylaxis option for children who cannot tolerate any of the
other options, but it should be provided in consultation with a travel
medicine specialist if needed, and all children should be checked for
glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency before prescribing this medication, because it is contraindicated in children
with G6PD deficiency. Provision of medication can be considered in
individuals who refuse to take prophylaxis or will be in very remote
areas without accessible medical care. Provision of medication for self-­
treatment of malaria should be done in consultation with a travel medicine specialist, and the medication provided should be different than
that used for prophylaxis.
A number of other efforts are currently underway to prevent malaria
in malaria-­endemic countries. Some have been highly successful, leading to a significant decrease in malaria incidence in many countries in
Africa, Asia, and South America in the past decade. These interventions
include the use of insecticide-­treated bed nets (which have decreased
all-­cause mortality in children <5 years old in several highly malaria-­
endemic areas by approximately 20%), indoor residual spraying with
long-­lasting insecticides, and the use of artemisinin-­combination
therapy for first-­line malaria treatment.
Intermittent prevention treatment is successfully used in many
African countries for seasonal chemoprevention treatment in areas
with seasonal malaria transmission. Sulfadoxine-­pyrimethamine
given to infants at the second and third doses of the diphtheria, tetanus toxoid, and pertussis vaccine is safe and relatively effective. Intermittent prevention treatment has also been given to pregnant women;
three doses of sulfadoxine-­pyrimethamine have resulted in a reduction
of low birthweight infants. Treatment of African children in malaria-­
endemic areas who have severe anemia with dihydroartemisinin-­
piperaquine reduces their risk of readmission and death, and this
intervention is under consideration for standard treatment of severe
anemia in children in several African countries.
The first malaria vaccine to have any degree of efficacy is the RTS,S
vaccine, which is based on the circumsporozoite protein of P. falciparum. The RTS,S vaccine was approved by WHO in 2021 for use in
children <2 years of age in malaria-­endemic regions, in combination with other malaria prevention strategies. WHO approval was
based on the results of phase IV studies showing a 30% reduction in
severe malaria in children who received the four-­dose vaccine series.
WHO also approved the R21/Matrix-M vaccine in 2023 for use in
children <2 years of age in malaria-endemic regions. Numerous
other vaccines are also in current clinical trials. There is currently
no vaccine with sufficient efficacy to be considered for prevention of
malaria in travelers. A trial of monoclonal antibodies showed short-­
term efficacy in prevention of malaria, and this intervention could
potentially be useful in malaria prevention in travelers and the military if efficacy is reproduced in larger studies. Trials of monoclonal
antibodies for prevention of seasonal malaria in African children
are also ongoing. If monoclonal antibodies can be produced at low
cost, they may have a role in prevention in areas of seasonal malaria
transmission.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 335

Babesiosis (Babesia)
Peter J. Krause
Babesiosis is a malaria-­like disease caused by intraerythrocytic protozoa that are transmitted by hard body (ixodid) ticks. The clinical
manifestations of babesiosis range from subclinical illness to fulminant
disease resulting in death.

ETIOLOGY

More than 100 species of Babesia infect a wide variety of wild and
domestic animals throughout the world. Only a few of these species
have been reported to infect humans, including Babesia crassa-­like
agent, Babesia divergens, Babesia duncani, Babesia microti, Babesia
motosi, and Babesia venatorum.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Babesia organisms are transmitted to humans from vertebrate reservoir hosts by the Ixodes ricinus family of ticks. B. microti is the most
common cause of babesiosis in humans. The primary reservoir for B.
microti in the United States is the white-­footed mouse, Peromyscus leucopus, and the primary vector is Ixodes scapularis, the black-­legged tick.
I. scapularis ticks also transmit the causative agents of Lyme disease,
human granulocytic anaplasmosis, Borrelia mayonii, Borrelia miyamotoi infection, Ehrlichia muris eauclairensis, and Powassan virus encephalitis and may simultaneously transmit two or more microorganisms.
White-­tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) serve as the host on which
adult ticks most abundantly feed but are incompetent reservoirs of B.
microti. Babesiosis may be transmitted through blood transfusion, and
B. microti has been one of the most frequently reported transfusion-­
transmitted microbial agents in the United States. Rarely, babesiosis is
acquired by transplacental transmission or organ transplantation.
In the United States, human B. microti infection is endemic in the
Northeast and Upper Midwest with more than 2,000 reported cases a
year, although the actual number of cases is probably much greater (Fig.
335.1). Most cases occur in June, July, and August. B. duncani infects
humans along the Pacific coast and is reported sporadically, with less than
50 cases having been described to date. B. divergens–like infections have
been described in Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, and Washington State.
In Europe, human babesiosis caused by B. divergens, B. microti, and B.
venatorum occurs sporadically. In Asia, B. venatorum and Babesia crassa–
like agent are endemic in northeastern China. Cases of B. microti infection are endemic in southwestern China and also have been described in
Taiwan and Japan. Infection due to Babesia motosi has been reported in
Korea. Human babesiosis also has been documented in Africa, Australia,
Canada, Cuba, Egypt, India, Mexico, South America, and Turkey.
In certain sites and in certain years of high transmission, babesiosis
constitutes a significant public health burden. On Nantucket Island,
case rates as high as 280 per 100,000 population have been recorded,
placing the community burden of disease in a category with gonorrhea as “moderately common.” Comparable incidence rates have been
described elsewhere on the southern New England coast.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of human babesiosis is not well understood. Lysis of
infected erythrocytes with resultant anemia and the excessive production of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor and
interleukin-­1 may account for most of the clinical manifestations and
complications of the disease. Cytoadherence of Babesia-­infected red
blood cells to vascular epithelium with subsequent vascular obstruction and tissue anoxia might also cause complications. The spleen has
an important role in clearing parasitemia, as do T and B cells, macrophages, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, cytokines, antibody, and
complement.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 335 u Babesiosis (Babesia) 2185

Fig. 335.1 Human babesiosis emerging in areas en-

Human cases reported
2011–2013
N

Key:
Lyme disease
Lyme disease and babesiosis

0

250

500 km

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical severity of babesiosis ranges from subclinical infection
to fulminant disease and death. In clinically apparent cases, symptoms of babesiosis begin after an incubation period of 1-­9 weeks from
the beginning of tick feeding or 1 week to 6 months after transfusion.
Typical symptoms in moderate to severe infection include intermittent
fever to as high as 40°C (104°F) accompanied by any combination of
chills, sweats, headache, and myalgias. Less common are arthralgias, sore
throat, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, emotional lability, hyperesthesia, conjunctival injection, photophobia, weight loss, and nonproductive
cough. The findings on physical examination generally are minimal,
often consisting only of fever. Splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, or both are
noted occasionally, but rash is seldom reported. Abnormal laboratory
findings include moderately severe hemolytic anemia, elevated reticulocyte count, thrombocytopenia, proteinuria, and elevated bilirubin,
BUN, and creatinine levels. The leukocyte count is normal to slightly
decreased, often with neutropenia. Complications include respiratory
failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, congestive heart failure,
renal failure, liver failure, coma, and death. Babesiosis symptoms usually last for 1-­2 weeks, although prolonged recovery of over 1 year may
occur in highly immunocompromised hosts who experience relapsing
infection despite multiple courses of antibabesial therapy. Such patients
include those with cancer and asplenia, those receiving immunosuppressive therapy, and those with HIV/AIDS. In one study, more than 20% of
these patients died, while the remainder were cured after an average of 3
months (range: 1-­24 months) of antibabesial therapy.
Risk factors for severe disease include aging, neonatal prematurity,
anatomic or functional asplenia, malignancy, HIV/AIDS, immunosuppressive drugs, acquisition of infection through blood transfusion,
or organ transplantation. Concurrent babesiosis and Lyme disease
has been reported in 3–11% of patients experiencing Lyme disease,
depending on location in the United States. Such co-­infection results
in more severe Lyme disease illness. Moderate to severe babesiosis may
occur in children, but infection generally is less severe than in adults.
About half of infected children are asymptomatic or experience minimal symptoms. Neonates may develop severe illness and usually are
infected from blood transfusion.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of B. microti infection in human hosts is confirmed by microscopic demonstration of the organism using Giemsa-­stained thin blood
films. Parasitemia may be exceedingly low, especially early in the course
of illness. Thick blood smears may be examined, but the organisms may
be mistaken for stain precipitate or iron inclusion bodies. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) is a sensitive and specific test for detection of
Babesia DNA and can be used in addition to or instead of blood smear

demic for Lyme disease. This U.S. map is based on data
obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that recorded the names of counties that reported cases of Lyme disease and/or babesiosis from 2011
to 2013. Counties with ≥3 cases of Lyme disease but
<3 cases of babesiosis are depicted in green. Counties
with ≥3 cases of Lyme disease and ≥3 cases of babesiosis are depicted in gray. No county reported ≥3 cases
of babesiosis but <3 cases of Lyme disease. (Adapted
from Diuk-­Wasser M, Vannier E, Krause PJ. Coinfection
by Ixodes tick-­borne pathogens: ecological, epidemiological, and clinical consequences. Trends Parasitol.
2016;32:30–42.)

to confirm the diagnosis. Serologic testing can be useful in supporting
the diagnosis of Babesia infection. The indirect immunofluorescence
serologic assay for both IgG and IgM antibodies is sensitive and specific, although it may reflect past infection rather than acute disease.
The diagnosis of babesiosis is most reliably made in patients who have
lived or traveled in an area where babesiosis is endemic, who experience viral infection–like symptoms, and who have identifiable parasites
on blood smear or amplifiable Babesia DNA in blood. The diagnosis of
active babesial infection based on seropositivity alone is suspect.

TREATMENT

The combination of clindamycin (7-­
10 mg/kg given intravenously
[IV] or orally [PO] every 6-­8 hr, up to maximum of 600 mg/dose)
and quinine sulfate (8 mg/kg PO every 8 hr, up to maximum of
650 mg/dose) for 7-­10 days was the first effective therapeutic combination for the treatment of babesiosis; however, adverse reactions associated with this regimen are common, especially tinnitus and abdominal
distress. The combination of atovaquone (20 mg/kg PO every 12 hr, up
to maximum of 750 mg/dose) and azithromycin (10 mg/kg/day PO
once on day 1, up to maximum of 500 mg/dose, and 5 mg/kg once daily
thereafter, up to maximum of 250 mg/dose) for 7-­10 days is as effective as clindamycin and quinine but has far fewer adverse effects. Atovaquone with azithromycin has been used successfully to treat babesiosis
in infants and should be used initially in all children experiencing babesiosis. Clindamycin with quinine is an alternative choice. Treatment failure with atovaquone-­azithromycin and clindamycin-­quinine may occur
in highly immunocompromised hosts. Consultation with an infectious
diseases expert is recommended in these cases. Exchange blood transfusion can decrease parasitemia rapidly and remove toxic by-­products of
infection. Partial or complete exchange transfusion is recommended for
children with high-­grade parasitemia (>10%), severe anemia (hemoglobin <10 g/dL), or severe pulmonary, renal, or hepatic compromise.

PROGNOSIS

Moderate to severe disease is frequently observed in some highly
endemic areas but mostly in adults. The babesiosis case fatality rate
was estimated at 5% in a retrospective study of 136 New York cases but
may be as high as 21% in immunocompromised hosts and those who
acquire babesiosis through blood transfusion. Clearance of infection is
sometimes delayed, with low-­level asymptomatic parasitemia persisting for as long as 26 months after symptoms have resolved, or with
relapsing symptomatic disease in immunocompromised hosts.

PREVENTION

Prevention of babesiosis can be accomplished by avoiding areas where
ticks, deer, and mice are known to thrive. Use of clothing that covers the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2186 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
lower part of the body and that is sprayed or impregnated with diethyltoluamide (DEET), dimethyl phthalate, or permethrin (Permanone)
is recommended for those who travel in the foliage of endemic areas.
DEET can be applied directly to the skin. A search for ticks should be
carried out and the ticks removed using tweezers. Prospective blood
donors with a history of babesiosis are excluded from giving blood to
prevent transfusion-­related cases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 336

Toxoplasmosis
(Toxoplasma gondii)
Rima McLeod and Kenneth M. Boyer
Toxoplasma gondii, an obligate, intracellular, apicomplexan protozoan,
is acquired perorally, transplacentally, or rarely parenterally in laboratory accidents, transfusions, or from a transplanted organ. In immunologically normal children, acute acquired infection most often is
asymptomatic or unrecognized but may cause lymphadenopathy or
affect almost any organ. Once acquired, latent encysted organisms persist in the host throughout life. In immunocompromised persons, initial acquisition or recrudescence of latent organisms can cause signs
or symptoms related to the central nervous system (CNS) or result in
systemic disease, as in bone marrow transplant recipients. If untreated,
congenital infection causes disease that manifests either perinatally or
later in life, most frequently chorioretinitis and CNS lesions. Other
manifestations include intrauterine growth restriction, prematurity,
cognitive and motor deficits, fever, lymphadenopathy, rash, hearing
loss, pneumonitis, hepatitis, thrombocytopenia, and cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) inflammatory changes. Unrecognized congenital toxoplasmosis in infants with HIV infection may be fulminant.

ETIOLOGY

T. gondii is a coccidian protozoan that multiplies only in living cells. It is
descended from an ancient, free-­living, single-­celled extracellular parasite
called Colpodella, which shares some ultrastructural features with T. gondii
(Fig. 336.1A). Tachyzoites are the pathogenic form of the parasite in active
infections and are oval or crescent-­like, measuring 2-­4 × 4-­7 μm (see Fig.
336.1B). Tissue cysts are 10-­100 μm in diameter, may contain thousands
of latent parasites called bradyzoites (see Fig. 336.1C), and will remain in
tissues, especially the CNS and skeletal and heart muscle, for the life of the
host. Toxoplasma can multiply in all tissues of mammals and birds. There
is also a dormant “stressed persister” form of the parasite that arrests and
does not progress through the G1 phase of the cell cycle, unable to pass a
checkpoint into the tachyzoite replicative phase of the cell cycle. In recent
years critical transcription factors that can distinguish Toxoplasma bradyzoites from tachyzoites and merozoites have been identified.
Oocysts are another form of the parasite and are formed in the cat intestine (see Fig. 336.1D). Newly infected, nonimmune cats and other Felidae
species are the definitive hosts of T. gondii and represent the location where
genetic exchange occurs during a sexual cycle. Toxoplasma organisms are
transmitted to cats when the cat ingests infected meat containing encysted
bradyzoites or ingests oocysts containing sporozoites excreted by other
recently infected cats. The parasites then multiply through schizogonic
merozoite and other gametogonic cycles in the distal ileal epithelium of
the cat intestine. Intestinal delta-­6-­desaturase activity and linoleic acid
determine the host range of oocyst formation in cats. Genes in the parasite
that promote fusion of the female and male gamete to form a zygote and
are critical for conception have been identified. Oocysts containing two

sporocysts are excreted, and under the proper temperature and moisture
conditions each sporocyst matures into four sporozoites. For approximately 2 weeks the cat excretes 105-­107 oocysts daily, which may retain
their viability for >1 year in a suitable environment. Oocysts sporulate 1-­5
days after excretion and are then infectious. They are killed by drying or
boiling but are resistant to bleach. Oocysts have been isolated from soil
and sand frequented by cats, and outbreaks associated with contaminated
food and water have been reported. Oocysts and tissue cysts are sources of
animal and human infections (see Fig. 336.1D).
There are genetically distinct types of T. gondii that differ in virulence for mice, form different numbers of cysts in the brain of outbred
mice, and cause different clinical manifestations for humans. In the
United States, there are four predominant clonal lineages called types
I, II, III, and IV (haplogroup XII) in addition to atypical, recombinant
types. There is one predominant clonal type (type II) in France, Austria, and Poland, and nonarchetypal parasites are prevalent in Brazil,
Guyana, French Guiana, and Central America. Hypervirulent parasites
containing a single stranded RNA virus appear to cause epidemics of
disease in Guiana and Victoria Canada.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Toxoplasma infection is ubiquitous in animals and is one of the most common latent infections of humans throughout the world, infecting and persisting in approximately 2 billion people. Prevalence varies considerably
among people and animals in different geographic areas. In different areas
of the world, approximately 3–35% of pork, 7–60% of lamb, and 0–9% of
beef contain T. gondii organisms. Significant antibody titers are detected
in 50–80% of residents of some localities, such as France, Brazil, and Central America, and in <5% of populations in other areas. The current overall prevalence estimate in the United States is 10%, but prevalence varies
among different demographic groups and in different geographic locations. For example, in a study of pregnant women in an Amish community
in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, prevalence was 50%. There appears
to be a higher prevalence of infection in some warmer, more humid climates. Non–type II parasites are more common in mothers of congenitally
infected infants in warm, moist southern climates, in rural areas, in those
with lower socioeconomic status and with Hispanic ethnicity in the United
States. Non–type II parasites are more often associated with prematurity
and severe congenital infection in the United States.
Human infection in older children and adults is usually acquired orally
by eating undercooked or raw meat that contains cysts or food or other
material contaminated with oocysts from acutely infected cats. Fruits and
vegetables that have not been properly washed may carry oocysts, consistent with the high overall prevalence of Toxoplasma oocysts in the soil
and water in many regions of the globe. Freezing meat to −20°C (−4°F)
or heating meat to 66°C (150.8°F) renders the tissue cysts noninfectious.
Outbreaks of acute acquired infection have occurred in families, at social
gatherings, and in restaurants where people have consumed the same
infected food or water. It was previously thought that T. gondii could not
be transmitted from person to person except for transplacental infection
from mother to fetus and, rarely, by organ transplantation or transfusion.
However, there is now increasing evidence of the ability of both humans
and animals to pass T. gondii from male to female via sperm.
Seronegative transplant recipients who receive an organ, bone
marrow, or stem cells from seropositive donors have experienced
life-­
threatening illness requiring immediate therapy. Seropositive
recipients who receive an infected donor organ may have increased
serologic titers without recognized, associated disease. Laboratory
accidents have resulted in infections, including fatalities.
Transmission to the fetus usually follows acquisition of primary
infection by an immunologically normal pregnant woman during gestation. Congenital transmission from mothers infected before pregnancy is extremely rare except for immunocompromised women who
are chronically infected. The estimated incidence of congenital infection in the United States ranges from 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 8,000 live births.
An estimated 15 million people are living with congenital toxoplasmosis worldwide. The incidence of infection among pregnant women
depends on the general risk for infection in the specific locale and the
proportion of the population that has not been infected previously.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 336 u Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii)

2187

Apical end
Conoid

Micronemes
Rhoptries
Golgi body
Apicoplast
Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum

Mitochondria

Dense
granules

A

B
Prevent infection or reduce
manifestations in the fetus
• Prevent infection of mother.
• Identify women of risk by
serologic testing.
• Treat acutely infected mother
during pregnancy to reduce
(by 60%) transmission.
• Identify infected fetus
by ultrasound and
amniocentesis.
• Treat fetus in utero
to reduce severity
of disease.

C
Laboratory
accident

Oocyst
Cyst
Tachyzoite

Blood or leukocyte
transfusion

Organ
transplantation

Prevent infection via blood
transfusion or organ
transplantation
• Do not use blood products and
organs from seropositive
donors for seronegative
recipients.

Tachyzoite

Tachyzoite

Cyst

Prevent infection with oocysts
excreted by cats

Tachyzoite

• Wash fruits and vegetables
before consumption.
• Prevent access of flies,
cockroaches, etc. to food.
• Avoid contact with materials that
are potentially contaminated with
cat feces, e.g. cat litter boxes, or
wear gloves when handling such
materials or when gardening or
playing with children in a
sandbox.
• Disinfect cat litter box for 5
min with nearly boiling water.

Prevent infection from
meat, eggs and milk
• Cook meat to “well done,”
smoke it, or cure it in brine.
• Do not touch mucous
membranes of mouth or eyes
while handling raw meat.
• Wash hands thoroughly after
handling meat.
• Wash kitchen surfaces that
come in contact with raw meat.
• Cook eggs. Do not drink
unpasteurized milk.
Oocyst

Milk

Cyst

Oocyst

D

Cyst

Fig. 336.1 The parasite: Toxoplasma ancient ancestor, ultrastructure, and life cycle stages affecting humans. A, Colpodella vorax, an ancient pro-

genitor to the apicomplexans. B, Ultrastructure of T. gondii tachyzoite. C, Light micrographs of, top to bottom, tachyzoite, bradyzoite, and sporozoite stages of T. gondii. D, Life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii and prevention of toxoplasmosis by interruption of transmission to humans. N, nucleus;
PBck, prey being ingested; aF, anterior flagellum; pF, posterior flagellum; pFV, posterior food vacuole. (A from Brugerolle G. Colpodella vorax:
Ultrastructure, predation, life-­cycle, mitosis, and phylogenetic relationships. Eur J Protistol. 2002;38[2]:113–125; B from Wheeler K. Characterization
of Toxoplasma gondii dense granule protein 1: Genetic, functional, and mechanistic analyses (Undergraduate Honors thesis), Kelsey Wheeler; C,
bottom panel, from Dubey JP, Miller N, Frenkel JK. The Toxoplasma gondii oocyst from cat feces. J Exp Med. 1970;132[4]:636–662.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2188 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
PATHOGENESIS

T. gondii is acquired by children and adults from ingesting food that
contains cysts or that is contaminated with oocysts from acutely
infected cats. Oocysts also may be transported to food by flies and
cockroaches and may be carried to people on the fur of dogs. When the
organism is ingested, bradyzoites are released from cysts or sporozoites
are produced from oocysts. The organisms enter gastrointestinal (GI)
cells, where they multiply, rupture cells, infect contiguous cells, enter
the lymphatics and blood, and disseminate lymphohematogenously
throughout the body. Tachyzoites proliferate, producing necrotic
foci surrounded by a cellular reaction. With development of a normal
immune response that is both humoral and cell mediated, tachyzoites disappear from tissues. In immunocompromised individuals and
also in some apparently immunocompetent people, acute infection
progresses and may cause pneumonitis, myocarditis, or encephalitis,
sometimes resulting in lethal disease.
Alterations of T-­lymphocyte populations during acute T. gondii infection are common and include lymphocytosis, increased CD8+ T-­cell
count, and decreased CD4+/CD8+ ratio. Characteristic histopathologic
changes in lymph nodes during acute infection include (1) reactive follicular hyperplasia with irregular clusters of epithelioid histiocytes that
encroach on and blur margins of germinal centers, and (2) focal distention
of sinuses with monocytoid cells. Depletion of CD4+ T cells in patients
with AIDS predisposes to severe manifestations of toxoplasmosis.
Cysts form as early as 7 days after infection and remain in the host
for life. During latent infection they produce little or no inflammatory
response but can cause recrudescent disease in immunocompromised
persons. Recrudescent chorioretinitis can occur in children and
adults with postnatally acquired infection and in older children and
adults with congenitally acquired infection. Host and parasite genetics
influence outcomes.
When a mother acquires infection during gestation, organisms
may disseminate hematogenously to the placenta. Infection may be

transmitted to the fetus transplacentally or to the infant during vaginal
delivery. Of untreated maternal infections acquired in the first trimester, approximately 17% of fetuses are infected, usually with severe disease. Of untreated maternal infection acquired in the third trimester,
approximately 65% of fetuses are infected, usually with disease that is
milder and sometimes inapparent at birth (Fig. 336.2). These different
rates of transmission and outcomes are most likely related to placental
blood flow, virulence, inoculum of T. gondii, and immunologic capacity of the mother and fetus to limit parasitemia.
Examination of the placenta of infected newborns may reveal
chronic inflammation and cysts. Tachyzoites can be seen with Wright
or Giemsa stains but are best demonstrated with the immunoperoxidase technique. Tissue cysts stain well with periodic acid–Schiff and
silver stains as well as with the immunoperoxidase technique. Gross
or microscopic areas of necrosis may be present in many tissues, especially the CNS, choroid and retina, heart, lungs, skeletal muscle, liver,
and spleen. Areas of calcification occur in the brain.
Almost all congenitally infected individuals who are not treated
develop signs or symptoms of infection by adolescence. Some severely
affected infants with congenital infection appear to have Toxoplasma
antigen–specific cell-­
mediated hyporesponsiveness, which may be
important in the pathogenesis of disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Manifestations of primary infection with T. gondii are highly variable
and are influenced primarily by host immunocompetence. Clinical features range from no signs or symptoms to severe disease. Reactivation
of previously asymptomatic congenital toxoplasmosis usually manifests as ocular toxoplasmosis.

Acquired Toxoplasmosis

Immunocompetent children who acquire infection postnatally generally do not have clinically recognizable symptoms. When clinical

1.0

1.0

Before 1992 (n = 424)
After 1992 (n = 1624)
95% Confidence interval

0.8
Probability of SNDD

Probability of Infection

0.8

Untreated
Treated

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.0
0

A

0.6

10
20
30
Week of Gestation at Maternal Infection

40

B

0
10
20
30
40
Gestational Age at Maternal Seroconversion (weeks)

Fig. 336.2 Probability and severity of congenital toxoplasmosis and relationship to gestational age. A, Probability of fetal infection according to

gestational age at the time of maternal infection before (n = 451) and after (n = 1624) mid-­1992, Lyon cohort (1987–2008). B, Risk of severe neurologic disease or death (SNDD) in children with congenital toxoplasmosis (CT) according to antepartum treatment. Probability of SNDD according to
imputed gestational age at seroconversion and 95% Bayesian credible limits. Gold lines denote treated pregnancies; purple lines denote untreated
pregnancies. (SNDD is a composite outcome comprising a pediatric report at any age of microcephaly; insertion of an intraventricular shunt; an abnormal or suspicious neurodevelopmental examination that resulted in referral to a specialist; seizures during infancy or at an older age that required
anticonvulsant therapy; severe bilateral visual impairment [visual acuity of Snellen ≤6/60 in both eyes assessed after 3 yr]; cerebral palsy; or death
from any cause before age 2 years, including termination of pregnancy [consistency of SSND findings was checked through multiple assessments].)
Severe neurologic sequelae were assessed at a median of 4 years’ follow-­up, death was assessed by age 2 yr, and severe bilateral visual impairment
was included in the composite outcome of severe neurologic sequelae. (A from Wallon M, Peyron F, Cornu C, et al. Congenital toxoplasmosis infection: monthly prenatal screening decreases transmission rate and improves clinical outcome at age 3 years. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;56:1229; B from
Cortina-­Borja M, Tan HK, Wallon M, et al. Prenatal treatment of serious neurologic sequelae of congenital toxoplasmosis: an observational prospective cohort study. PLoS Med. 2010;7:e1000351.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 336 u Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii)
manifestations are apparent, they may include almost any combination
of fever, stiff neck, myalgia, arthralgia, maculopapular rash that spares
the palms and soles, localized or generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, hepatitis, reactive lymphocytosis, meningitis, brain abscess,
encephalitis, confusion, malaise, pneumonia, polymyositis, pericarditis, pericardial effusion, and myocarditis. Chorioretinitis occurs
in approximately 1% of U.S. cases and in 20% of cases in epidemics
in Brazil at 2 years after infection. Approximately 10% of mothers of
congenitally infected infants have eye lesions on dilated indirect ophthalmoscopic examinations. Postnatally acquired chorioretinal lesions
cannot be distinguished from congenitally acquired lesions based on
appearance. In some areas of Brazil, 80% of the population is infected,
with 50% of infected individuals >50 years old and 20% of infected
individuals having retinal involvement. Symptoms and signs of active
ocular infection may be present for a few weeks only or may persist for
many months.
The most common manifestation of acute acquired toxoplasmosis
is enlargement of one or a few cervical lymph nodes. Cases of Toxoplasma lymphadenopathy can resemble infectious mononucleosis,
lymphoma, or other lymphadenopathies (see Chapter 539). Pectoral, mediastinal, mesenteric, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes may
be involved. Involvement of intraabdominal lymph nodes may be
associated with fever, mimicking appendicitis. Nodes may be tender
but do not suppurate. Lymphadenopathy may wax and wane for as
long as 1-­2 years. However, almost all patients with lymphadenopathy recover spontaneously without antimicrobial therapy. Significant
organ involvement in immunologically normal persons is uncommon,
although some individuals have significant morbidity, including rare
cases of encephalitis, brain abscesses, hepatitis, myocarditis, pericarditis, and polymyositis. In persons acquiring T. gondii in Guyana
near the Maroni River and along Amazon tributaries, a severe form of
life-­threatening, multi-­visceral involvement with fever has occurred.
The causative parasites in these cases are genetically different from the
parasites in others.

Ocular Toxoplasmosis

In the United States and Western Europe, T. gondii is estimated to cause
35% of cases of chorioretinitis (Fig. 336.3). In Brazil, T. gondii retinal
lesions are common. Clinical manifestations include blurred vision,
visual floaters, photophobia, epiphora, and, with macular involvement,
loss of central vision. Ocular findings of congenital toxoplasmosis also
include strabismus, microphthalmia, microcornea, cataracts, anisometropia, nystagmus, glaucoma, optic neuritis, and optic atrophy. Episodic
recurrences are common, but precipitating factors have not been defined.
Recurrent, active disease usually occurs at school-­entry age and during
adolescence. Anecdotally, stress or trauma seems to precipitate symptoms. Recurrences are most common closest to the time of acquisition
of infection, and treatment leads to resolution of activity. PD-L1 may
contribute to susceptibility to recurrent active retinal disease.

Immunocompromised Persons

Host factors play a prominent role in susceptibility to disease due to
T. gondii and in the outcome of toxoplasmosis. Disseminated T. gondii infection among older children who are immunocompromised by
AIDS, malignancy, cytotoxic therapy, corticosteroids, or immunosuppressive drugs given for organ transplantation involves the CNS in 50%
of cases and may also involve the heart, lungs, and GI tract. Stem cell
transplant recipients present a special problem, because active infection
is difficult to diagnose serologically. After transplantation, T. gondii–specific antibody levels may remain the same, increase, or decrease, and can
even become undetectable. Toxoplasmosis in transplantation patients
results from reactivation of latent organisms or transplantation from a
seropositive donor to a seronegative recipient; thus knowledge of the
serologic status of the donor and recipient is essential. Prompt diagnosis
is of utmost importance, as active infection is often fulminant and rapidly fatal without treatment.
Congenital T. gondii infection in infants with HIV infection is rare in
the United States but can be a severe and fulminant disease with substantial CNS involvement. Alternatively, it may be more indolent in presentation, with focal neurologic deficits or systemic manifestations such as

2189

pneumonitis occurring with progressive CD4 depletion in infants who
are not receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
Up to 50% of persons with T. gondii antibodies and HIV infection who are not on antiretroviral treatment eventually experience
toxoplasmic encephalitis, which is fatal if not treated. HAART and
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) prophylaxis to prevent
Pneumocystis jirovecii have reduced the incidence of toxoplasmosis
in patients with HIV infection, but toxoplasmic encephalitis remains
a presenting manifestation in some adult patients with AIDS. Typical findings include fever, headache, altered mental status, psychosis,
cognitive impairment, seizures, and focal neurologic defects such as
hemiparesis, aphasia, ataxia, visual field loss, cranial nerve palsies, dysmetria, and movement disorders. In adult patients with AIDS, toxoplasmic retinal lesions are often large with diffuse necrosis and contain
many organisms but little inflammatory cellular infiltrate. Diagnosis
of presumptive toxoplasmic encephalitis based on neuroradiologic
studies in patients with AIDS necessitates a prompt therapeutic trial
of medications effective against T. gondii. Clear clinical improvement
within 7-­14 days and improvement of neuroradiologic findings within
3 weeks make the presumptive diagnosis almost certain.

Congenital Toxoplasmosis

Congenital toxoplasmosis usually occurs when a woman acquires
primary infection while pregnant. Most often, maternal infection is
asymptomatic or without specific symptoms or signs. As with other
adults with acute toxoplasmosis, lymphadenopathy is the most commonly identified physical finding.
In monozygotic twins the clinical pattern of involvement is most
often similar, whereas in dizygotic twins the manifestations often differ, including cases of congenital infection in only one twin. The major
histocompatibility complex class II gene DQ3 appears to be more common than DQ1 among HIV-­infected persons seropositive for T. gondii who develop toxoplasmic encephalitis, as well as in children with
congenital toxoplasmosis who develop hydrocephalus. These findings suggest that the presence of HLA-­DQ3 is a risk factor for severity of toxoplasmosis. Other allelic variants of genes, including COL2A,
ABC4R, P2X7R, NALP1, ALOX12, TLR9, TIRAP MAL, and ERAAP,
are also associated with increased susceptibility.
Congenital infection may present as a mild or severe neonatal disease
(Table 336.1). It may also present with sequelae or relapse of a previously
undiagnosed and untreated infection later in infancy or even later in life
(see Table 336.1). There is a wide variety of manifestations of congenital
infection, ranging from hydrops fetalis and perinatal death to small size
for gestational age, prematurity, peripheral or central retinal scars, persistent jaundice, mild thrombocytopenia, CSF pleocytosis, and the characteristic triad of chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus, and cerebral calcifications
(Figs. 336.4 and 336.5). More than 50% of congenitally infected infants are
considered normal in the perinatal period, but almost all such children
will develop ocular involvement later in life if they are not treated during
infancy. Neurologic signs such as convulsions, setting-­sun sign with downward gaze, and increased head circumference due to ventricular dilatation
or hydrocephalus caused by relatively mild involvement with inflammation or marked destruction of tissue obstructing the aqueduct of Sylvius
or foramen of Monroe or inflammation resulting in stiff ventricles may be
associated with substantial cerebral damage. If affected infants are treated
promptly with antimicrobial therapy and placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt, signs and symptoms may resolve and development may be
normal, making evidence of hydrocephalus a medical emergency. Early
signs of potential congenital toxoplasmosis, such as ventricular dilatation or hydrocephalus, should be treated as a pediatric emergency. Outcomes are better with prompt placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt
when indicated than when shunt placement is delayed. Head circumference crossing percentiles and obviously dilated ventricles with increased
intracranial pressure require shunt placement, and ventricular dilatation
without obvious increased pressure can also benefit from shunt placement.
The spectrum and frequency of neonatal manifestations of 210 newborns with congenital Toxoplasma infection identified by a serologic
screening program of pregnant women in France were described in 1984.
In this study, 10% had severe congenital toxoplasmosis with CNS involvement, eye lesions, and general systemic manifestations; 34% had mild

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2190 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

A
Near birth

D

With ongoing treatment

Presentation

7 weeks

11 weeks

B

C

E

Fig. 336.3 Toxoplasmic chorioretinitis. A, Retinal photographs of a child with severe vitreitis that is less intense than the classic “headlight in fog”

appearance (left). Resolving vitreitis caused by underlying active lesion (middle). Resolved healed lesion without vitreitis (right). B, Retina photographs for a newborn infant with active vitreitis (left, “near birth”) with clearing of vitreitis and marked, but not complete, resolution of activity of the
lesion 3 wk later (right, “with ongoing treatment”). C, Retinal photographs of a child showing an active lesion at presentation (left), and scarred lesion
(right). D, Retinal photographs showing an active retinal lesion before treatment (left) and a completely resolved normal appearing retina within 1
mo of initiating treatment (right). E, Active choroidal neovascular membranes in a child. Fundus photographs (top row), fluorescein angiogram (middle row), and ocular coherence tomography (bottom row) of a child at presentation (first column), 7 wk after first ranibizumab (Lucentis, antibody to
vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF]) injection (second column), and 11 wk after first ranibizumab injection (third column). (A-­D, Adapted from
Delair E, Latkany P, Noble AG, et al. Clinical manifestations of ocular toxoplasmosis. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2011;19:91–102; E, Adapted from Benevento JD, Jager RD, Noble AG, et al. Toxoplasmosis-­associated neovascular lesions treated successfully with ranibizumab and antiparasitic therapy.
Arch Ophthalmol. 2008;126:1152–1156.)

involvement with normal clinical examination results other than retinal
scars on dilated indirect exams or isolated intracranial calcifications in
brain CT scans; and 55% had no detectable manifestations. These numbers
represent an underestimation of the incidence of severe congenital infection for several reasons: the most severe cases, including most who died,
were not referred; therapeutic abortion sometimes was performed when
acute acquired infection of the mother was diagnosed early during pregnancy; in utero spiramycin therapy prevented or diminished the severity of infection; and only 13 of 210 congenitally infected newborns had
brain CT, and only 77% of these 210 infants had a CSF examination. Routine newborn examinations often yield normal findings for congenitally
infected infants, but more careful evaluations may reveal significant abnormalities. A 2012 analysis of the National Collaborative Chicago-­Based
Congenital Toxoplasmosis Study (NCCCTS, 1981–2009) data found that
72% of children at or near birth had chorioretinal scars, 70% had CNS
calcifications, 12% had microcephaly, 37% had hydrocephalus, 41% had
thrombocytopenia, 39% had hepatomegaly, 32% had splenomegaly, and
41% were born prematurely. In a study of 28 infants in New England identified by a universal state-­mandated serologic screening program for T.
gondii–specific immunoglobulin (Ig) M, 26 (93%) had normal findings on
routine newborn examination, but 14 (50%) had significant abnormalities detected with more careful evaluation. The abnormalities included
retinal scars (seven infants), active chorioretinitis (three infants), and CNS
abnormalities (eight infants). In Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, infection
is common, affecting 1 in 600 live births. Half of these infected infants have
active chorioretinitis at birth.
There is also a wide spectrum of symptoms of untreated congenital
toxoplasmosis that presents later in the first year of life. These children may
have IQ scores of <70, convulsions, and severely impaired vision. When
the infection is acquired in utero and the fetus is treated by drug therapy

of the pregnant woman with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin,
ocular and neurologic sequelae in the infant may be prevented.

SYSTEMIC SIGNS

From 25–50% of infants with clinically apparent disease at birth are
born prematurely. Parasite clonal types other than type II are more
often associated with prematurity and more severe disease. Intrauterine
growth restriction, low Apgar scores, and temperature instability are
common. Other manifestations may include lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, myocarditis, pneumonitis, nephrotic syndrome, vomiting, diarrhea, and feeding problems. Bands of metaphyseal lucency
and irregularity of the line of provisional calcification at the epiphyseal
plate may occur without periosteal reaction in the ribs, femurs, and
vertebrae. Congenital toxoplasmosis may be confused with erythroblastosis fetalis resulting from isosensitization, although the Coombs
test result is usually negative with congenital T. gondii infection.
Prematurity, growth restriction, signs suggesting sepsis, thrombocytopenia, and abnormal CSF cells, protein, and glucose in the perinatal
period should suggest congenital toxoplasmosis.

Skin

Cutaneous manifestations among newborn infants with congenital toxoplasmosis include rashes and jaundice and/or petechiae secondary to
thrombocytopenia, but ecchymoses and large hemorrhages secondary to
thrombocytopenia also occur. Rashes may be fine punctate, diffuse maculopapular, lenticular, deep blue-­red, sharply defined macular, or diffuse
blue and papular. Macular rashes involving the entire body including the
palms and soles, exfoliative dermatitis, and cutaneous calcifications have
been described. Jaundice with hepatic involvement and/or hemolysis, cyanosis due to interstitial pneumonitis from congenital infection, and edema

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 336 u Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii)

2191

Table 336.1  Signs and Symptoms Occurring Before Diagnosis or During the Course of Untreated Acute Congenital
Toxoplasmosis in 152 Infants (A) and in 101 of These Same Children After They Had Been Followed ≥4 Years (B)
FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE IN PATIENTS WITH
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
A. Infants

“NEUROLOGIC” DISEASE*

“GENERALIZED” DISEASE†

108 Patients (%)

44 Patients (%)

Chorioretinitis

102 (94)

29 (66)

Abnormal cerebrospinal fluid

59 (55)

37 (84)

Anemia

55 (51)

34 (77)

Convulsions

54 (50)

8 (18)

Intracranial calcification

54 (50)

2 (4)

Jaundice

31 (29)

35 (80)

Hydrocephalus

30 (28)

0 (0)

Fever

27 (25)

34 (77)

Splenomegaly

23 (21)

40 (90)

Lymphadenopathy

18 (17)

30 (68)

Hepatomegaly

18 (17)

34 (77)

Vomiting

17 (16)

21 (48)

Microcephaly

14 (13)

0 (0)

Diarrhea

7 (6)

11 (25)

Cataracts

5 (5)

0 (0)

Eosinophilia

6 (4)

8 (18)

Abnormal bleeding

3 (3)

8 (18)

Hypothermia

2 (2)

9 (20)

Glaucoma

2 (2)

0 (0)

Optic atrophy

2 (2)

0 (0)

Microphthalmia

2 (2)

0 (0)

Rash

1 (1)

11 (25)

Pneumonitis

0 (0)

18 (41)

B. Children ≥4 Yr Old

70 Patients (%)

Intellectual impairment

62 (89)

25 (81)

Convulsions

58 (83)

24 (77)

Spasticity and palsies

53 (76)

18 (58)

Severely impaired vision

48 (69)

13 (42)

Hydrocephalus or microcephaly

31 (44)

2 (6)

Deafness

12 (17)

3 (10)

Normal

6 (9)

5 (16)

31 Patients (%)

*Patients with otherwise undiagnosed central nervous system disease in the first year of life.
†Patients with otherwise undiagnosed nonneurologic diseases during the first 2 mo of life.
Adapted from Eichenwald H. A study of congenital toxoplasmosis. In: Slim JC, ed. Human Toxoplasmosis. Copenhagen: Munksgaard; 1960: pp 41–49. Study performed in 1947. The
most severely involved institutionalized patients were not included in the later study of 101 children.

secondary to myocarditis or nephrotic syndrome may be present. Jaundice
and conjugated hyperbilirubinemia may persist for months.

Endocrine Abnormalities

Endocrine abnormalities may occur secondary to hypothalamic or
pituitary involvement or end-­organ involvement but are not common.
Occasionally reported endocrine manifestations include myxedema,
persistent hypernatremia with vasopressin-­sensitive diabetes insipidus,
sexual precocity, and partial anterior hypopituitarism.

Central Nervous System

Neurologic manifestations of congenital toxoplasmosis vary from massive acute encephalopathy to subtle neurologic syndromes. Toxoplasmosis
should be considered as a potential cause of any undiagnosed neurologic
disease in children <1 year old, especially if retinal lesions are present.
Hydrocephalus may be the sole neurologic manifestation of congenital
toxoplasmosis and almost always requires shunt placement (see Fig. 336.5).
Hydrocephalus may present prenatally and progress during the perinatal
period or, much less often, may present later in life. Patterns of seizures

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2192 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
are protean and have included focal motor seizures, petit and grand mal
seizures, muscular twitching, opisthotonos, and hypsarrhythmia. Spinal
or bulbar involvement may be manifested by paralysis of the extremities, difficulty swallowing, and respiratory distress. Microcephaly usually
reflects severe brain damage, but some children with microcephaly caused
by congenital toxoplasmosis who have been treated promptly have normal or even superior cognitive function. Seizures, focal motor defects, and

Microphthalmia

144

Chorioretinal scars

145

Seizures

145

CNS calcifications

145

Microcephalus

145

Hydrocephalus

145

R/O sepsis

145

Jaundice

134

Skin rash

142

Anemia

139

Thrombocytopenia

139

Hepatomegaly

142

Splenomegaly

142

Other Neurologic Disease

T. gondii infection is a cause of epilepsy and other neurologic disorders that improve with medical treatment. Ketogenic diet has led to
resolution of seizures refractory to other treatments due to T. gondii.
Symptomatic spinal cord lesions may be evident as T2-weighted abnormalities and can also resolve with medical treatment.
Symptomatic spinal cord lesions may be evident as T2 weighted
abnormalities on MRI and can resolve with medical treatment.
CSF abnormalities occur in at least 50% of infants with congenital
toxoplasmosis. A CSF protein level >1 g/dL is characteristic of severe
CNS toxoplasmosis and is usually accompanied by hydrocephalus.
Local production of T. gondii–specific IgG and IgM antibodies may be
demonstrated. CT of the brain is useful to detect calcifications, determine ventricular size, and demonstrate porencephalic cystic structures
(see Fig. 336.5). MRI is used to assess ventricular size and configuration and can detect T2-weighted abnormalities associated with active
disease. Calcifications occur throughout the brain, but there is a propensity for development of calcifications in the caudate nucleus and
basal ganglia, choroid plexus, and subependyma. MRI and contrast-­
enhanced CT brain scans are useful for detecting active inflammatory
lesions. Rapid MRI or ultrasonography may be useful for following
ventricular size. Medical treatment in utero and in the first year of life
results in improved neurologic outcomes and oftentimes diminution or
disappearance of calcifications.

180

Prematurity (38 wk)

0
20
40
60
80 100
Percentage with manifestation at or near birth*

Fig. 336.4 Congenital toxoplasmosis: manifestations at presentation.

National Collaborative Chicago-­Based Congenital Toxoplasmosis Study
(NCCCTS, 1981–2009). *Infants diagnosed with congenital toxoplasmosis
in the newborn period and referred to the NCCCTS during the first year of
life. Numbers adjacent to histogram bars represent number of infants with
this manifestation and are based on information in birth records. Sample
size dependent on available birth records/diagnoses at birth. R/O, Rule
out; CNS, central nervous system. (Adapted from McLeod R, Boyer KM,
Lee D, et al. Prematurity and severity are associated with Toxoplasma gondii alleles [NCCCTS, 1981–2009]. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;54:1595–1605.)

A

intellectual impairment may become apparent after the newborn period,
even when infection is subclinical at birth.

B

C

Eyes

Almost all untreated congenitally infected infants develop chorioretinal lesions by adulthood and may have severe visual impairment.
T. gondii causes a focal necrotizing retinitis in congenitally infected
individuals (see Fig. 336.3). Retinal detachment may occur. Any part
of the retina may be involved, either unilaterally or bilaterally, including the maculae. The optic nerve may be involved, and toxoplasmic
lesions that involve projections of the visual pathways in the brain
or the visual cortex also may lead to visual impairment. In association with severe retinal lesions and vitritis, secondary anterior uveitis
may develop and occasionally lead to erythema of the external eye.

D

E

F

Fig. 336.5 Head CT scans of infants with congenital toxoplasmosis. A, CT scan at birth that shows areas of hypolucency, mildly dilated ventricles,

and small calcifications. B, CT scan of the same child at 1 yr of age (after antimicrobial therapy for 1 yr). This scan is normal, with the exception of two
small calcifications. This child’s Mental Development Index (MDI) at 1 yr old was 140 by the Bayley Scale of Infant Development. C, CT scan from a
1-­yr-­old infant who was normal at birth. His meningoencephalitis became symptomatic in the first few weeks of life but was not diagnosed correctly
and remained untreated during his first 3 mo of life. At 3 mo old, development of hydrocephalus and bilateral macular chorioretinitis led to the diagnosis of congenital toxoplasmosis, and antimicrobial therapy was initiated. This scan shows significant residual atrophy and calcifications. This child
had substantial motor dysfunction, development delays, and visual impairment. D, CT scan obtained during the first month of life of a microcephalic
child. Note the numerous calcifications. This child’s IQ scores using the Stanford-­Binet Intelligence Scale for children when she was 3 yr old and
Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale Intelligence when she was 5 yr old were 100 and 102, respectively. She received antimicrobial therapy during
her first year of life. E, CT scan with hydrocephalus caused by aqueductal obstruction, before placement of a ventricular shunt. F, Scan from the same
patient as the scan in E, after shunt placement. This child’s IQ scores using the Stanford-­Binet Intelligence Scale for children were approximately 100
when she was 3 yr old and 6 yr old. (A-­F adapted from McAuley J, Boyer K, Patel D, et al. Early and longitudinal evaluations of treated infants and
children and untreated historical patients with congenital toxoplasmosis: the Chicago Collaborative Treatment Trial. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18:38–72.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 336 u Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii)
Other ocular findings include cells and protein in the anterior chamber, large keratic precipitates, posterior synechiae, nodules on the iris,
and neovascular formation on the surface of the iris, sometimes with
increased intraocular pressure and glaucoma. Rarely, the extraocular musculature may also be involved directly. Other manifestations
include strabismus, nystagmus, visual impairment, and microphthalmia. Enucleation has been required for a blind, phthisic, painful eye.
The differential diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis includes congenital coloboma and inflammatory lesions caused by cytomegalovirus
(CMV), lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, Bartonella henselae,
Toxocara canis, Treponema pallidum, Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
varicella-­zoster virus, Zika virus, or vasculitis. Ocular toxoplasmosis may be a recurrent and progressive disease that requires multiple
courses of therapy. Limited data suggest that occurrence of lesions in
the early years of life may be prevented by instituting antimicrobial
treatment with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine during the first year
of life. Initiation of treatment of the infected fetus in utero followed
by treatment in the first year of life further reduces the incidence and
the severity of retinal disease.

Ears

Both mild and severe sensorineural hearing loss may occur. It is not
known whether this hearing loss is a static or progressive disorder.
Treatment in the first year of life is associated with decreased frequency
of hearing loss.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of acute T. gondii infection can be established by a number
of methods (Table 336.2): isolation of T. gondii from blood or body
fluids; identification of tachyzoites in sections or preparations of tissues
and body fluids, amniotic fluid, or placenta; identification of cysts in
the placenta or tissues of a fetus or newborn; and characteristic lymph
node histologic features. Serologic tests are very useful for diagnosis.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is useful to identify T. gondii DNA
in CSF and amniotic fluid and has been reported to be useful with
infant peripheral blood and urine to establish the diagnosis definitively
and in immunocompromised patients for diagnosis and monitoring
treatment.

Isolation or Identification of T. gondii

Organisms can be isolated by inoculation of body fluids, leukocytes, or
tissue specimens into mice or tissue culture cells. Body fluids should be
processed and inoculated immediately, but T. gondii has been isolated
from tissues and blood that have been stored overnight or even for 4-­5
days at 4°C (39.2°F). Freezing or treatment of specimens with formalin
kills T. gondii. From 6-­10 days after inoculation into mice, or earlier if
mice die, peritoneal fluids should be examined for tachyzoites. If inoculated mice survive for 6 weeks and seroconvert, definitive diagnosis
is made by visualization of Toxoplasma cysts in mouse brain. If cysts
are not seen, subinoculation of mouse tissue into other mice is performed. Treatment of subinoculated mice with corticosteroids appears
to enhance ability to isolate the parasite.
Microscopic examination of tissue culture cells inoculated with T.
gondii shows necrotic, heavily infected cells with numerous extracellular tachyzoites. Isolation of T. gondii from blood or body fluids reflects
acute infection. Except in the fetus or neonate, it is usually not possible
to distinguish acute from past infection by isolation of T. gondii from
tissues (e.g., skeletal muscle, lung, brain, eye) obtained by biopsy or at
autopsy.
Diagnosis of acute infection can be established by visualization of
tachyzoites in biopsy tissue sections, bone marrow aspirates, or body
fluids (e.g., CSF, amniotic fluid). Immunofluorescent antibody and
immunoperoxidase staining techniques may be necessary, because it
is often difficult to distinguish the tachyzoite using ordinary stains.
Tissue cysts are diagnostic of infection but do not differentiate
between acute and chronic infection, although the presence of many
cysts suggests recent acute infection. Cysts in the placenta or tissues
of the newborn infant establish the diagnosis of congenital infection.

2193

Characteristic histologic features strongly suggest the diagnosis of
toxoplasmic lymphadenitis.

Serologic Testing

Serologic tests are useful in establishing the diagnosis of congenital
or acutely acquired T. gondii infection. Each laboratory that reports
serologic test results must have established values for their tests that
diagnose infection in specific clinical settings, provide interpretation
of their results, and ensure appropriate quality control before therapy
is based on serologic test results. Serologic test results used as the basis
for therapy should ideally be confirmed in a reference laboratory.
The Sabin-­Feldman dye test is sensitive and specific. This test measures primarily IgG antibodies. Results should be expressed in international units (IU/mL), based on international standard reference sera
available from the World Health Organization (WHO).
The IgG indirect fluorescent antibody (IgG-­IFA) test measures
the same antibodies as the Sabin-­Feldman dye test, and the titers tend
to be parallel. These antibodies usually appear 1-­2 weeks after infection, reach high titers (≥1:1,000) after 6-­8 weeks, and then decline over
months to years. Low titers (1:4 to 1:64) usually persist for life. Antibody titer does not correlate with severity of illness.
An agglutination test (bioMérieux, Lyon, France) available commercially in Europe uses formalin-­
preserved whole parasites to
detect IgG antibodies. This test is accurate, simple to perform, and
inexpensive.
The IgM-­IFA test is useful for the diagnosis of acute acquired infection with T. gondii in the older child because IgM antibodies appear
earlier, often by 3-5 days after infection, and diminish more quickly
than IgG antibodies. In most instances, IgM antibodies rise rapidly
(1:50 to ≥1:1,000) and then fall to low levels (1:10 or 1:20) or disappear after weeks or months. However, some patients continue to have
positive IgM levels with low titers for several years. The IgM-­IFA test
detects Toxoplasma-­specific IgM in only approximately 25% of congenitally infected infants at birth. IgM antibodies may not be present
in sera of immunocompromised patients with acute toxoplasmosis or
in patients with reactivation of ocular toxoplasmosis. The IgM-­IFA test
may yield false-­positive results as a result of rheumatoid factor (RF).
The double-­sandwich IgM enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay
(IgM-­ELISA) is also useful for detection of Toxoplasma IgM antibodies. In the older child, serum IgM-­ELISA Toxoplasma antibodies of >2
(a value of one reference laboratory; each laboratory must establish its
own value for positive results) indicates that Toxoplasma infection most
likely has been acquired recently. The IgM-­ELISA identifies approximately 50–75% of infants with congenital infection. IgM-­ELISA avoids
both the false-­positive results from RF and the false-­negative results
from high levels of passively transferred maternal IgG antibody in fetal
serum, as may occur with the IgM-­IFA test. Results obtained with commercial kits must be interpreted with caution, because false-­positive
reactions can occur. Care must also be taken to determine whether kits
have been standardized for diagnosis of infection in specific clinical
settings, such as in the newborn infant. The IgA-­ELISA also is a sensitive test for detection of maternal and congenital infection, and results
may be positive when those of the IgM-­ELISA are not.
The immunosorbent agglutination assay (ISAGA) combines trapping of a patient’s IgM to a solid surface and use of formalin-­fixed
organisms or antigen-­coated latex particles. It is read as an agglutination test. There are no false-­positive results from RF or antinuclear
antibodies (ANAs). IgM-­ISAGA is more sensitive and may detect specific IgM antibodies before and for longer periods than IgM-­ELISA.
At present, IgM-­ISAGA and IgA-­ELISA are the most useful tests
for diagnosis of congenital infection in the newborn but are not positive in all infected infants. The IgE-­ELISA and IgE-­ISAGA are also
sometimes useful in establishing the diagnosis of congenital toxoplasmosis or acute acquired T. gondii infection. The presence of IgM
antibodies in the older child or adult can never be used alone to diagnose acute acquired infection. The lateral immunochromatographic
test (ICT) can identify IgG and/or IgM in serum or whole blood from
fingerstick precisely and rapidly. Western blot II is highly accurate for
identifying T. gondii-specific IgG and for IgM.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2194 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 336.2  Generalizations Concerning Clinical Presentations, Toxoplasma-­Specific Diagnostic Tests, and Treatment
CLINICAL
SETTING AND
MANIFESTATION

TOXOPLASMA-­SPECIFIC DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
SAMPLE
SOURCE

G

M

A

E

AV

AC/HS

Mother

+

+

+

+

L

Acute

Mother

+

+

+

+

L

Acute infection in
Mother
pregnant woman
at >18 wk
gestation

+

+

+

+

Congenital
infection in
infant

Infant

+

+

+

Child

+

+

Chronic,
asymptomatic

Child

+

Acute, severely
symptomatic

Child

Immune
compromised¶
Laboratory
accident#

PCR
KARIUS

TREATMENT

SUBINOCULATION

SP

PSL*

AF (17-­
18 wk)

NS

+

+
†No P first
trimester

Acute

AF (may
not be
necessary)

NS

+
†No P first
trimester

L

Acute

AF

NS

+

+

L

Acute

Placenta/
buffy
coat

Placenta/buffy coat

+

+

+

L

Acute

NS

NS

+

−

−

−

H

Chronic

NS

NS

+

+

+

+

L

Acute

§

Body fluids/buffy
coat

Child

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

§

Body fluids/buffy
coat

Child

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

NS

NS

Child

+

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

NS

NS

Active
chorioretinitis**

Child

+

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

NS

NS

+

Active CNVM**

Child

+

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

+/−

NS

NS

+

PRENATAL
Acute infection
in pregnant
woman ≤15 wk
amenorrhea in
gestation and no
clinical evidence
of fetal infection
Acute infection
in pregnant
woman ≤15 wk
amenorrhea in
gestation and
signs of fetal
infection

POSTNATAL
Acute,
symptomatic
Acute, self-­limited
symptoms

Eye Disease
Quiescent scar**

CO

LU

NONE

‡

+

+

+

+

††

*Pyrimethamine and leucovorin should be adjusted for granulocytopenia; complete blood counts, including platelets, should be monitored each Monday and Thursday. If there is
sulfonamide allergy, alternative medicines include azithromycin (first choice), clarithromycin, or clindamycin in place of sulfadiazine.
†Do not use pyrimethamine in the first 14 weeks of gestation.
‡Occasionally, corticosteroids (prednisone) have been used when CSF protein is ≥1 g/dL or when active chorioretinitis threatens vision and should be continued until signs of
inflammation or active chorioretinitis that threatens vision have subsided; then dosage can be tapered and the steroids discontinued.
§Utility of PCR depends on clinical setting. For example, the following may be useful to establish the diagnosis: PCR of body fluids such as amniotic fluid or CSF; cells from
bronchoalveolar lavage from a patient with pneumonia; or tissue such as placenta where the presence of parasites or parasite DNA would support a diagnosis of infection.
¶In some cases, in immunocompromised persons, there is no detectable serologic response to T. gondii. However, if clinical presentation is indicative of infection in the absence
of positive serologic results, CSF, buffy coat of peripheral blood, histopathology of tissue samples, or body fluids tested with PCR or subinoculation may be useful. If PCR
demonstrates the presence of T. gondii DNA in the sample, it is useful for diagnosis. However, the sensitivity of PCR has been variable in this setting. In some circumstances,
presumptive treatment may be warranted.
#Whether a person should be treated for a laboratory accident depends on the nature of the accident, the serology of the person before the accident, and other factors. When there
is risk of infection, prompt treatment is given, considering the possible genetic manipulation of the laboratory strain.
**Serologic results depend on whether infection is acute (recently acquired) or chronic. When testing serum from persons with ocular toxoplasmosis, T. gondii–specific IgG may be
demonstrable only in an undiluted serum sample.
††Corticosteroids (prednisone) are used if inflammation or edema caused by infection threatens vision and should be continued until signs of inflammation or active chorioretinitis
that threatens vision have subsided; then dosage can be tapered and the steroids discontinued.
+, Positive; −, negative; +/−, equivocal; A, T. gondii–specific IgA; AC/HS, differential agglutination test where A represents acetone fixed parasites and H represents formalin
fixed antigen; AF, amniotic fluid; Av, T. gondii–specific IgG avidity; CNVM, choroidal neovascular membrane; Co, corticosteroids (prednisone); CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; E, T.
gondii–specific IgE; G, T. gondii–specific IgG; L, leucovorin; Lu, Lucentis (antibody to vascular endothelial growth factor); M, T. gondii–specific IgM; NS, not standard to obtain; P,
pyrimethamine; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PSL, pyrimethamine (P), sulfadiazine (S), leucovorin (L) (folinic acid); Sp, spiramycin.
Adapted from Remington JS, McLeod R, et al. Toxoplasmosis. In: Remington JS, Klein JO, eds. Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn Infant. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 336 u Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii)
The differential agglutination test (HS/AC) compares antibody titers
obtained with formalin-­fixed tachyzoites (HS antigen) with titers obtained
using acetone-­fixed tachyzoites (AC antigen) to differentiate recent and
remote infections in adults and older children. This method may be particularly useful in differentiating remote infection in pregnant women,
because levels of IgM and IgA antibodies detectable by ELISA or ISAGA
may remain elevated for months to years in adults and older children.
The avidity test can be helpful to establish time of acquisition of
infection. A high-­avidity test result indicates that infection began
>12-­16 weeks earlier, which is especially useful in determining time
of acquisition of infection in the first or final 16 weeks of gestation. A
low-­avidity test result may be present for many months or even years
and does not definitively identify recent acquisition of infection.
A relatively higher level of Toxoplasma antibody in the aqueous
humor or in CSF demonstrates local production of antibody during
active ocular or CNS toxoplasmosis. This comparison yields a coefficient [C], which is calculated as follows:
C

Antibody titer in body fluid
Antibody titer in serum



Concentration of IgG in serum
Concentration of IgG in body fluid

Significant coefficients [C] are >8 for ocular infection, >4 for congenital
CNS infection, and >1 for CNS infection in patients with AIDS. If the
serum dye test titer is >300 IU/mL, it is not possible to demonstrate
significant local antibody production using this formula with either the
dye test or the IgM-­IFA test titer. IgM antibody may be detectable in
CSF.
Comparative Western immunoblot tests of sera from a mother and
infant may detect congenital infection. Infection is suspected when the
mother’s serum and her infant’s serum contain antibodies that react
with different Toxoplasma antigens.
The enzyme-­
linked immunofiltration assay using micropore
membranes permits simultaneous study of antibody specificity by
immunoprecipitation and characterization of antibody isotypes by
immunofiltration with enzyme-­labeled antibodies. This method is able
to detect 85% of cases of congenital infection in the first few days of life.
Serologic tests in development include multiplex antibody tests for
IgG-­, IgM-­, and IgA-­specific antibodies and point-­of-­care tests designed
to provide accurate and rapid identification of recent infection or seroconversion in pregnant women. The ICT point-­of-­care IgG-­IgM test
(LDBIO Diagnostic, Lyon, France) has shown very high diagnostic sensitivity and specificity and has been CE marked for use in Europe.

Nucleic Acid Detection

PCR on amniotic fluid is used to detect a repetitive T. gondii gene such as
the 529 bp multi-­copy gene or the 20 copy B1 gene and is the method of
choice for establishing the diagnosis of congenital Toxoplasma infection
in the fetus. Sensitivity and specificity of PCR on amniotic fluid obtained
between 17 and 21 weeks of gestation are approximately 95% for diagnosing congenital infection. PCR of peripheral white blood cells, CSF, and
urine has been used to detect congenital infection at birth or postnatally.
PCR of vitreous or aqueous fluids has been used to diagnose ocular toxoplasmosis. Karius test also detects nucleic acid. Abnormalities in MRI
studies of brain and spinal cord may demonstrate activity of infection and
are indicative (see Fig. 336.4). Both patient and parasite genetics contribute
to severity and manifestations of illness (see Figs. 336.3 to 336.5).

Other Tests

Lymphocyte blastogenesis to T. gondii antigens has been used to diagnose
congenital toxoplasmosis when the diagnosis is uncertain and other test
results are negative. However, a negative result does not exclude the diagnosis, as immune tolerance sometimes interferes with response of neonatal
peripheral blood lymphocytes to T. gondii antigens. Novel biomarkers such
as microRNAs and certain proteins may indicate active infection.

Acquired Toxoplasmosis

Recent infection is diagnosed by seroconversion from a negative to a
positive IgG antibody titer (in the absence of transfusion), a two-­tube
increase in Toxoplasma-­specific IgG titer when serial sera are obtained

2195

3 weeks apart and tested in parallel, or the detection of Toxoplasma-­
specific IgM antibody in conjunction with other tests, but never alone.

Ocular Toxoplasmosis

IgG antibody titers of 1:4 to 1:64 are typical in older children with active
Toxoplasma chorioretinitis. The presence of antibodies measurable only
when serum is tested undiluted is also helpful in establishing the diagnosis.
The diagnosis of ocular infection is likely with characteristic retinal lesions
and positive serologic tests. PCR of aqueous or vitreous fluid has been used
to diagnose ocular toxoplasmosis but is performed infrequently because of
the risks associated with obtaining intraocular fluid and because the diagnosis can be made based on clinical appearance and history.

Immunocompromised Persons

Toxoplasma IgG antibody titers may be low and Toxoplasma IgM is
often absent in immunocompromised stem cell transplant recipients
but not in kidney or heart transplant recipients with toxoplasmosis.
Demonstration of Toxoplasma DNA by PCR in serum, blood, and CSF
may identify disseminated Toxoplasma infection in immunocompromised persons. Resolution of CNS lesions during a therapeutic trial of
pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine has been useful to diagnose toxoplasmic encephalitis in patients with AIDS. Brain biopsy has been used to
establish the diagnosis if there is no response to a therapeutic trial and
to exclude other possible diagnoses such as CNS lymphoma.

Congenital Toxoplasmosis

Fetal ultrasound examination performed every 2 weeks during gestation beginning at diagnosis of acute acquired infection in a pregnant
woman and PCR analysis of amniotic fluid are used for prenatal diagnosis. Examination of the placenta at delivery by histology and by PCR
may facilitate diagnosis of congenital infection but is not sufficiently
sensitive or specific for routine diagnosis.
Newborns suspected of having congenital toxoplasmosis should be
evaluated by general, ophthalmologic, and neurologic examinations; head
CT scan; and ideally all of the following tests: an attempt to detect T. gondii in the placenta and the infant’s leukocytes from peripheral blood buffy
coat; measurement of serum Toxoplasma-­specific IgG, IgM, IgA, and IgE
antibodies and the levels of total serum IgM and IgG; lumbar puncture,
including analysis of CSF for cells, glucose, protein, Toxoplasma-­specific
IgG and IgM antibodies, and level of total IgG; and testing of CSF for T.
gondii by PCR and inoculation into mice. Presence of Toxoplasma-­specific
IgM in CSF that is not contaminated with blood or confirmation of local
antibody production of Toxoplasma-­specific IgG antibody in CSF establishes the diagnosis of congenital Toxoplasma infection.
Serologic tests are also useful in establishing a diagnosis of congenital
toxoplasmosis. Either persistent or rising titers in the Sabin-­Feldman dye
test or the IgG-­IFA test or a positive IgM-­ELISA or IgM-­ISAGA result is
diagnostic of congenital toxoplasmosis. The half-­life of IgM is approximately 2 days, so presence of detectable IgM antibodies in the infant’s
serum decreases relatively quickly, usually within 1 week. Passively transferred maternal IgG antibodies may require many months to a year to
disappear from the infant’s serum, depending on the magnitude of the
original titer. The half-­life of passively transferred maternal IgG is approximately 30 days, so the titer diminishes by half each 30 days. Synthesis of
Toxoplasma antibody is usually demonstrable by the third month of life if
the infant is untreated, although the rate of IgG synthesis varies considerably in infants <1 year old. If the infant is treated, synthesis may be delayed
for as long as the ninth month of life and occasionally does not occur at all.
When an infant begins to synthesize IgG antibody, infection may be documented serologically even without demonstration of IgM antibodies by an
increase in the ratio of specific serum IgG antibody titer to the total IgG.
In contrast, the ratio of specific serum IgG to the total IgG will decrease if
the specific IgG antibody has been passively transferred from the mother.
Many manifestations of congenital toxoplasmosis are similar to findings that occur in other perinatal infections, especially congenital CMV
infection. Because neither cerebral calcification nor chorioretinitis is
pathognomonic, a negative urine culture or PCR for CMV soon after
birth is a useful adjunctive test. The clinical picture in the newborn
infant may also be compatible with sepsis, aseptic meningitis, syphilis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2196 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
or hemolytic disease. Some children <5 years old with chorioretinitis
have postnatally acquired T. gondii infection.

TREATMENT

Currently available treatments are effective against the active tachyzoite form of the parasite. No commercially available medicines to date
eliminate the latent encysted form of the parasite, although promising preclinical data suggest that such treatments will be possible in the
future. Table 336.1 summarizes treatments in each clinical category.
A number of therapeutic agents, including pyrimethamine, sulfonamides, and macrolides, have been used to treat toxoplasmosis in its
various clinical manifestations. In general, they have activity that is
limited to the pathogenic tachyzoite stage of the parasite’s life cycle.
No clinically available antimicrobial agent has yet been found capable
of eliminating the encysted bradyzoite stage. Thus, active disease may
be effectively treated, but not ultimately cured, by current therapies.
In a person with normal cell-mediated immunity, a single course of
therapy may be sufficient. In immune-compromised patients and congenital infection, recurrences may be a long-term management problem. Curative therapies remain an area of continuing active research,
with several promising candidates. Table 336.2 summarizes treatment
according to clinical category of disease.
Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine act synergistically against Toxoplasma, and combination therapy is considered the treatment of choice
and is indicated for all clinical presentations of toxoplasmosis that
require treatment, except for acute Toxoplasma infection acquired during the first trimester of pregnancy (see Table 336.2). Pyrimethamine is
contraindicated during the first trimester of pregnancy because of teratogenic effects. Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine are used in Austria and
Germany and now sometimes in France and the United States for treatment of newly seropositive mothers after 15 weeks of gestation.
In contrast to mammals, Toxoplasma cannot take up folinic acid,
a precursor for folate synthesis. Thus folinic acid protects the human
bone marrow from toxicity due to pyrimethamine, which inhibits the
enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), blocking synthesis of folic
acid. By correcting an enzymatic pathway accessible in human cells but
not in Toxoplasma, leucovorin (folinic acid) renders pyrimethamine/
sulfadiazine a safer and more selective antiparasitic combination. Leucovorin is always given in conjunction with pyrimethamine and in the
week after discontinuing pyrimethamine because of pyrimethamine’s
long half-­life.
Pyrimethamine levels can be measured to make certain that they
are in a therapeutic, nontoxic range of less than approximately 2.3 mg/
dL and more than approximately 0.5 mg/dL for pyrimethamine when
older children are treated for retinal disease or in other circumstances
when medicines may be continued for longer times and reach high levels. Therapeutic endpoint is until resolution of the active retinal lesion
and then at least 1 month beyond that, with no immune compromise,
immune deficiency, or immune immaturity (for infants).
For treatment of those with primary, acute acquired toxoplasma
in gestation to prevent or treat infection in the fetus, pyrimethamine
is contraindicated during the first trimester of pregnancy. Pyrimethamine sulfadiazine is used in Austria and Germany, and now sometimes in France and the United States for treatment of those newly
seropositive mothers after 15 weeks amenorrhea during gestation.
Spiramycin is used to attempt to prevent vertical transmission of
infection to the fetus of acutely infected pregnant women in the first
trimester. A recent meta-analysis adds to the evidence of significant
reduction in mother-to-child transmission rates following spiramycin treatment of diagnosed gestational T. gondii infection. In 2018,
Mandelbrot et al. reported results of a randomized controlled trial
that compared treatment with pyrimethamine sulfadiazine promptly
following seroconversion after 15 weeks rather than using spiramycin
until 17 weeks’ gestation with pyrimethamine sulfadiazine initiated
only for PCR-positive amniotic fluid. Hypersensitivity for the mother
is a greater risk in the group that receives pyrimethamine sulfadiazine
earlier and may make diagnosis more difficult by obscuring evidence
of infection in the fetus and infant. There was a very small increase in

the number of infants with severe findings in the group that received
pyrimethamine sulfadiazine initiated at the later time.
The merits of this gestational treatment approach have been examined in cost-benefit analyses examining both the United States and
Austria, and the first direct cost-benefit comparison of prenatal and
neonatal in the context of France (not yet published) all indicate better
outcomes for affected infants and the healthcare system if treatment is
started in utero, rapidly following seroconversion. Toxoplasma cannot
take up folinic acid, a precursor for folate synthesis, whereas mammalian cells can take up folinic acid. Thus, folinic acid protects the human
bone marrow from toxicity due to pyrimethamine. Use of pyrimethamine is contraindicated in the first trimester of pregnancy; it inhibits
the enzyme dihydrofolate reductases and thus synthesis of folic acid.
Spiramycin is a macrolide antibiotic that is active against Toxoplasma in the placenta but does not reach sufficient levels in other tissues to treat a fetus or to be used postnatally. Hence, it has been used
successfully to prevent congenital toxoplasmosis in pregnant women
who have documented seroconversion in the first trimester when pyrimethamine is contraindicated.
Azithromycin is a macrolide that is used in severe or recurrent
disease when sulfonamide allergy precludes the use of sulfadiazine.
Azithromycin has been used to suppress infection and prevent recurrences of retinochoroiditis.
TMP-­
SMX is less active than pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine, with
a suboptimal ratio of the DHFR and para-­amino benzoic acid synthase inhibitors and with a shorter half-­life of trimethoprim relative
to pyrimethamine. Treatment failures have occurred with TMP-­SMX,
underscoring the importance of treating with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine if at all possible. Clindamycin and atovaquone have also been
used as second line agents but not as single antimicrobial agents.
Reversible neutropenia is the most common adverse effect in
pyrimethamine-­treated infants and typically responds to temporary
holding of doses. All patients treated with pyrimethamine should have
leukocyte counts twice weekly. Medicines may be held temporarily.
GCSF treatment is rarely needed. Improper preparation of medicine,
not making it fresh each week, is a cause of increased difficulties with
neutropenia. Seizures may occur with overdose of pyrimethamine.
Potential toxic effects of sulfonamides include crystalluria, hematuria,
and rash. Profound neutropenia is a risk with sulfonamide overdosage, which has occurred when pharmacies make large quantities of
the suspension and there is settling of the medication with the starch
binder. The protocol for preparation for infants should be followed
carefully, with fresh medicine prepared weekly and the bottle shaken
well. Hypersensitivity reactions occur, especially in patients with AIDS.
For older children and adults, eight glasses of a nonacidic beverage
should be consumed each day while taking the medicine. Hypersensitivity reactions occur, especially frequently in patients with AIDS. As
mentioned above, folinic acid, as calcium leucovorin, should always be
administered concomitantly and for 1 week after treatment with pyrimethamine is discontinued to prevent bone marrow suppression.

Acquired Toxoplasmosis

Patients with acquired toxoplasmosis and lymphadenopathy usually
do not need specific treatment unless they have severe and persistent
symptoms or evidence of damage to vital organs (see Table 336.2). If
such signs and symptoms occur, treatment with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin should be initiated. Patients who appear to be
immunocompetent but have severe and persistent symptoms or damage to vital organs (e.g., chorioretinitis, myocarditis) need specific therapy until these specific symptoms resolve, followed by therapy for an
additional 2 weeks. Therapy often is administered for at least 4-­6 weeks,
though the optimal duration of therapy has not been defined. A loading dose of pyrimethamine for older children is 2 mg/kg/day divided
twice daily (maximum 50 mg bid), given for the first 1-2 days of treatment. The maintenance dose begins on the third day and is 1 mg/kg/
day (maximum 50 mg/day). Sulfadiazine is administered at 100 mg/kg/
day bid (maximum 4 g/day). Leucovorin is administered orally at 5-­20
mg 3 times weekly (or 10 mg daily depending on the leukocyte count).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 336 u Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii)
Ocular Toxoplasmosis

Patients with active ocular toxoplasmosis are treated with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin (see Table 336.2). They are treated
while disease is active and then for at least several weeks after the lesion
has developed a quiescent appearance (i.e., sharp borders, pigmentation at margins of the lesion, and resolution of associated inflammatory cells in the vitreous), which usually occurs in 2-­4 weeks when
treatment is initiated promptly. Within 7-­10 days, the borders of the
retinal lesions sharpen, and visual acuity usually returns to the level
before development of the acute lesion. Systemic corticosteroids have
been administered concomitantly with antimicrobial treatment when
lesions involve the macula, optic nerve head, or papillomacular bundle.
Corticosteroids must never be given alone but may be initiated after
loading doses of pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine have been administered (2 days). With recurrences, new lesions often appear contiguous
to old ones. Very rarely, vitrectomy and removal of the lens are needed
to restore visual acuity. Active choroidal neovascular membranes as
a result of toxoplasmic chorioretinitis have been treated successfully
in children with intravitreal injection of antibody to vascular endothelial growth factor in addition to oral anti-­Toxoplasma medicines.
Suppressive treatment has prevented frequent recurrences of vision-­
threatening lesions.

Immunocompromised Persons

Serologic evidence of acute infection in an immunocompromised
patient, regardless of whether signs and symptoms of infection are
present or tachyzoites are demonstrated in tissue, is indication for
therapy similar to that described for immunocompetent persons
with symptoms of organ injury (see Table 336.2). It is important
to establish the diagnosis as rapidly as possible and institute treatment early. In immunocompromised patients other than those with
AIDS, therapy should be continued for at least 4-­6 weeks beyond
complete resolution of all signs and symptoms of active disease
and resolution of immune compromise. Careful follow-­up of these
patients is imperative because relapse may occur, requiring prompt
reinstitution of therapy. Relapse was once common in AIDS patients
without antiretroviral treatment, and suppressive therapy with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine, or TMP-­SMX, was continued for life.
Now it is possible to discontinue maintenance therapy when the
CD4 count remains at >200 cells/μL for 4 months and all lesions
have resolved. Therapy usually induces a beneficial response clinically but does not eradicate cysts. Treatment of T. gondii–seropositive patients with AIDS should be continued as long as CD4 counts
remain at <200/μL. Prophylactic TMP-­SMX therapy for P. jirovecii
pneumonia significantly reduces the incidence of toxoplasmosis in
AIDS patients.

Congenital Toxoplasmosis

All fetuses and newborns infected with T. gondii should be treated
regardless of whether they have clinical manifestations of infection,
because treatment may be effective in interrupting acute disease that
damages vital organs (see Table 336.2). The fetus is treated by treating
the pregnant woman with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin
after the first trimester. Infants should be treated for 1 year with pyrimethamine (2 mg/kg/day orally [PO] bid for 2 days, then 1 mg/kg/day
for 2-­6 months, and then 1 mg/kg given on Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday), sulfadiazine (100 mg/kg/day PO bid), and leucovorin (5-­10 mg
PO given on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, or more often depending on neutrophil count). The relative efficacy in reducing sequelae of
infection and the safety of treatment with 2 months vs 6 months of
the higher dosage of pyrimethamine are being compared in the U.S.
National Collaborative Study. (Updated information about this study
and these regimens is available from Dr. Rima McLeod, 773-­834-­4131.)
Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine are available only in tablet form but
can be prepared as suspensions. Prednisone (1 mg/kg/day PO bid) has
been used in addition when active chorioretinitis involves the macula
or otherwise threatens vision or when the CSF protein is >1,000 mg/
dL at birth, but the efficacy of this adjunctive therapy is not established.
Prednisone is continued only for as long as the active inflammatory

2197

process in the posterior pole of the eye is vision-­threatening or the CSF
protein is >1,000 mg/dL and is then tapered rapidly if the duration of
treatment has been brief.

Pregnant Women with Toxoplasma gondii Infection

The immunologically normal pregnant woman who acquires T. gondii >6 months before conception does not need treatment to prevent
congenital infection of her fetus. Although data are not available to
allow for a definitive time interval, if infection occurs during or shortly
before the pregnancy, it is reasonable to evaluate the fetus by PCR on
amniotic fluid and ultrasonography and to treat to prevent congenital
infection in the fetus (see Table 336.2).
Treatment of a pregnant woman who acquires infection at any time
during pregnancy reduces the chance of congenital infection in her
infant. If the mother develops acute toxoplasmosis during the first trimester of pregnancy, spiramycin (1 g PO every 8 hours without food)
or sulfadiazine is recommended for prevention of fetal infection. Spiramycin is available in the United States on an “emergency use” request
by a physician through the FDA Division of Anti-­Infective Drugs (301-­
796-­1400) after the diagnosis of acute infection is confirmed in a reference laboratory (Palo Alto Medical Facility Toxoplasma Serology Lab,
650-­853-­4828). With this approval, the physician can then contact the
spiramycin manufacturer, Sanofi Pasteur (1-­800-­822-­2463), to obtain
spiramycin for the patient. Adverse reactions to spiramycin are infrequent and include paresthesia, rash, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
For treatment of the pregnant woman whose fetus has a confirmed
or probable infection in the second or third trimester, the combination
of pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin is recommended. Following a loading dose of pyrimethamine (50 mg bid) for 2 days, then
pyrimethamine is administered at 50 mg once daily beginning on the
third day. Sulfadiazine (1.5-­2.0 g PO bid) and leucovorin (10 mg PO
once daily) are initiated on the first day of treatment with pyrimethamine and continued for the full course of treatment. Delay in maternal treatment during gestation results in greater brain and eye disease
in the infant. Diagnostic amniocentesis should be performed at >17-­18
weeks of gestation in pregnancies when there is high suspicion of fetal
infection. After 24 weeks of gestation, incidence of transmission is relatively high, and all pregnant women who are infected acutely after that
time are treated with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin to
treat the fetus.
The approach in France to congenital toxoplasmosis includes systematic serologic screening of all pregnant women beginning at ≤11
weeks of gestational age. For women who are seronegative, testing is
performed again each month during gestation, at birth, and 1 month
after birth. Mothers with acute infection early in gestation and without evidence of involvement of the fetus are treated with spiramycin
to prevent transmission and sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine to treat
possible fetal infection. Ultrasonography and amniocentesis for PCR
at approximately week 17-18 of gestation are used for fetal diagnosis
and have 97% sensitivity and 100% specificity. Confidence intervals
for sensitivity are larger early and late in gestation. Fetal infection
is treated with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin after 14
weeks of gestation, and termination of pregnancy is very rare at present. Prompt initiation of treatment with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin during pregnancy usually results in an excellent
outcome, with normal development of children in most cases. Only
19% of infants have findings of congenital infection, including intracranial calcifications (13%) and chorioretinal scars (6%), although
the prevalence of chorioretinal scars is 39% at follow-­up later in
childhood. Several studies have demonstrated improved outcomes
with shorter times between diagnosis and initiation of treatment.
In Germany, for seroconverting women who are between 15 and 17
weeks’ gestation and before amniocentesis, administration of pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin results in good outcomes
for infants but is sometimes associated with sulfadiazine hypersensitivity in mothers.
Chronically infected pregnant women who are immunocompromised have transmitted T. gondii to their fetuses. Such women
should be treated with spiramycin throughout gestation. The optimal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2198 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
management for prevention of congenital toxoplasmosis in the fetus
of a pregnant woman with HIV infection, a CD4 count <200 cells/μL,
and inactive T. gondii infection is unknown. Fortunately, this situation now is rarely encountered in the United States. If the pregnancy
is not terminated, some experts suggest that the mother should be
treated with spiramycin or sulfadiazine alone during the first 14
weeks of gestation and thereafter with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine,
and leucovorin until term. There are no universally accepted guidelines at present.
In a study of adult patients with AIDS and toxoplasmic encephalitis,
pyrimethamine (75 mg PO once daily) combined with high dosages of
intravenous clindamycin (1,200 mg every 6 hr) appeared equal in efficacy to pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine in the treatment of toxoplasmic encephalitis. Other experimental agents include the macrolides
clarithromycin and azithromycin.

Future Treatments

Many potential future treatments are currently being studied, including tetrahydroquinolones and another cytochrome b/c inhibitor as a
prodrug, calcium kinase inhibitors, DHFR inhibitors, and nanoparticle technology. Research is ongoing regarding the molecular targets
of a toxoplasmosis vaccine that could be administered to mothers, children, or the general population. One group has developed an effective,
porous, nanoparticle-­based, intranasally administered vaccine against
latent and congenital toxoplasmosis that protects nonhuman primates.

PROGNOSIS

Early institution of specific treatment for congenitally infected infants
usually rapidly controls the active manifestations of toxoplasmosis,
including active chorioretinitis, meningitis, encephalitis, hepatitis, splenomegaly, and thrombocytopenia. Rarely, hydrocephalus resulting from
aqueductal obstruction may develop or become worse during therapy.
Treatment appears to reduce the incidence of diminished cognitive and
abnormal motor function. Chorioretinitis often recurs in untreated
patients and sometimes recurs in treated patients. Treated children with
extensive involvement at birth may function normally later in life or
have mild to severe impairment of vision, hearing, cognitive function,
and other neurologic functions. Delays in diagnosis and therapy, perinatal hypoglycemia, hypoxia, hypotension, repeated shunt infections,
and severe visual impairment are associated with a poorer prognosis.
The prognosis is not necessarily poor for infected babies. Currently
available treatments do not eradicate encysted parasites.
Studies in France have demonstrated that outcome of treated fetal
toxoplasmosis, even when infection is acquired early in gestation, is
usually favorable if no hydrocephalus is detected on ultrasound and
treatment with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, or leucovorin is initiated promptly. The Systematic Review on Congenital Toxoplasmosis (SYROCOT) study in Europe indicated that neurologic outcome is
improved with shorter times between diagnosis and initiation of treatment of fetal toxoplasmosis. Work in Lyon, France, has indicated a low
incidence of recurrent eye disease in children with congenital toxoplasmosis who had been treated in utero and in their first year of life.
The NCCCTS (1981–2004) in the United States found that neurologic,
developmental, audiologic, and ophthalmologic outcomes are considerably better for most children who were treated in the first year of
life with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin compared with
children who had not been treated or were treated for only 1 month in
earlier decades described in the literature.

PREVENTION

Counseling pregnant women about the methods of preventing transmission of T. gondii (see Fig. 336.1) during pregnancy can reduce
acquisition of infection during gestation. Women who do not have
specific antibody to T. gondii before pregnancy should only eat well-­
cooked meat during pregnancy and should avoid contact with materials contaminated with oocysts excreted by cats, when possible. Cats
that are kept indoors, maintained on prepared food, and not fed fresh,
uncooked meat should not contact encysted T. gondii or shed oocysts.
Serologic screening, ultrasound monitoring, and treatment of pregnant

women during gestation can also reduce the incidence and manifestations of congenital toxoplasmosis.
Point-­of-­care testing to facilitate gestational screening, recent developments in medicines for treatment of active and chronic infections, and
progress toward vaccines to prevent infections in humans and oocyst
shedding by cats are all recent advances with promise to prevent or
improve outcomes for Toxoplasma gondii infections. There is a pointof-care test that has been CE marked for use in Europe and is currently
moving toward completion of feasibility studies in the United States with
consideration of FDA clearance, potentially marking the beginning of
more widespread testing for optimal obstetrical care to prevent congenital toxoplasmosis and for public health initiatives to identify prevalence
of toxoplasmosis in specific high-risk areas of the globe.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We gratefully acknowledge the participant families, physicians, and
other personnel of the National Collaborative Congenital Toxoplasmosis Study (NCCTS), and colleagues, for helping to create the understanding and knowledge in this chapter; and the Cornwell Mann,
Rodriguez, and Morel families. Taking out Toxo (TOT), TRI, and NIH,
NIAID/DMID ROI AI27530 and RO1 AI071319-­01 for support. We
also thank Andrew Grose for his assistance in preparing this chapter.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 16

Helminthic Diseases
Chapter 337

Ascariasis (Ascaris
lumbricoides)
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent
ETIOLOGY

Ascariasis is caused by the nematode, or roundworm, Ascaris lumbricoides. Adult worms of A. lumbricoides inhabit the lumen of the small
intestine. The reproductive potential of Ascaris is prodigious; a gravid
female worm produces 200,000 eggs per day. The fertile ova are oval in
shape with a thick, mamillated covering measuring 45-­70 μm in length
and 35-­50 μm in breadth (Fig. 337.1). After passage in the feces, the
eggs embryonate and become infective in 5-­10 days under favorable
environmental conditions. Adult worms can live for 12-­18 months
(Fig. 337.2).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Ascariasis occurs globally and is the most prevalent human helminthiasis in the world. It is most common in tropical areas (South America,
Africa, Asia) where environmental conditions are optimal for maturation of ova in the soil. Approximately 1 billion persons are estimated
to be infected. Although the number of cases in the United States is
not known precisely, the highest prevalence is thought to be in high-­
poverty areas of the South and Appalachia. Pig farming is also associated with Ascaris species. Key factors linked with a higher prevalence of
infection include poor socioeconomic conditions, use of human feces
as fertilizer, and geophagia. Even though infection can occur at any
age, the highest rate is in preschool or early school-­age children. Transmission is primarily hand to mouth but may also involve ingestion of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 337 u Ascariasis (Ascaris lumbricoides)
Diagnosis

Ascaris lumbricoides

2199

Clinical features

Fertilized
egg

Loeffler syndrome
caused by larval
migration through
pulmonary tissue

Adult worm: 15 cm
Eggs: 90 µm × 45 µm

Fig. 337.1 Soil-­
transmitted helminth eggs (Ascaris lumbricoides).

(From Bethony J, Brooker S, Albonico M, et al. Soil-­transmitted helminth infections: ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm. Lancet.
2006;367:1521–1532.)

Detection
of ascaris
eggs by
microscopy of
stool samples;
rarely detection
of worms
A

B

Indigestion,
and intestinal
and
hepatobiliary
obstruction
due to worms

A Fertilized egg
B Unfertilized egg

Fig. 337.3 Transmission of Ascaris lumbricoides: diagnosis and clini-

cal features. (From Jourdan PM, Lamberton PHL, Fenwick A, Addiss
DG. Soil-­transmitted helminth infections. Lancet. 2018;391:252–262.
Fig 2A.)

Fig. 337.2 Endoscopic image of intestinal Ascaris lumbricoides and
hookworm co-­infection. The ascaris worm is large in relation to the lumen and multiple blood-­filled hookworms. (Courtesy Dr. Kunimitsu Inoue, Nakamura Hospital, Oita, Japan.)

contaminated raw fruits and vegetables. Transmission is enhanced by
the high output of eggs by fecund female worms and resistance of ova
to the outside environment. Ascaris eggs can remain viable at 5–10°C
(41–50°F) for as long as 2 years.

PATHOGENESIS

Ascaris ova hatch in the small intestine after ingestion by the human
host. Larvae are released, penetrate the intestinal wall, and migrate to
the lungs by way of the venous circulation. The parasites then cause
pulmonary ascariasis as they enter into the alveoli and migrate
through the bronchi and trachea (Fig. 337.3). They are subsequently
swallowed and return to the intestines, where they mature into adult
worms. Female Ascaris begin depositing eggs in 8-­10 weeks.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation depends on the intensity of infection and the
organs involved. Most individuals have low to moderate worm burdens
and have no symptoms or signs. The most common clinical problems are
from pulmonary disease and obstruction of the intestinal or biliary
tract. Larvae migrating through these tissues may cause allergic symptoms, fever, urticaria, and granulomatous disease. The pulmonary manifestations resemble Loeffler syndrome and include transient respiratory
symptoms such as cough and dyspnea, pulmonary infiltrates, and blood
eosinophilia. Larvae may be observed in the sputum. Vague abdominal
complaints have been attributed to the presence of adult worms in the

small intestine, although the precise contribution of the parasite to these
symptoms is difficult to ascertain. A more serious complication occurs
when a large mass of worms leads to acute bowel obstruction. Children
with heavy infections may present with vomiting, abdominal distention, and cramps. In some cases, worms may be passed in the vomitus or
stools. Ascaris worms occasionally migrate into the biliary and pancreatic ducts, where they cause cholecystitis or pancreatitis. Worm migration through the intestinal wall can lead to peritonitis. Dead worms can
serve as a nidus for stone formation. Studies show that chronic infection
with A. lumbricoides (often coincident with other helminth infections)
impairs growth, physical fitness, and cognitive development.

DIAGNOSIS

Microscopic examination of fecal smears can be used for diagnosis
because of the high number of eggs excreted by adult female worms
(see Fig. 337.1). A high index of suspicion in the appropriate clinical
context is needed to diagnose pulmonary ascariasis or obstruction of
the gastrointestinal tract. Ultrasound examination of the abdomen is
capable of visualizing intraluminal adult worms.

TREATMENT

Although several chemotherapeutic agents are effective against ascariasis,
none has documented utility during the pulmonary phase of infection.
Treatment options for gastrointestinal ascariasis include albendazole
(400 mg orally once, for all ages), mebendazole (100 mg orally twice
daily for 3 days or 500 mg once, for all ages), pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg
orally once; maximum dose: 1g), or ivermectin (200 μg/kg orally once).
Nitazoxanide (100 mg orally twice per day for 3 days for children 1-­3
years old; 200 mg twice per day for 3 days for children 4-­11 years; 500 mg
twice per day for 3 days for adolescents and adults) produces cure rates
comparable to single-­dose albendazole. Piperazine citrate (75 mg/kg/
day for 2 days; maximum dose: 3.5 g/day), which causes neuromuscular paralysis of the parasite and rapid expulsion of the worms, is a good
treatment for intestinal or biliary obstruction but has been withdrawn
from the market in many regions due to toxicity and good alternatives.
Surgery may be required for cases with severe obstruction. Drug resistance has not been reported, but repeated treatment for ascariasis may be
necessary because reinfection is common.

PREVENTION

Although ascariasis is the most prevalent worm infection in the world,
little attention has been given to its control (Table 337.1). Anthelmintic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2200 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 337.1  Clinical and Public Health Control of Soil-­Transmitted Helminthiasis
CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS AND
MANAGEMENT

PUBLIC HEALTH CONTROL

Diagnosis

Individual

Community level (e.g., in select schools)

Diagnostic criteria

Parasitologic

Residence in an area with soil-­transmitted
helminthiasis prevalence >20%

Treatment approach

Single dose or multiple dose

Single-­dose periodic mass treatment

Threshold for treatment

Travel history, symptoms and signs, positive
laboratory test

Estimated prevalence of infection in target
population

Treatment objective

Parasitologic cure

Decreased worm burden; reduction in
transmission

Ancillary treatment

Based on clinical signs and symptoms

Typically, only if included in mass treatment
(e.g., vitamin A supplementation)

Follow-­up

Parasitologic test of cure; improvement in
associated health conditions

Not usually done

Health education (sanitation/hygiene)

Recommended

Recommended

From Jourdan PM, Lamberton PHL, Fenwick A, Addiss DG. Soil-­transmitted helminth infections. Lancet. 2018;391:252–262. Table 1.

chemotherapy programs can be implemented in one of three ways: (1)
offering universal treatment to all individuals in an area of high endemicity; (2) offering treatment targeted to groups with high frequency of
infection, such as children attending primary school; or (3) offering individual treatment based on intensity of current or past infection. Improving education about and practices of sanitary conditions and sewage
facilities, discontinuing the practice of using human feces as fertilizer,
and education are the most effective long-­term preventive measures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 338

Hookworms (Necator
americanus and
Ancylostoma spp.)
Peter J. Hotez
ETIOLOGY

Two major genera of hookworms, which are nematodes, or roundworms,
infect humans. Necator americanus, the only representative of its genus,
is a major anthropophilic hookworm and is the most common cause
of human hookworm infection. Hookworms of the genus Ancylostoma
include the anthropophilic hookworm Ancylostoma duodenale, which
also causes classic hookworm infection, and the less common zoonotic
species Ancylostoma ceylanicum (restricted mostly to Southeast Asia).
Human zoonotic infection with the dog hookworm Ancylostoma caninum is associated with an eosinophilic enteritis syndrome. The larval
stage of Ancylostoma braziliense, whose definitive hosts include dogs and
cats, is the principal cause of cutaneous larva migrans.
The infective larval stages of the anthropophilic hookworms live
in a developmentally arrested state in warm, moist soil. Larvae infect
humans either by penetrating through the skin (N. americanus and A.
duodenale) or when they are ingested (A. duodenale). Larvae entering
the human host by skin penetration undergo extraintestinal migration
through the venous circulation and lungs before they are swallowed,
whereas orally ingested larvae may undergo extraintestinal migration

or remain in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract (Figs. 338.1 and 338.2).
Larvae returning to the small intestine undergo two molts to become
adult, sexually mature, male and female worms ranging in length from
5-­13 mm. The buccal capsule of the adult hookworm is armed with cutting plates (N. americanus) or teeth (A. duodenale) to facilitate attachment to the mucosa and submucosa of the small intestine. Hookworms
can remain in the intestine for 1-­5 years, where they mate and produce
eggs. Although up to 2 months is required for the larval stages of hookworms to undergo extraintestinal migration and develop into mature
adults, A. duodenale larvae may remain developmentally arrested for
many months before resuming development in the intestine. Mature
A. duodenale female worms produce about 30,000 eggs per day; daily
egg production by N. americanus is <10,000/day (Fig. 338.3). The eggs
are thin shelled and ovoid, measuring approximately 40-­60 μm. Eggs
that are deposited on soil with adequate moisture and shade develop
into first-­stage larvae and hatch. Over the ensuing several days and
under appropriate conditions, the larvae molt twice to the infective
stage. Infective larvae are developmentally arrested and nonfeeding.
They migrate vertically in the soil until they either infect a new host or
exhaust their lipid metabolic reserves and die.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Hookworm infection is one of the most prevalent infectious diseases
of humans. The Global Burden of Disease Study 2015 reported that
approximately 428 million people are infected with hookworms, with
further estimates indicating that hookworm infection globally results in
4.1 million disability-­adjusted life-­years, possibly leading all neglected
tropical diseases in years lost through disability. In the case of hookworm infection, all the years lost through disability are attributed to anemia from intestinal blood loss. There is also a massive socioeconomic
impact from hookworm infection, with estimates that hookworm can
cause up to $139 billion in losses from diminished productivity.
Because of the requirement for adequate soil moisture, shade, and
warmth, hookworm infection is usually confined to rural areas, especially where human feces are used for fertilizer or where sanitation is
inadequate. Hookworm is an infection associated with economic underdevelopment and poverty throughout the tropics and subtropics. Sub-­
Saharan Africa, East Asia, and tropical regions of the Americas have
the highest prevalence of hookworm infection. High rates of infection
are often associated with cultivation of certain agricultural products,
such as tea in India; sweet potato, corn, cotton, and mulberry trees in
China; coffee in Central and South America; and rubber in Africa. It is
not uncommon to find dual N. americanus and A. duodenale infections.
N. americanus predominates in Central and South America as well as in
southern China and Southeast Asia, whereas A. duodenale predominates
in North Africa, in northern India, in China north of the Yangtze River,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 338 u Hookworms (Necator americanus and Ancylostoma spp.) 2201

Loeffler syndrome caused
by larval migration through
pulmonary tissue

Filariform larva

Adult worm: 0.5-1.5 cm
Eggs: 65 µm × 40 µm
Larvae: 250 µm × 15 µm

Detection of
hookworm eggs
by microscopy of
stool samples; rarely
detection of worms
Hookworm egg

and among aboriginal people in Australia. The ability of A. duodenale
to withstand somewhat harsher environmental and climatic conditions
may reflect its ability to undergo arrested development in human tissues.
A. ceylanicum infection occurs in India and Southeast Asia.
Eosinophilic enteritis caused by A. caninum was first described in
Queensland, Australia, with two reported cases in the United States.
Because of its global distribution in dogs, it was initially anticipated
that human A. caninum infections would be identified in many locales,
but this has not been found.

PATHOGENESIS
Indigestion
and iron
deficiency
anemia;
sometimes
severe

Fig. 338.1 Transmission of hookworm (Ancylostoma duodenale and
Necator americanus): diagnosis and clinical features. (From Jourdan
PM, Lamberton PHL, Fenwick A, Addiss DG. Soil-­transmitted helminth
infections. Lancet. 2018;391:252–262. Fig 2C.)

The major morbidity of human hookworm infection is a direct result
of intestinal blood loss. Adult hookworms adhere tenaciously to the
mucosa and submucosa of the proximal small intestine by using their
cutting plates or teeth and a muscular esophagus that creates negative
pressure in their buccal capsules. At the attachment site, host inflammation is downregulated by the release of antiinflammatory polypeptides by
the hookworm. Rupture of capillaries in the lamina propria is followed
by blood extravasation, with some of the blood ingested directly by the
hookworm. After ingestion, the blood is anticoagulated, the red blood
cells are lysed, and the hemoglobin is released and digested. Each adult
A. duodenale hookworm causes loss of an estimated 0.2 mL of blood/
day; blood loss is less for N. americanus. Individuals with light infections
have minimal blood loss and thus may have hookworm infection but not
hookworm disease. There is a direct correlation between the number of
adult hookworms in the gut and the volume of fecal blood loss. Hookworm disease results only when individuals with moderate and heavy
infections experience sufficient blood loss to develop iron deficiency and
anemia. Hypoalbuminemia and consequent edema and anasarca from
the loss of intravascular oncotic pressure can also occur. These features
depend heavily on the dietary reserves of the host.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Fig. 338.2 Endoscopic images of intestinal hookworm infection.
(Courtesy Dr. Kunimitsu Inoue, Nakamura Hospital, Oita, Japan.)

Hookworm

Fig. 338.3 Soil-­transmitted hookworm helminth eggs. (From Bethony
J, Brooker S, Albonico M, et al. Soil-­transmitted helminth infections:
ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm. Lancet. 2006;367:1521–1532.)

Chronically infected children with moderate and heavy hookworm
infections suffer from intestinal blood loss that results in iron deficiency
and can lead to anemia as well as protein malnutrition. Prolonged iron
deficiency associated with hookworms in childhood can lead to physical
growth retardation and cognitive and intellectual deficits.
Anthropophilic hookworm larvae elicit dermatitis sometimes
referred to as ground itch when they penetrate human skin. The vesiculation and edema of ground itch are exacerbated by repeated infection. Infection with a zoonotic hookworm, especially A. braziliense,
can result in lateral migration of the larvae to cause the characteristic cutaneous tracts of cutaneous larva migrans (see Chapter 338.1).
Cough subsequently occurs in A. duodenale and N. americanus hookworm infection when larvae migrate through the lungs to cause laryngotracheobronchitis, usually about 1 week after exposure. Pharyngitis
also can occur. The onset of eosinophilia coincides with the entry of
hookworm larvae into the GI tract. Upper abdominal pain can occur
during this period, but it eventually subsides.
Chronic intestinal hookworm infection is not typically associated
with specific GI complaints, although pain, anorexia, and diarrhea
have been attributed to the presence of hookworms. The major clinical manifestations are related to intestinal blood loss. Heavily infected
children exhibit all the signs and symptoms of iron-­deficiency anemia
and protein malnutrition. In some cases, children with chronic hookworm disease acquire a yellow-­green pallor known as chlorosis.
An infantile form of ancylostomiasis resulting from heavy A.
duodenale infection has been described. Affected infants experience
diarrhea, melena, failure to thrive, and profound anemia. Infantile
ancylostomiasis has significant mortality.
Eosinophilic enteritis caused by A. caninum is associated with colicky abdominal pain that begins in the epigastrium and radiates outward and is usually exacerbated by food. Extreme cases may mimic
acute appendicitis.

DIAGNOSIS

Children with hookworm release eggs that can be detected by direct
fecal examination (see Fig. 338.3). Quantitative methods are available

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2202 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
to determine whether a child has a heavy worm burden that can cause
hookworm disease. The eggs of N. americanus and A. duodenale are
morphologically indistinguishable. Species identification typically
requires egg hatching and differentiation of third-­stage infective larvae;
methods using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have been developed
but are not generally used in clinical practice.
In contrast, eggs are generally not present in the feces of patients with
eosinophilic enteritis caused by A. caninum. Eosinophilic enteritis is often
diagnosed by demonstrating ileal and colonic ulcerations by colonoscopy
in the presence of significant blood eosinophilia. An adult canine hookworm may occasionally be recovered during colonoscopic biopsy. Patients
with this syndrome develop IgG and IgE serologic responses.

TREATMENT

The goal of deworming is removal of the adult hookworms with an anthelmintic drug. The benzimidazole anthelmintics, mebendazole and albendazole, are effective at eliminating hookworms from the intestine, although
multiple doses are sometimes required. Albendazole (400 mg orally [PO]
once, for all ages) often results in cure, although N. americanus adult hookworms are sometimes more refractory and require additional doses. Mebendazole (100 mg PO twice daily [bid] for 3 days, for all ages) is also effective.
In many developing countries, mebendazole is administered as a single dose
of 500 mg; however, the cure rates with this regimen can be as low as 10% or
less. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), children should
be encouraged to chew tablets of albendazole or mebendazole, because
forcing very young children to swallow large tablets may cause choking
or asphyxiation. Mebendazole is recommended for A. caninum–associated eosinophilic enteritis, although recurrences are common. Because the
benzimidazoles have been reported to be embryotoxic and teratogenic in
laboratory animals, their safety during pregnancy and in young children is
a potential concern, and the risks vs benefits must be carefully considered.
WHO currently supports the use of benzimidazoles in infected children
≥1 year old but at a reduced dose (200 mg for albendazole) in the youngest age-­group (1-­2 years old). The most up to date guidelines for treating
these populations are available from the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/hookworm/health_professionals/
index.html#tx. In some countries, pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg PO once
daily for 3 days; maximum dose: 1 g) is available in liquid form and is an
effective alternative to the benzimidazoles. A newer drug known as tribendimidine is still under clinical development and may be available in the
future. Replacement therapy with oral iron is not usually required to correct
hookworm-­associated iron deficiency in children.

PREVENTION

In 2001, the World Health Assembly urged its member states to implement programs of periodic deworming so as to control the morbidity of hookworm and other soil-­transmitted helminth infections (see
Table 337.1 in Chapter 337). Although anthelmintic drugs are effective at eliminating hookworms from the intestine, the high rates of
drug failure from single-­dose mebendazole or albendazole and posttreatment reinfection among children suggest that mass drug administration alone is not effective for controlling hookworm in highly
endemic areas. Moreover, data suggest that the efficacy of mebendazole decreases with frequent, periodic use, leading to concerns about
the possible emergence of anthelminthic drug resistance. To reduce
the reliance exclusively on anthelminthic drugs, a recombinant human
hookworm vaccine has been developed and is undergoing clinical testing. Economic development and associated improvements in sanitation, health education, and avoidance of human feces as fertilizer
remain critical for reducing hookworm transmission and endemicity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

338.1 Cutaneous Larva Migrans
Peter J. Hotez

ETIOLOGY

Cutaneous larva migrans (creeping eruption) is caused by the larvae
of several nematodes, primarily hookworms, which are not usually

Fig. 338.4 Creeping eruption of cutaneous larva migrans. (From Korting GW. Hautkrankheitenbeikindern und jugendlichen. Stuttgart, Germany: FK Schattauer Verlag, 1969.)

parasitic for humans. A. braziliense, a hookworm of dogs and cats, is
the most common cause, but other animal hookworms may also produce the disease.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Cutaneous larva migrans is usually caused by A. braziliense, which is
endemic to the southeastern United States and Puerto Rico. Travelers
account for a significant percentage of the cases. Recently, autochthonous cases have been reported from Europe.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

After penetrating the skin, larvae localize at the epidermal-­dermal
junction and migrate in this plane, moving at a rate of 1-­2 cm/day.
The response to the parasite is characterized by raised, erythematous, serpiginous tracks, which occasionally form bullae (Fig. 338.4).
These lesions may be single or numerous and are usually localized to
an extremity, although any area of the body may be affected. As the
organism migrates, new areas of involvement may appear every few
days. Intense localized pruritus, without any systemic symptoms, may
be associated with the lesions. Bacterial superinfection can occur.

DIAGNOSIS

Cutaneous larva migrans is diagnosed by clinical examination of the
skin. Patients are often able to recall the exact time and location of
exposure because the larvae produce intense itching at the site of penetration. Eosinophilia may occur but is uncommon.

TREATMENT

If left untreated, the larvae die, and the syndrome resolves within a few
weeks to several months. Treatment with ivermectin (200 μg/kg PO in
a single dose for children over 15 kg; considered drug of choice by some
investigators), albendazole (400 mg PO daily for 3 days, for children
over the age of 2 years), or topical thiabendazole hastens resolution, if
symptoms warrant treatment. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
has not approved these drugs for cutaneous larva migrans. The safety of
ivermectin in young children (weighing <15 kg) and pregnant women
remains to be established. Albendazole should be taken with a fatty
meal. The latest guidelines from the US Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/zoonotichookworm/health_professionals/index.html#tx.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 339 u Trichuriasis (Trichuris trichiura)

2203

Chapter 339

Trichuriasis (Trichuris
trichiura)
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent
Fig. 339.2 Trichuris trichiura infection. (Courtesy Dr. Kunimitsu Inoue,

ETIOLOGY

Trichuriasis is caused by the whipworm, Trichuris trichiura, a nematode, or roundworm, that inhabits the cecum and ascending colon.
The principal hosts of T. trichiura are humans, who acquire infection
by ingesting embryonated, barrel-­shaped eggs (Fig. 339.1). The larvae
escape from the shell in the upper small intestine and penetrate the
intestinal villi. The worms slowly move toward the cecum, where the
anterior three-­quarters whiplike portion remains within the superficial
mucosa and the short posterior end is free in the lumen (Fig. 339.2).
In 1-­3 months, the adult female worm begins producing 5,000-­20,000
eggs per day. After excretion in the feces, embryonic development
occurs in 2-­4 weeks with optimal temperature and soil conditions. The
adult worm life span is approximately 2 years.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Trichuriasis occurs throughout the world and is especially common
in poor rural communities with inadequate sanitary facilities and
soil contaminated with human or animal feces. Trichuriasis is one of
the most prevalent human helminthiases, with an estimated 1 billion
infected individuals worldwide. In many parts of the world, where
protein-­energy malnutrition and anemia are common, the prevalence
of T. trichiura infection can be as high as 95%. Although trichuriasis
occurs in the rural southeastern United States, its prevalence has not
been reported. The highest rate of infection occurs among children
5-­15 years old. Infection develops after ingesting embryonated ova by
direct contamination of hands, food (raw fruits and vegetables fertilized with human feces), or drink (Fig. 339.3). Transmission can also
occur indirectly through flies or other insects.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most persons harbor low worm burdens and do not have symptoms.
Some individuals may have a history of right lower quadrant or vague
periumbilical pain. Adult Trichuris ingest approximately 0.005 mL of
blood per worm per day. Children, who are most likely to be heavily infected, frequently suffer from disease. Clinical manifestations

Nakamura Hospital, Oita, Japan.)

Diagnosis

Clinical features

Embryonated egg

Indigestion and
anemia due to
worms

Adult worm: 2-5 cm
Eggs: 55 µm × 20 µm

Detection
of trichuris
eggs by
microscopy of
stool samples;
rarely detection
of worms
Unembryonated egg

In severe
infection,
dysentery,
anemia,
clubbing,
abdominal
tenderness,
and rectal
prolapse

Fig. 339.3 Transmission of Trichuris trichiura: diagnosis and clinical

features. (From Jourdan PM, Lamberton PHL, Fenwick A, Addiss DG.
Soil-­transmitted helminth infections. Lancet. 2018;391:252–262. Fig 2B.)

include chronic dysentery, rectal prolapse, anemia, poor growth, as
well as developmental and cognitive deficits. There is no significant
eosinophilia, even though a portion of the worm is embedded in the
mucosa of the large bowel.

DIAGNOSIS

Because egg output is so high, fecal smears frequently reveal the characteristic barrel-­shaped ova of T. trichiura.

TREATMENT

Albendazole (400 mg orally for 3 days, for all ages) is the drug of
choice and is safe and effective, in part because it is poorly absorbed
from the gastrointestinal tract. It reduces egg output by 90–99% and
has cure rates of 70–90%, although reinfection and resumption of egg
production by live worms that presumably survive after treatment may
occur. Alternatives include mebendazole (100 mg orally twice daily for
3 days) and ivermectin (600 μg/kg orally for 3 days). Single-­day treatment with albendazole, nitazoxanide, or albendazole plus nitazoxanide
leads to cure rates that are low and short-­lived. Combination treatment
with oxantel pamoate (20 mg/kg) plus 400 mg albendazole on consecutive days may have the highest cure rate.

PREVENTION
Fig. 339.1 Trichuris trichiura. Soil-­transmitted helminth eggs. (From

Bethony J, Brooker S, Albonico M, et al. Soil-­transmitted helminth infections: ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm. Lancet. 2006;367:1521–
1532.)

Disease can be prevented by personal hygiene, improved sanitary conditions, and eliminating the use of human feces as fertilizer (see Table
337.1 in Chapter 337).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2204 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 340

Enterobiasis (Enterobius
vermicularis)
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent
ETIOLOGY

The cause of enterobiasis, or pinworm infection, is Enterobius vermicularis, which is a small (1 cm in length), white, threadlike nematode,
or roundworm that typically inhabits the cecum, appendix, and adjacent areas of the ileum and ascending colon. Gravid females migrate
at night to the perianal and perineal regions, where they deposit up to
15,000 eggs. Ova are convex on one side and flattened on the other and
have diameters of approximately 30 × 60 μm. Eggs embryonate within
6 hours and remain viable for 20 days. Human infection occurs by the
fecal-­oral route typically by ingestion of embryonated eggs that are carried on fingernails, clothing, bedding, or house dust. After ingestion,
the larvae mature to form adult worms in 36-­53 days.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Enterobiasis infection occurs in individuals of all ages and socioeconomic levels. It is prevalent in regions with temperate climates and is the
most common helminth infection in the United States. It infects 30%
of children worldwide, and humans are the only known host. Infection occurs primarily in institutional or family settings that include
children. The prevalence of pinworm infection is highest in children
5-­14 years of age. It is common in areas where children live, play, and
sleep close together, thus facilitating egg transmission. Because the life
span of the adult worm is short, chronic parasitism is likely caused by
repeated cycles of reinfection. Autoinoculation can occur in individuals who habitually put their fingers in their mouth.

Fig. 340.1 Eggs of Enterobius vermicularis. (From Guerrant RL,

Walker DH, Weller PF, et al. Tropical Infectious Diseases. Philadelphia:
Churchill Livingstone, 2006. p. 1248.)

TREATMENT

Anthelmintic drugs should be administered to infected individuals and
their family members. Albendazole (400 mg orally with a repeat dose
2 week later for all age-­groups) is the treatment of choice and results in
cure rates exceeding 90%. Alternatives include mebendazole (100 mg
orally with a repeat dose 2 weeks later) and pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/
kg base orally 3 times a day up to a maximum of 1 g; repeat at 2 weeks).
Morning bathing removes a large portion of eggs. Frequent changing of
underclothes, bedclothes, and bedsheets decreases environmental egg
contamination and may decrease the risk for autoinfection.

PREVENTION

Household contacts can be treated at the same time as the infected
individual. Repeated treatments every 3-­4 months may be required
in circumstances with repeated exposure, such as with institutionalized children. Good hand hygiene is the most effective method of
prevention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PATHOGENESIS

Enterobius infection may cause symptoms by mechanical stimulation and irritation, allergic reactions, and migration of the worms to
anatomic sites where they become pathogenic. Enterobius infection
has been associated with concomitant Dientamoeba fragilis infection,
which causes diarrhea.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pinworm infection is innocuous and rarely causes serious medical
problems. The most common complaints include itching and restless
sleep secondary to nocturnal perianal or perineal pruritus. The precise cause and incidence of pruritus are unknown but may be related to
the intensity of infection, psychologic profile of the infected individual
and the family, or allergic reactions to the parasite. Eosinophilia is not
observed in most cases, because tissue invasion does not occur. Aberrant migration to ectopic sites occasionally may lead to appendicitis,
chronic salpingitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, peritonitis, hepatitis,
and ulcerative lesions in the large or small bowel.

DIAGNOSIS

A history of nocturnal perianal pruritus in children strongly suggests enterobiasis. Definitive diagnosis is established by identification
of parasite eggs or worms. Microscopic examination of adhesive cellophane tape pressed against the perianal region early in the morning frequently demonstrates eggs (Fig. 340.1). Repeated examinations
increase the chance of detecting ova; one examination detects 50%
of infections, three examinations 90%, and five examinations 99%.
Worms seen in the perianal region should be removed and preserved
in 75% ethyl alcohol until microscopic examination can be performed.
Digital rectal examination may also be used to obtain samples for a wet
mount. Routine stool samples rarely demonstrate Enterobius ova.

Chapter 341

Strongyloidiasis
(Strongyloides stercoralis)
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent
ETIOLOGY

Strongyloidiasis is caused by the nematode, or roundworm, Strongyloides stercoralis. Only adult female worms inhabit the small intestine.
The nematode reproduces in the human host by parthenogenesis and
releases eggs containing mature larvae into the intestinal lumen. Rhabditiform larvae immediately emerge from the ova and are passed in
feces, where they can be visualized by stool examination. Rhabditiform larvae either differentiate into free-­living adult male and female
worms or metamorphose into the infectious filariform larvae. Sexual
reproduction occurs only in the free-­living stage. Humans are usually
infected through skin contact with soil contaminated with infectious
larvae (Fig. 341.1). Larvae penetrate the skin, enter the venous circulation, and then pass to the lungs, break into alveolar spaces, and migrate
up the bronchial tree. They are then swallowed and pass through the
stomach, and adult female worms develop in the small intestine. Egg
deposition begins approximately 28 days after initial infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 341 u Strongyloidiasis (Strongyloides stercoralis)
Filariform larva
Loeffler syndrome
caused by larval
migration through
pulmonary tissue

Adult worm: 0·2 cm
Larvae:
225 µm × 15 µm

Rhabditiform larva

*

Indigestion and
in severe cases
hyperinfection;
dissemination
following
autoinfection
of larvae from
intestinal eggs

Detection
of strongyloides larvae
by microscopy of stool
samples, serology, and PCR

Fig. 341.1 Transmission of Strongyloides stercoralis: diagnosis and

clinical features. (From Jourdan PM, Lamberton PHL, Fenwick A, et al.
Soil-­
transmitted helminth infections. Lancet. 2018;391:252–262. Fig
2D.)

The hyperinfection syndrome occurs when large numbers of larvae
transform into infective organisms during their passage in feces and
then reinfect (autoinfect) the host by way of the lower gastrointestinal
(GI) tract or perianal region. This cycle may be accelerated in immunocompromised persons, particularly those with depressed T-­
cell
function.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

S. stercoralis infection is prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions of
the world and is endemic in several areas of Europe, the southern United
States, and Puerto Rico. Transmission requires appropriate environmental conditions, particularly warm, moist soil. Poor sanitation and
crowded living conditions are conducive to high levels of transmission.
Dogs and cats can act as reservoirs. The highest prevalence of infection in
the United States occurs in impoverished areas and among socially marginalized groups, such as immigrants, refugees, and indigenous or ethnic
minority groups. Infection may be especially common among residents
of mental institutions, veterans who were prisoners of war in areas of
high endemicity, and refugees and immigrants. Because of internal autoinfection, individuals may remain infected for decades. Infection may
be transmitted by organ transplantation. Individuals with hematologic
malignancies, autoimmune diseases, malnutrition, and drug-­induced
immunosuppression (especially corticosteroids) are at high risk for the
hyperinfection syndrome. Patients with AIDS may experience a rapid
course of disseminated strongyloidiasis with a fatal outcome.

PATHOGENESIS

The initial host immune response to infection is production of immunoglobulin E and eosinophilia in blood and tissues, which presumably
prevents dissemination and hyperinfection in the immunocompetent
host. Adult female worms in otherwise healthy and asymptomatic individuals may persist in the GI tract for years. If infected persons become
immunocompromised, the reduction in cellular and humoral immunity may lead to an abrupt and dramatic increase in parasite load with
systemic dissemination.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Approximately 30% of infected individuals are asymptomatic. The
remaining patients have symptoms that correlate with the three stages
of infection: invasion of the skin, migration of larvae through the
lungs, and parasitism of the small intestine by adult worms. Larva
currens is the manifestation of an allergic reaction to filariform larvae

2205

that migrate through the skin, where they leave pruritic, tortuous, urticarial tracks. The lesions may recur and are typically found over the
lower abdominal wall, buttocks, or thighs, resulting from larval migration from defecated stool. Pulmonary disease secondary to larval
migration through the lung rarely occurs and may resemble Loeffler
syndrome (cough, wheezing, shortness of breath, transient pulmonary
infiltrates accompanied by eosinophilia). GI strongyloidiasis is characterized by indigestion, crampy abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea,
steatorrhea, protein-­losing enteropathy, protein-­caloric malnutrition,
and weight loss. Edema of the duodenum with irregular mucosal folds,
ulcerations, and strictures can be seen radiographically. Infection may
be chronic in nature and is associated with eosinophilia.
Strongyloidiasis is potentially lethal because of the ability of the
parasite to replicate within the host and cause overwhelming hyperinfection in immunocompromised persons. The hyperinfection syndrome is characterized by an exaggeration of the clinical features that
develop in symptomatic immunocompetent individuals. The onset
is usually sudden, with generalized abdominal pain, distention, and
fever. Multiple organs can be affected as massive numbers of larvae
disseminate throughout the body and introduce bowel flora. The latter
may result in bacteremia and septicemia. Cutaneous manifestations
may include petechiae and purpura. Cough, wheezing, and hemoptysis are indicative of pulmonary involvement. Whereas eosinophilia is
a prominent feature of strongyloidiasis in immunocompetent persons,
this sign may be absent in immunocompromised persons. Because of
the low incidence of strongyloidiasis in industrialized countries, it is
often misdiagnosed, resulting in a significant delay in treatment.

DIAGNOSIS

Intestinal strongyloidiasis is diagnosed by examining feces or duodenal fluid for the characteristic larvae (Fig. 341.2). Several stool samples
should be examined by direct smear, the Koga agar plate method, or
the Baermann test. Alternatively, duodenal fluid can be sampled by the
enteric string test (Entero-­Test) or aspiration via endoscopy. In children with the hyperinfection syndrome, larvae may be found in sputum, gastric aspirates, and rarely in small intestinal biopsy specimens.
An enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay for IgG antibody to Strongyloides may be more sensitive than parasitologic methods for diagnosing
intestinal infection in the immunocompetent host. The utility of the
assay in diagnosing infection in immunocompromised patients with
the hyperinfection syndrome has not been determined. Eosinophilia
is common.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed at eradication of infection. Ivermectin
(200 μg/kg/day once daily orally for 2 days) is the drug of choice
for uncomplicated strongyloidiasis. Alternatively, albendazole
(400 mg orally twice daily for 7 days) may be used. Patients with
the hyperinfection syndrome should be treated with ivermectin
for 7-­14 days and may require repeated courses. Reducing the
dose of immunosuppressive therapy and treatment of concomitant
bacterial infections are essential in the management of the hyperinfection syndrome. Close follow-­up with repeated stool examination is necessary to ensure complete elimination of the parasite.
Strongyloides antibodies decrease within 6 months after successful
treatment.

PREVENTION

Sanitary practices designed to prevent soil and person-­
to-­
person
transmission are the most effective control measures (see Table 337.1).
Wearing shoes is a main preventive strategy. Reducing transmission in
institutional settings can be achieved by decreasing fecal contamination of the environment, such as by the use of clean bedding. Because
infection is uncommon in most settings, case detection and treatment
are advisable. Individuals who will be given prolonged high-­dose corticosteroids, immunosuppressive drugs before organ transplantation,
or cancer chemotherapy should have a screening examination for S.
stercoralis. If infected, they should be treated before immunosuppression is initiated.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2206 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
transient, recurrent lymphadenitis and lymphangitis. The early signs
and symptoms include episodic fever, lymphangitis of an extremity,
lymphadenitis (especially the inguinal and axillary areas), headaches,
and myalgias that last a few days to several weeks. These symptoms
are caused by an acute inflammatory response triggered by death of
adult worms. Initial damage to lymphatic vessels may remain subclinical for years. The syndrome is most frequently observed in persons
10-­20 years old. Manifestations of chronic lymphatic filariasis occur
mostly in adults ≥30 years old and result from anatomic and functional
obstruction to lymph flow. This obstruction results in lymphedema of
the legs, arms, breasts, and/or genitalia. Male genital involvement, such
as hydrocele, is very common in W. bancrofti infection, but uncommon
in Brugia spp. infection. Chronic lymphedema predisposes affected
extremities to bacterial superinfections, sclerosis, and verrucous skin
changes, resulting in elephantiasis, which may involve one or more
limbs, the breasts, or genitalia. It is uncommon for children to have
overt signs of chronic filariasis.

10 µm

Fig. 341.2 Larvae of intestinal strongyloidiasis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 342

Lymphatic Filariasis
(Brugia malayi, Brugia
timori, and Wuchereria
bancrofti)
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent
ETIOLOGY

The filarial worms Brugia malayi (Malayan filariasis), Brugia timori,
and Wuchereria bancrofti (bancroftian filariasis) are threadlike nematodes that cause similar infections. Infective larvae are introduced
into humans during blood feeding by the mosquito vector. Over 4-­6
months, the larval forms develop into sexually mature adult worms.
Once an adequate number of male and female worms accumulate in
the afferent lymphatic vessels, adult female worms release large numbers of microfilariae that circulate in the bloodstream. The life cycle
of the parasite is completed when mosquitoes ingest microfilariae in a
blood meal, which molt to form infective larvae over 10-­14 days. Adult
worms have a 5–7-­year life span.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

More than 120 million people living in tropical Africa, Asia, and Latin
America are infected; approximately 10–20% of these individuals have
clinically significant morbidity attributable to filariasis. W. bancrofti is
transmitted in Africa, Asia, and Latin America and accounts for 90%
of lymphatic filariasis. B. malayi is restricted to the South Pacific and
Southeast Asia, and B. timori is restricted to several islands of Indonesia. Travelers from nonendemic areas of the world who spend brief
periods in endemic areas are rarely infected. Global programs have targeted elimination in >80% of endemic countries by 2030.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of B. malayi, B. timori, and W. bancrofti infection are similar; manifestations of acute infection include

Tropical Pulmonary Eosinophilia

The presence of microfilariae in the body has no apparent pathologic
consequences except in persons with tropical pulmonary eosinophilia,
a syndrome of filarial etiology in which microfilariae are found in the
lungs and lymph nodes but not the bloodstream. It occurs only in individuals who have lived for years in endemic areas. Men 20-­30 years
old are most likely to be affected, although the syndrome occasionally
occurs in children. The presentation includes paroxysmal nocturnal
cough with dyspnea, fever, weight loss, and fatigue. Rales and rhonchi
are found on auscultation of the chest. The x-­ray findings may occasionally be normal, but increased bronchovascular markings, discrete
opacities in the middle and basal regions of the lung, or diffuse miliary lesions are usually present (Fig. 342.1). Recurrent episodes may
result in interstitial fibrosis and chronic respiratory insufficiency in
untreated individuals. Hepatosplenomegaly and generalized lymphadenopathy are often seen in children. The diagnosis is suggested by
residence in a filarial endemic area, eosinophilia (>2,000/μL), compatible clinical symptoms, increased serum IgE (>1,000 IU/mL), and high
titers of antimicrofilarial antibodies in the absence of microfilaremia.
Although microfilariae may be found in sections of lung or lymph
node, biopsy of these tissues is unwarranted in most situations. The
clinical response to diethylcarbamazine (2 mg/kg/dose orally 3 times
daily for 12-­21 days) is the final criterion for diagnosis; the majority of patients improve with this therapy. If symptoms recur, a second
anthelmintic course should be administered. Patients with chronic
symptoms are less likely to show improvement than those who have
been ill for a short time.

DIAGNOSIS

Demonstration of microfilariae in the blood is the primary means for
confirming the diagnosis of lymphatic filariasis. Because microfilaremia is nocturnal in most cases, blood samples should be obtained
between 10 pm and 2 am. Anticoagulated blood is passed through a
Nuclepore filter that is stained and examined microscopically for
microfilariae. Adult worms or microfilariae can be identified in tissue specimens obtained at biopsy. Infection with W. bancrofti in the
absence of bloodborne microfilariae may be diagnosed by detection of
parasite antigen in the serum. Adult worms in lymphatic vessels can be
visualized by ultrasonography.

TREATMENT

The use of antifilarial drugs in the management of acute lymphadenitis
and lymphangitis is controversial. No controlled studies demonstrate
that administration of drugs such as diethylcarbamazine modifies the
course of acute lymphangitis. Diethylcarbamazine may be given to
asymptomatic microfilaremic persons to lower the intensity of parasitemia. The drug also kills a proportion of the adult worms. Because
treatment-­associated complications such as pruritus, fever, generalized
body pain, hypotension, and even death may occur, especially with
high microfilarial levels, the dose of diethylcarbamazine should be
increased gradually (children: 1 mg/kg orally as a single dose on day 1,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 343 u Other Tissue Nematodes

Fig. 342.1 Chest radiograph of tropical pulmonary eosinophilia.
Reticulonodular opacities are scattered throughout both lungs. (From
Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2006. p. 3274.)

1 mg/kg 3 times daily on day 2, 1-­2 mg/kg 3 times daily on day 3, and
2 mg/kg 3 times daily on days 4-­14; adults: 50 mg orally on day 1, 50
mg 3 times daily on day 2, 100 mg 3 times daily on day 3, and 2 mg/
kg 3 times daily on days 4-­14). For patients with no microfilaria in the
blood, the full dose (2 mg/kg/day orally divided 3 times daily) can be
given beginning on day 1. Repeat doses may be necessary to further
reduce the microfilaremia and kill lymph-­dwelling adult parasites. W.
bancrofti is more sensitive than B. malayi to diethylcarbamazine.
Global programs to control and ultimately eradicate lymphatic
filariasis from endemic populations outside of sub-­Saharan Africa
currently recommend triple drug treatment with one or two annual
doses of diethylcarbamazine (6 mg/kg orally once), albendazole (400
mg orally once), and ivermectin (150 μg/kg orally once) (mass drug
administration). In co-­endemic areas of filariasis and onchocerciasis,
mass drug applications with single-­dose ivermectin and albendazole
are used because of severe adverse reactions with diethylcarbamazine
in onchocerciasis-­infected individuals.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 343

Other Tissue Nematodes
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent
ONCHOCERCIASIS (ONCHOCERCA VOLVULUS)

Infection with Onchocerca volvulus leads to onchocerciasis or river
blindness. Onchocerciasis occurs primarily in West Africa but also in
Central and East Africa and is the world’s second leading infectious
cause of blindness. There have been scattered foci in South America
and Yemen. O. volvulus larvae are transmitted to humans by the bite
of Simulium black flies that breed in fast-­flowing streams. The larvae
penetrate the skin and migrate through the connective tissue and eventually develop into adult worms that can be found tangled in fibrous
tissue. Adult worms can live in the human body for up to 14 years.
Female worms produce large numbers of microfilariae that migrate
through the skin, connective tissue, and eye. Most infected individuals

2207

are asymptomatic. In heavily infected individuals, clinical manifestations are a result of localized host inflammatory reactions to dead or
dying microfilariae and subcutaneous adult worms surrounded by a
palpable fibrous capsule. Cutaneous and ocular reactions to microfilariae produce pruritic dermatitis, punctate keratitis, corneal pannus
formation, and chorioretinitis. Adult worms in subcutaneous nodules
are not painful and tend to occur over bony prominences of the hip.
The diagnosis can be established by obtaining snips of skin covering
the scapulae, iliac crests, buttocks, or calves. The snips are immersed in
saline for several hours and examined microscopically for microfilariae
that have emerged into the fluid. The diagnosis can also be established
by demonstrating microfilariae in the cornea or anterior chamber on
slit-­lamp examination or finding adult worms on a nodule biopsy specimen. Ophthalmology consultation should be obtained before treatment of eye lesions.
A single dose of ivermectin (150 μg/kg orally) is the drug of choice
and clears O. volvulus microfilariae from the skin for several months
but has no effect on the adult worm. Treatment with ivermectin should
be repeated every 6-­12 months until the patient is asymptomatic or
has no evidence of eye infection. Adverse effects of ivermectin therapy include fever, urticaria, and pruritus, which are more frequent in
individuals not born in endemic areas who acquired the infection after
periods of intense exposure, such as Peace Corps volunteers. Patients
with concurrent high-­density microfilaremia from loiasis may develop
potentially fatal encephalopathy with ivermectin therapy. Treatment
with ivermectin should be withheld until Loa loa microfilaremia can
be reduced. Moxidectin is a promising new agent. Personal protection includes avoiding areas where biting flies are numerous, wearing protective clothing, and using insect repellent. Programs of mass
treatment with ivermectin have been implemented in Africa and South
America in an effort to reduce the prevalence of onchocerciasis.
The World Health Organization (WHO) set goals for onchocerciasis
elimination by 2025 using mass drug administration with ivermectin.
Elimination can be declared only after 3 years of posttreatment surveillance without microfilaria detection in skin biopsies.
Nodding syndrome, a form of epilepsy in African children living in
focal areas of Uganda and South Sudan, was epidemiologically associated with onchocerciasis, but an etiologic link was not established.
Recently, researchers identified neurotoxic autoantibodies that cross-­
react with O. volvulus proteins, which were found more frequently in
people with nodding syndrome than in those in the same village without the syndrome. Nodding syndrome may be an autoimmune epileptic disorder triggered by O. volvulus infection.

LOIASIS (LOA LOA)

Loiasis is caused by infection with the tissue nematode Loa loa. The
parasite is transmitted to humans by diurnally biting flies (Chrysops)
that live in the rain forests of West and Central Africa. Migration of
adult worms through skin, subcutaneous tissue, and subconjunctival
area can lead to transient episodes of pruritus, erythema, and localized edema known as Calabar swellings, which are nonerythematous
areas of subcutaneous edema 10-­20 cm in diameter typically found
around joints such as the wrist or the knee (Fig. 343.1). They resolve
over several days to weeks and may recur at the same or different sites.
Lifelong residents of L. loa–endemic regions may have microfilaremia
and eosinophilia but are often asymptomatic. In contrast, travelers to
endemic regions may have a hyperreactive response to L. loa infection
characterized by frequent recurrences of swelling, high level eosinophilia, debilitation, and serious complications such as glomerulonephritis and encephalitis. Diagnosis is usually established on clinical
grounds, often assisted by the infected individual reporting a worm
being seen crossing the conjunctivae. Microfilariae may be detected in
blood smears collected between 10 am and 2 pm. Adult worms should
be surgically excised when possible.
Diethylcarbamazine is the treatment of choice for loiasis, as there is
evidence that it kills both microfilariae and adult worms and results in
a sustained decrease in microfilarial intensity after treatment. Because
treatment-­associated complications such as pruritus, fever, generalized body pain, hypertension, and even death may occur, especially

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2208 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
to infected mosquitoes, such as working or hunting in swampy areas.
Management is by surgical excision.

ANGIOSTRONGYLUS CANTONENSIS

Fig. 343.1 Calabar swelling of the right hand. (From Guerrant RL,
Walker DH, Weller PF, et al. Tropical Infectious Diseases. Philadelphia:
Churchill Livingstone, 2006: p. 1165.)

with high microfilaria levels, the dose of diethylcarbamazine should
be increased gradually in such cases (children: 1 mg/kg orally on day
1, 1 mg/kg three times daily on day 2, 1-­2 mg/kg three times daily on
day 3, 3 mg/kg three times daily on days 4-­21; adults: 50 mg orally on
day 1, 50 mg three times daily on day 2, 100 mg three times daily on
day 3, 3 mg/kg three times daily on days 4-­21). Full doses can be instituted on day 1 in persons without microfilaremia (3 mg/kg orally times
daily for 21 days). A 3-­week course of albendazole can also be used
to slowly reduce L. loa microfilarial levels as a result of embryotoxic
effects on the adult worms. Antihistamines or corticosteroids may be
used to limit allergic reactions secondary to killing of microfilariae.
Personal protective measures include avoiding areas where biting flies
are present, wearing protective clothing, and using insect repellents.
Diethylcarbamazine (300 mg orally once weekly) prevents infection in
travelers who spend prolonged periods in endemic areas. L. loa do not
harbor Wolbachia endosymbionts, and therefore doxycycline has no
effect on infection.

INFECTION WITH ANIMAL FILARIAE

The most commonly recognized zoonotic filarial infections are caused by
members of the genus Dirofilaria. The worms are introduced into humans
by the bites of mosquitoes containing third-­stage larvae. The most common filarial zoonosis in the United States is Dirofilaria tenuis, a parasite
of raccoons. In Europe, Africa, and Southeast Asia, infections are usually caused by the dog parasite Dirofilaria repens. The dog heartworm,
Dirofilaria immitis, is the second most frequently encountered filarial
zoonosis worldwide. Other genera, including Dipetalonema-­like worms,
Onchocerca, and Brugia, are rare causes of zoonotic filarial infections.
Animal filariae do not undergo normal development in the human
host. The clinical manifestations and pathologic findings correspond
to the anatomic site of infection and can be categorized into four major
groups: subcutaneous, lung, eye, and lymphatic. Pathologic examination of affected tissue reveals a localized foreign body reaction around
a dead or dying parasite. The lesion consists of granulomas with eosinophils, neutrophils, and tissue necrosis. D. tenuis does not leave the
subcutaneous tissues, whereas Brugia beaveri eventually localizes to
superficial lymph nodes. Infections may be present for up to several
months. D. immitis larvae migrate for several months in subcutaneous tissues and most frequently result in a well-­circumscribed, coinlike
lesion in a single lobe of the lung. The chest radiograph typically reveals
a solitary pulmonary nodule 1-­3 cm in diameter. Definitive diagnosis
and cure depend on surgical excision and identification of the nematode within the surrounding granulomatous response. D. tenuis and
B. beaveri infections present as painful, rubbery, 1-­5 cm nodules in
the skin of the trunk, of the extremities, and around the orbit. Patients
often report having been engaged in activities predisposing to exposure

Angiostrongylus cantonensis, the rat lungworm, is the most common
cause of eosinophilic meningitis worldwide. Rats are the definitive
host. Human infection follows ingestion of third-­stage larvae in raw
or undercooked intermediate hosts such as snails and slugs, or transport hosts such as freshwater prawns, frogs, and fish. Most cases are
sporadic, but clusters have been reported, including clusters related to
consumption of lettuce contaminated with intermediate or transport
hosts. Even though most infections have been described in Southeast
Asia, the South Pacific, and Taiwan, shipboard travel of infected rats
has spread the parasite to Madagascar, Africa, the Caribbean, and most
recently Australia and North America. Larvae penetrate the vasculature of the intestinal tract and migrate to the meninges, where they
usually die but induce eosinophilic aseptic meningitis. Patients present 2-­35 days after ingestion of larvae with severe headache, neck pain
or nuchal rigidity, hyperesthesias and paresthesias (often migrating),
fatigue, fever, rash, pruritus, nausea, and vomiting. Neurologic involvement varies from asymptomatic to paresthesias, severe pain, weakness,
and focal neurologic findings such as cranial nerve palsies. Symptoms
can last for several weeks to months, especially headache. Coma and
death from hydrocephalus occur rarely in heavy infections. Peripheral
blood eosinophilia is not always present on initial examination but
peaks about 5 weeks after exposure, often when symptoms are improving. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis reveals pleocytosis with >10%
eosinophils in more than half of patients, with mildly elevated protein,
a normal glucose level, and an elevated opening pressure. Head CT
or MRI is usually unremarkable. The diagnosis is established clinically with supporting travel and diet history. A sensitive and specific
enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is available on a limited
basis from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for
testing CSF or serum.
Treatment is primarily supportive because the majority of infections are mild, and most patients recover within 2 months without
neurologic sequelae. Analgesics should be given for headache. Careful, repeated lumbar punctures should be performed to relieve hydrocephalus. Anthelmintic drugs have not been shown to influence the
outcome and may exacerbate neurologic symptoms. The use of corticosteroids may shorten the duration of persistent and severe headaches.
There is a higher incidence of permanent neurologic sequelae and
mortality among children than among adults. Infection can be avoided
by not eating raw or undercooked crabs, prawns, or snails.

ANGIOSTRONGYLUS COSTARICENSIS

Angiostrongylus costaricensis is a nematode that infects several species of rodents and causes abdominal angiostrongyliasis, which has
been described predominantly in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The mode of transmission to humans, who are accidental hosts, is
unknown. It is speculated that infectious larvae from a molluscan
intermediate host, such as the slug Vaginulus plebeius, contaminate
water or vegetation that is inadvertently consumed (chopped up in salads or on vegetation contaminated with the slug’s mucous secretions).
Although this slug is not indigenous to the continental United States,
it has been found on imported flowers and produce. The incubation
period for abdominal angiostrongyliasis is unknown, but limited data
suggest that it ranges from 2 weeks to several months after ingestion of
larvae. Third-­stage larvae migrate from the gastrointestinal tract to the
mesenteric arteries, where they mature into adults. These eggs degenerate and elicit an eosinophilic granulomatous reaction. The clinical findings of abdominal angiostrongyliasis mimic appendicitis, although the
former is typically more indolent. Children can have fever, right lower
quadrant pain, a tumor-­like mass, abdominal rigidity, and a painful
rectal examination. Most patients have leukocytosis with eosinophilia.
Radiologic examination may show bowel wall edema, spasticity, or filling defects in the ileocecal region and the ascending colon. Examination of stool for ova and parasites is not useful for A. costaricensis but
is useful for evaluating the presence of other intestinal parasites. An

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 344 u Toxocariasis (Visceral and Ocular Larva Migrans)
ELISA is available for diagnosis on a limited basis from the CDC, but
the test has a low specificity and is known to cross react with Toxocara,
Strongyloides, and Paragonimus.
Many patients undergo laparotomy for suspected appendicitis and
are found to have a mass in the terminal ileum to the ascending colon.
No specific treatment is known for abdominal angiostrongyliasis. Even
though the use of anthelmintic therapy has not been studied systematically, thiabendazole or diethylcarbamazine has been suggested. The
prognosis is generally good. Most cases are self-­limited, although surgery may be required in some patients. Cornerstones of prevention
include avoidance of slugs and not ingesting raw food and water that
may be contaminated with imperceptible slugs or slime from slugs. Rat
control is also important in preventing the spread of infection.

2209

There is no well-­
documented effective chemotherapy, although
albendazole (400 mg orally twice daily for 21 days) as first-­line therapy
or ivermectin (200 μg/kg for 2 days) as an alternative is recommended
without or with surgical removal. Multiple courses may be needed.
Corticosteroids have been used to relieve focal neurologic deficits. Surgical resection of the Gnathostoma is the major mode of therapy and
the treatment of choice. Blind surgical resection of subcutaneous areas
of diffuse swelling is not recommended because the worm can rarely
be located. Prevention through the avoidance of ingestion of poorly
cooked or raw fish, poultry, or pork should be emphasized for individuals living in or visiting endemic areas.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

DRACUNCULIASIS (DRACUNCULUS MEDINENSIS)

Dracunculiasis is caused by the guinea worm, Dracunculus medinensis.
WHO has targeted dracunculiasis for eradication in 2030. Eradication efforts have been hampered by conflicts as well as increasing rates
of infections in animals such as dogs. As of 2021, transmission of the
infection was occurring in Chad, Ethiopia, Mali, South Sudan, Angola,
and Cameroon. Humans become infected by drinking contaminated
stagnant water that contains immature forms of the parasite in the gut
of tiny crustaceans (copepods or water fleas). Larvae are released in
the stomach, penetrate the mucosa, mature, and mate. Approximately
1 year later, the adult female worm (1-­2 mm in diameter and up to 1
m long) migrates and partially emerges through the human host skin,
usually of the legs. Thousands of immature larvae are released when
the affected body part is immersed in the water. The cycle is completed
when larval forms are ingested by the crustaceans. Infected humans
have no symptoms until the worm reaches the subcutaneous tissue,
causing a stinging papule that may be accompanied by urticaria, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and dyspnea. The lesion vesiculates, ruptures,
and forms a painful ulcer in which a portion of the worm is visible.
Diagnosis is established clinically. Larvae can be identified by microscopic examination of the discharge fluid.
Metronidazole (25 mg/kg/day orally divided into three doses for 10
days; maximum dose: 750 mg) decreases local inflammation. Although
the drug does not kill the worm, it facilitates its removal. The worm
must be physically removed by rolling the slowly emerging 1 m–long
parasite onto a thin stick over a week. Topical corticosteroids shorten
the time to complete healing, while topical antibiotics decrease the risk
of secondary bacterial infection. Dracunculiasis can be prevented by
boiling or chlorinating drinking water or passing the water through a
cloth sieve before consumption. Eradication is dependent on behavior
modification and education.

GNATHOSTOMA SPINIGERUM

Gnathostoma spinigerum is a dog and cat nematode endemic to Southeast Asia, Japan, China, Bangladesh, and India, but it has been sporadically reported in numerous countries worldwide. Infection is
acquired by ingesting intermediate hosts containing larvae of the
parasite, such as raw or undercooked freshwater fish, chickens, pigs,
snails, or frogs. Penetration of the skin by larval forms and prenatal
transmission has also been described. Nonspecific signs and symptoms such as generalized malaise, fever, urticaria, anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, and epigastric pain develop 24-­48 hours after
ingestion of G. spinigerum. Ingested larvae penetrate the gastric wall
and migrate through soft tissue for up to 10 years. Moderate to severe
eosinophilia can develop. Cutaneous gnathostomiasis manifests
as intermittent episodes of localized, migratory nonpitting edema
associated with pain, pruritus, or erythema. Central nervous system involvement in gnathostomiasis is suggested by focal neurologic
findings, initially neuralgia followed within a few days by paralysis
or changes in mental status. Multiple cranial nerves may be involved,
and CSF may be xanthochromic but typically shows an eosinophilic
pleocytosis. Diagnosis of gnathostomiasis is based on clinical presentation and epidemiologic background. Brain and spinal cord lesions
may be seen on CT or MRI. Serologic testing varies in sensitivity and
specificity and is available through the CDC.

Chapter 344

Toxocariasis (Visceral and
Ocular Larva Migrans)
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent
Most cases of human toxocariasis are caused by the dog roundworm,
Toxocara canis. Adult female T. canis worms live in the intestinal
tracts of young puppies and their lactating mothers. Large numbers
of eggs are passed in the feces of dogs and embryonate under optimal soil conditions. Toxocara eggs can survive relatively harsh environmental conditions and are resistant to freezing and extremes of
moisture and pH. Humans ingest embryonated eggs contaminating
soil, hands, or fomites. The larvae hatch and penetrate the intestinal
wall and travel via the circulation to the liver, lung, and other tissues.
Humans do not excrete T. canis eggs because the larvae are unable to
complete their maturation to adult worms in the intestine. The cat
roundworm, Toxocara cati, is responsible for far fewer cases of visceral larva migrans (VLM) than T. canis. Ingestion of infective larvae of the raccoon ascarid Baylisascaris procyonis rarely leads to VLM
but can cause neural larva migrans, resulting in fatal eosinophilic
meningitis. Ingestion of larvae from the opossum ascarid Lagochilascaris minor leads to VLM rarely.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Human T. canis infections have been reported in almost all parts of
the world, primarily in temperate and tropical areas where dogs are
popular household pets. Young children are at highest risk because
of their unsanitary play habits and tendency to place fingers in the
mouth. Other behavioral risk factors include pica, contact with puppy
litters, and institutionalization. In North America, the highest prevalence of infection is in the southeastern United States and Puerto
Rico, particularly among socially disadvantaged Black and Hispanic
children. In the United States, serosurveys show that 3–3.9% of children are infected. Assuming an unrestrained and untreated dog population, toxocariasis is prevalent in settings where other geohelminth
infections, such as ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm infections,
are common.

PATHOGENESIS

T. canis larvae secrete large amounts of immunogenic glycosylated proteins. These antigens induce immune responses that lead to
eosinophilia and polyclonal and antigen-­specific immunoglobulin E
production. The characteristic histopathologic lesions are granulomas containing eosinophils, multinucleated giant cells (histiocytes),
and collagen. Granulomas are typically found in the liver but may also

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2210 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 344.1  Clinical Syndromes of Human Toxocariasis
SYNDROME

CLINICAL
FINDINGS

AVERAGE AGE

INFECTIOUS
DOSE

INCUBATION
PERIOD

LABORATORY
FINDINGS

ELISA

Visceral larva
migrans

Fevers,
hepatomegaly,
asthma

5 yr

Moderate to high

Weeks to months

Eosinophilia,
leukocytosis,
elevated IgE

High (≥1:16)

Ocular larva
migrans

Visual
disturbances,
retinal
granulomas,
endophthalmitis,
peripheral
granulomas

12 yr

Low

Months to years

Usually none

Low

Covert
toxocariasis

Abdominal pain,
gastrointestinal
symptoms,
weakness,
hepatomegaly,
pruritus, rash

School-­age to
adult

Low to moderate

Weeks to years

± Eosinophilia
± Elevated IgE

Low to moderate

ELISA, Enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay; IgE, immunoglobulin E; ±, with or without.
Adapted from Glickman LT, Schantz PM. Epidemiology and pathogenesis of zoonotic toxocariasis. Epidemiol Rev. 1981;3:230–250.

occur in the lungs, central nervous system (CNS), and ocular tissues.
Clinical manifestations reflect the intensity and chronicity of infection,
anatomic localization of larvae, and host granulomatous responses.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Three major clinical syndromes are associated with human toxocariasis: VLM, ocular larva migrans (OLM), and covert toxocariasis
(Table 344.1). The classic presentation of VLM includes eosinophilia,
fever, and hepatomegaly and occurs most often in toddlers with a history of pica and exposure to puppies. The findings include fever, cough,
wheezing, bronchopneumonia, anemia, hepatomegaly, leukocytosis,
eosinophilia, and positive Toxocara serology. Cutaneous manifestations
such as pruritus, eczema, and urticaria can be present. OLM tends to
occur in older children without signs or symptoms of VLM. Presenting
symptoms include unilateral visual loss, eye pain, white pupil, or strabismus that develops over weeks. Granulomas occur on the posterior
pole of the retina and may be mistaken for retinoblastoma. Serologic
testing for Toxocara has allowed the identification of individuals with
less obvious or covert symptoms of infection. These children may have
nonspecific complaints that do not constitute a recognizable syndrome.
Common findings include hepatomegaly, abdominal pain, cough,
sleep disturbance, failure to thrive, and headache with elevated Toxocara antibody titers. Eosinophilia may be present in 50–75% of cases.
The prevalence of positive Toxocara serology in the general population
supports that most children with T. canis infection are asymptomatic
and will not develop overt clinical sequelae over time. A correlation
between positive Toxocara serology and allergic asthma has also been
described.

DIAGNOSIS

A presumptive diagnosis of toxocariasis can be established in a young
child with eosinophilia (>20%), leukocytosis, hepatomegaly, fevers,
wheezing, and a history of geophagia and exposure to puppies or
unrestrained dogs. Supportive laboratory findings include hypergammaglobulinemia and elevated isohemagglutinin titers to A and
B blood group antigens. Most patients with VLM have an absolute
eosinophil count >500/μL. Eosinophilia is less common in patients
with OLM. Biopsy confirms the diagnosis. When biopsies cannot be
obtained, an enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay using excretory-­
secretory proteins harvested from T. canis larvae maintained in vitro
is the standard serologic test used to confirm toxocariasis. A titer

of 1:32 is associated with a sensitivity of approximately 78% and a
specificity of approximately 92%. The sensitivity for OLM is significantly less. The diagnosis of OLM can be established in patients with
typical clinical findings of a retinal or peripheral pole granuloma or
endophthalmitis with elevated antibody titers. Vitreous and aqueous
humor fluid anti-­Toxocara titers are usually greater than serum titers.
The diagnosis of covert toxocariasis should be considered in individuals with chronic weakness, abdominal pain, or allergic signs with
eosinophilia and increased IgE. In temperate regions of the world,
nonparasitic causes of eosinophilia that should be considered in the
differential diagnosis include allergies, drug hypersensitivity, lymphoma, vasculitis, and idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (see
Chapter 169).

TREATMENT

Most patients do not require treatment because signs and symptoms
are mild and subside over weeks to months. Several anthelmintic drugs
have been used for symptomatic cases, often with adjunctive corticosteroids to limit inflammatory responses that presumably result from
release of Toxocara antigens by dying parasites. Albendazole (400 mg
orally twice daily for 5 days for all ages) has demonstrated efficacy in
both children and adults. Mebendazole (100-­200 mg PO twice daily for
5 days for all ages) is also useful. Anthelmintic treatment of CNS and
ocular disease should be extended (3-­4 weeks). Even with no clinical
trials on OLM therapy, a course of oral corticosteroids such as prednisone (1 mg/kg/day PO for 2-­4 weeks) has been recommended to suppress local inflammation while treatment with anthelmintic agents is
initiated.

PREVENTION

Transmission can be minimized by public health measures that prevent
dog feces from contaminating the environment. These include keeping
dogs on leashes and excluding pets from playgrounds and sandboxes
that toddlers use. Children should be discouraged from putting dirty
fingers in their mouth and eating dirt. Vinyl covering of sandboxes
reduces the viability of T. canis eggs. Widespread veterinary use of
broad-­spectrum anthelmintics effective against Toxocara may lead to
a decline in parasite transmission to humans.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 345 u Trichinellosis (Trichinella spiralis) 2211

Chapter 345

Trichinellosis (Trichinella
spiralis)
Katherine R. Dobbs and Arlene E. Dent

ETIOLOGY

Human trichinellosis (also called trichinosis) is caused by consumption of meat containing encysted larvae of Trichinella spiralis, a tissue-­dwelling nematode with a worldwide distribution.
After ingestion of raw or inadequately cooked meat from pigs (or
other commercial meat sources such as horses) containing viable
Trichinella larvae, the organisms are released from the cyst by acid-­
pepsin digestion of the cyst walls in the stomach and then pass into
the small intestine. The larvae invade the small intestine columnar epithelium at the villi base and develop into adult worms. The
adult female worm produces about 500 larvae over 2 weeks and
is then expelled in the feces. The larvae enter the bloodstream
and seed striated muscle by burrowing into individual muscle
fibers. Over a period of 3 weeks, they coil as they increase about
10 times in length and become capable of infecting a new host if
ingested. The larvae eventually become encysted and can remain
viable for years. Sylvatic Trichinella spp. (T. britovi, T. nativa,
T. pseudospiralis, and T. murrelli) are present in traditional native
foods, such as walrus meat, and game meat may also cause disease
similar to that caused by T. spiralis.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Despite public health efforts to control trichinellosis by eliminating
the practice of feeding garbage to domestic swine, epidemics and isolated cases of Trichinella spp. infection continue to be a health problem in many areas of the world. It is most common in Asia, Latin
America, and Central Europe. Swine fed with garbage may become
infected when given uncooked trichinous scraps, usually pig meat,
or when the carcasses of infected wild animals such as rats are eaten.
Prevalence rates of T. spiralis in domestic swine range from 0.001%
in the United States to ≥25% in China. The resurgence of this disease
can be attributed to translocations of animal populations, human
travel, and export of food as well as ingestion of sylvatic Trichinella
through game meat. In the United States from 2008 to 2012, wild
game meat (especially bear or wild boar meat) was the most common
source of infection. Most outbreaks occur from the consumption of
T. spiralis–infected pork (or horse meat in areas of the world where
horse is eaten) obtained from a single source.

PATHOGENESIS

During the first 2-­3 weeks after infection, pathologic reactions to
infection are limited to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and include a
mild, partial villous atrophy with an inflammatory infiltrate of neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages in the mucosa
and submucosa. Larvae are released by female worms and disseminate over the next several weeks. Skeletal muscle fibers show the most
striking changes with edema and basophilic degeneration. The muscle fiber may contain the typical coiled worm, the cyst wall derived
from the host cell, and the surrounding lymphocytic and eosinophilic
infiltrate.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The development of symptoms depends on the number of viable larvae
ingested. Most infections are asymptomatic or mild, and children
often show milder symptoms than adults who consumed the same
amount of infected meat. Watery diarrhea is the most common
symptom corresponding to maturation of the adult worms in the
GI tract, which occurs during the first 1-­2 weeks after ingestion.
Patients may also complain of abdominal discomfort and vomiting. Fulminant enteritis may develop in individuals with extremely
high worm burdens. The classic symptoms of facial and periorbital edema, fever, weakness, malaise, and myalgia peak approximately 2-­3 weeks after the infected meat is ingested, as the larvae
migrate and then encyst in the muscle. Headache, cough, dyspnea, dysphagia, subconjunctival and splinter hemorrhages, and a
macular or petechial rash may occur. Patients with high-­intensity
infection may die from myocarditis, encephalitis, or pneumonia.
In symptomatic patients, eosinophilia is common and may be
dramatic.

DIAGNOSIS

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) diagnostic criteria for trichinellosis require positive serology or muscle biopsy for
Trichinella with one or more compatible clinical symptoms (eosinophilia, fever, myalgia, facial or periorbital edema). To declare a discrete
outbreak, at least one person must have positive serology or muscle
biopsy. Antibodies to Trichinella are detectable approximately 3 weeks
after infection. Severe muscle involvement results in elevated serum
creatine phosphokinase and lactic dehydrogenase levels. Muscle biopsy
is not usually necessary, but if needed, a sample should be obtained
from a tender swollen muscle. A history of eating undercooked meat
supports the diagnosis. The cysts may calcify and may be visible on
radiograph.

TREATMENT

Recommended treatment of trichinellosis diagnosed at the GI phase
is albendazole (400 mg orally twice daily for 8-­14 days for all ages) to
eradicate the adult worms if a patient has ingested contaminated meat
within the previous 1 week. An alternative regimen is mebendazole
(200-­400 mg PO 3 times daily for 3 days followed by 400-­500 mg 3
times daily for 10 days). There is no consensus for treatment of muscle-­
stage trichinellosis. Corticosteroids may be used, although evidence for
efficacy is anecdotal.

PREVENTION

Trichinella larvae can be killed by cooking meat (≥55°C [131°F]) until
there is no trace of pink fluid or flesh, or by storage in a freezer (−15°C
[5°F]) for ≥3 wk. Freezing to kill larvae should only be applied to pork
meat, because larvae in horse, wild boar, or game meat can remain
viable even after 4 weeks of freezing. Smoking, salting, and drying
meat are unreliable methods of killing Trichinella. Strict adherence to
public health measures, including garbage feeding regulations, stringent rodent control, prevention of exposure of pigs and other livestock
to animal carcasses, constructing barriers between livestock, wild
animals, and domestic pets, and proper handling of wild animal carcasses by hunters, can reduce infection with Trichinella. Current meat
inspection for trichinellosis is by direct digestion and visualization of
encysted larvae in meat samples. Serologic testing does not have a role
in meat inspection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2212 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 346

Schistosomiasis
(Schistosoma)
Amaya L. Bustinduy, Sophie Pach, and
Katja Doerholt
The term schistosomiasis (also known as bilharzia) encompasses the
acute and chronic inflammatory disorders caused by human infection
with Schistosoma spp. parasites. Disease is related to both the systemic
and the focal effects of schistosome infection and its consequent host
immune responses triggered by parasite eggs deposited in the tissues.
For the affected individuals, this frequently manifests as disabling
chronic morbidity.

Transmission depends on water contamination by human excreta
(urine and stool), the presence of specific intermediate snail hosts,
and the patterns of water contact and social habits of the population
(Fig. 346.2). The distribution of infection in endemic areas shows that
prevalence increases with age, to a peak at 10-­20 years old. Exposure to
infected water starts early in life for children living in endemic areas.
Passive water contact by infants (accompanying mothers in their daily
household activities) evolves to more active water contact as preschool
and school-­age children pursue recreational activities such as swimming and wading.
Measuring intensity of infection (by quantitative egg count in urine
or feces) demonstrates that the heaviest worm loads are found in
school-­age and adolescent children. Even though schistosomiasis is
most prevalent and most severe in older children and young adults, who
are at maximal risk for suffering from its acute and chronic sequelae,
preschool children can also exhibit significant disease manifestations.

PATHOGENESIS

Schistosoma organisms are trematodes, or flukes, that parasitize the
bloodstream. Five schistosome species are known to infect humans:
Schistosoma haematobium, S. mansoni, S. japonicum, S. intercalatum,
and S. mekongi. Humans are infected through contact with water
contaminated with cercariae, the free-­living infective stage of the
parasite. These motile, forked-­tail organisms emerge from infected
snails and are capable of penetrating intact human skin. As they reach
maturity, adult worms migrate to specific anatomic sites characteristic of each schistosome species: S. haematobium adults are found in
the perivesical and periureteral venous plexus, S. mansoni in the inferior mesenteric veins, and S. japonicum in the superior mesenteric
veins. The less common S. intercalatum and S. mekongi are usually
found in the mesenteric vessels. Adult schistosome worms (1-­2 cm
long) are clearly adapted for an intravascular existence. The female
accompanies the male in a groove formed by the lateral edges of its
body. On fertilization, female worms begin oviposition in the small
venous tributaries. The eggs of the three main schistosome species
have characteristic morphologic features: S. haematobium has a terminal spine, S. mansoni has a lateral spine, and S. japonicum has a
smaller size with a short, curved spine (Fig. 346.1). Parasite eggs provoke a significant granulomatous inflammatory response that allows
them to ulcerate through host tissues to reach the lumen of the urinary tract or the intestines. They are carried to the outside environment in urine or feces (depending on the species), where they will
hatch if deposited in freshwater. Motile miracidia emerge, infect specific freshwater snail intermediate hosts, and divide asexually. After
4-­12 weeks, the infective cercariae are released by the snails into the
contaminated water.

Both early and late manifestations of schistosomiasis are immunologically mediated. Acute schistosomiasis, known as snail fever or Katayama syndrome, is a febrile illness that represents an immune complex
disease associated with early infection and oviposition 4-­8 weeks after
cercarial skin penetration. The major pathology of infection occurs
later, with chronic schistosomiasis, in which retention of eggs in the
host tissues is associated with chronic granulomatous injury. Eggs
may be trapped at sites of deposition (urinary bladder, ureters, cervix, intestine) or may be carried by the bloodstream to ectopic sites,
most frequently the liver and less often the lungs and central nervous
system (CNS). The host response to these eggs involves local as well as
systemic manifestations. The cell-­mediated immune response leads to
granulomas composed of lymphocytes, macrophages, and eosinophils
that surround the entrapped eggs and add significantly to the degree
of tissue destruction. Granuloma formation in the bladder wall and
at the ureterovesical junction results in the major disease manifestations of S. haematobium infection: hematuria, dysuria, and obstructive uropathy. Granulomata in the genital tissues also contributes to
reproductive organ obstruction and local inflammation. Intestinal as
well as hepatic granulomas underlie the pathologic sequelae of the
other schistosome infections: ulcerations and fibrosis of intestinal wall,
hepatosplenomegaly, and portal hypertension caused by presinusoidal
obstruction of blood flow. In terms of systemic disease, antischistosome inflammation increases circulating levels of proinflammatory
cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-­α and interleukin-­6, associated
with elevated levels of C-­reactive protein. These responses are associated with hepcidin-­mediated inhibition of iron uptake and use, leading
to anemia of chronic inflammation. Schistosomiasis-­related undernutrition and decreased cognition may be the result of similar pathways
of chronic inflammation. Acquired partial protective immunity against
schistosomiasis has been demonstrated in some animal species and
may occur in humans.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

ETIOLOGY

Schistosomiasis affects more than 300 million people worldwide with
more than 700 million people at risk, primarily children and young
adults. There are 1.8 million disability-­adjusted life-­years (DALYs)
attributed to schistosomiasis, making it the second most disabling
parasitic disease after malaria. Prevalence is increasing in many areas
as population density increases and new irrigation projects provide
broader habitats for the intermediate snail hosts. Humans are the main
definitive hosts for the five clinically important species of schistosomes,
although S. japonicum is also a zoonosis, infecting animals such as
dogs, rats, pigs, and cattle. S. haematobium is prevalent in Africa and
the Middle East with cases reported in the Mediterranean (Corsica in
France); S. mansoni is prevalent in Africa, the Middle East, the Caribbean, and South America; and S. japonicum is prevalent in China, the
Philippines, and Indonesia, with some sporadic foci in parts of Southeast Asia. The other two species are less prevalent. S. intercalatum is
found in West and Central Africa, and S. mekongi is found only along
the upper Mekong River in Asia.

Two main chronic clinical syndromes arise from Schistosoma spp.
infection: urogenital schistosomiasis caused by S. haematobium and
intestinal schistosomiasis caused by S. mansoni or S. japonicum. Most
chronically infected individuals experience mild symptoms and may
not seek medical attention; the more severe symptoms of schistosomiasis occur mainly in those who are heavily infected or who have been
infected over longer periods. In addition to organ-­specific morbidities,
infected patients frequently demonstrate anemia (often complicated by
malaria in endemic regions), chronic pain, diarrhea, exercise intolerance, and chronic undernutrition manifesting as growth stunting. Cercarial penetration of human skin may result in a pruritic papular rash
known as schistosomal dermatitis or swimmer’s itch. Skin manifestations are more pronounced in previously exposed individuals and are
characterized by edema and intense cellular infiltrates in the dermis
and epidermis.
Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome) may occur 4-­8 weeks
after exposure and is most commonly seen in S. japonicum endemic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 346 u Schistosomiasis (Schistosoma) 2213

Fig. 346.1 Eggs of common human trematodes. Clockwise from up-

per left: Schistosoma mansoni, S. japonicum, S. haematobium, Clonorchis sinensis, Paragonimus westermani, and Fasciola hepatica (note
the partially open operculum). (From Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. DPDx: laboratory identification of parasites of public health
concern. http://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/az.html)

A

B

E
C

and eosinophilia. Acute schistosomiasis typically presents in first-­time
visitors to endemic areas who experience primary infection at an older
age.
Chronic schistosomiasis occurs after granuloma formation in the
organs where eggs have entrapped. In urogenital schistosomiasis,
caused by S. haematobium, symptomatic children usually complain of
frequency, dysuria, and macro-­and micro-­hematuria. Urine examination shows erythrocytes, parasite eggs, and occasional eosinophiluria.
In endemic areas, moderate to severe pathologic lesions have been
demonstrated in the urinary tract of >20% of infected children. The
extent of disease correlates with the intensity of infection, but significant morbidity can occur even in lightly infected children, including
children under 5 years of age. The advanced stages of urogenital schistosomiasis are associated with chronic renal failure, secondary infections, and squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder.
An important complication of S. haematobium infection to consider, particularly in adolescent females, is female genital schistosomiasis (FGS). Eggs migrate from the vesical plexus to lodge
in the female genital tract, where they induce a granulomatous
inflammatory response that can manifest as contact bleeding, pain
after sex, ectopic pregnancies, and infertility. Symptoms start before
sexual debut and get later confused with those of sexually transmitted infections. There is a threefold to fourfold greater risk of HIV
transmission. Pathognomonic lesions can be visualized in the cervix
by colposcopy. Male genital schistosomiasis (MGS) can present in
adolescent males with hematospermia, pain, erectile dysfunction,
and infertility and is likely to contribute to increased male-­to-­female
HIV transmission.
Children with chronic intestinal schistosomiasis due to S. mansoni,
S. japonicum, and, less commonly, S. intercalatum or S. mekongi can
present with intestinal symptoms; colicky abdominal pain and bloody
diarrhea are the most common. However, the intestinal phase may
remain subclinical, and the late syndrome of hepatosplenomegaly, portal hypertension, ascites, and hematemesis may then be the first clinical presentation in later years. Liver disease is caused by granuloma
formation and subsequent periportal fibrosis; no appreciable liver
cell injury occurs, and hepatic function may be preserved for a long
time. Schistosome eggs can escape into the lungs, causing pulmonary
hypertension and cor pulmonale. S. japonicum worms may migrate to
the brain vasculature and produce localized lesions that cause seizures.
Transverse myelitis, spinal compression, and other CNS involvement
(meningoencephalitis) are rare but well-­known complications in children or young adults with either acute or chronic S. haematobium or S.
mansoni infection.
Although end-­
organ scarring is pathognomonic, affected children may also have persistent long-­term systemic effects of infection,
including poor growth, anemia, decreased aerobic capacity, and cognitive impairment and poor school performance.

DIAGNOSIS
D

Fig. 346.2 Life cycle of Schistosoma mansoni, S. haematobium, and

S. japonicum. A, Paired adult worms (larger male enfolding slender female). B, Eggs (left to right, S. haematobium, S. mansoni, S. japonicum). C, Ciliated miracidium. D, Intermediate host snails (left to right,
Oncomelania, Biomphalaria, Bulinus). E, Cercariae. (From Colley DG,
Bustinduy AL, Secor WE, King CH. Human schistosomiasis. Lancet.
2014;383:2253–2264. Fig 1.)

areas, though it can occur with all species. This is a serum sickness–
like syndrome manifested by the acute onset of fever, cough, chills,
sweating, abdominal pain, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly,

Parasitologic diagnosis entails finding schistosome eggs in the excreta
of infected individuals; quantitative methods should be used to provide
an indication of the burden of infection. For the diagnosis of S. haematobium infection, a volume of 10 mL of urine should be collected
around midday, the time of maximal egg excretion, and filtered for
microscopic examination. Stool examination by the Kato-­Katz thick
smear procedure and detection of parasite antigen in patient serum
or urine are the methods of choice for diagnosis and quantification of
other schistosome infections (S. mansoni and S. japonicum). More sensitive antigenic diagnosis includes the unique schistosome antigens
in urine or plasma: circulating anodic antigen (CAA), which is not yet
commercially available, and circulating cathodic antigen (CCA) from
stool for the detection only of S. mansoni and S. japonicum.
Morbidity diagnosis can be ascertained by abdominal ultrasonography; in urogenital schistosomiasis, by the detection of bladder polyps and derived renal complications, and in intestinal schistosomiasis,
by the detection of periportal fibrosis in the liver. Colposcopy and
semen analysis are useful in adolescent children suspected of having
FGS and MGS.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2214 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
TREATMENT

Treatment of children with schistosomiasis should be based on an
appreciation of the intensity of infection and the extent of disease.
The World Health Organization (WHO)–recommended treatment
for schistosomiasis is praziquantel. For infection due to S. mansoni,
S. haematobium, or S. intercalatum, the dose of praziquantel is 40 mg/
kg/day PO divided into two doses for 1 day. For infection due to S.
japonicum or S. mekongi, the dose of praziquantel is 60 mg/kg/day PO
divided into three doses for 1 day. A second treatment 4-­6 weeks after
the first course is advised by some experts, allowing for maturation of
immature forms not cleared initially. Praziquantel is well tolerated but
can give side effects that correlate with intensity of infection, including
abdominal pain and cramps, sweating, and somnolence. Pregnant and
lactating women with schistosomiasis can safely be treated with praziquantel at usual doses starting at the second trimester of pregnancy.

PREVENTION

Transmission in endemic areas may be decreased by reducing the parasite load in the human population. WHO recommends praziquantel
to be given as a single dose to school-­age children through mass drug
administration programs once or twice a year depending on parasite
endemicity levels. Recently, preschool children 2 years and older have
also been included in control strategies. When added to national drug-­
based control programs, other measures such as improved sanitation,
antiparasitic treatment given at well child visits, focal application of
molluscicidals, and animal vaccination may prove useful in breaking the cycle of transmission. Ultimately, control of schistosomiasis is
closely linked to economic and social development.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 347

Flukes (Liver, Lung, and
Intestinal)
Amaya L. Bustinduy, Sophie Pach, and
Katja Doerholt

LIVER FLUKES
Fascioliasis (Fasciola hepatica)

Fasciola hepatica, the sheep liver fluke, infects cattle, other ungulates,
and occasionally humans. This infection affects approximately 17 million people worldwide and has been reported in many different parts
of the world, particularly South America, Europe, Africa, China, Australia, and Cuba. Although F. hepatica is enzootic in North America,
reported cases are extremely rare. Humans are infected by ingestion
of metacercariae attached to vegetation, especially wild watercress, lettuce, and alfalfa. In the duodenum, the parasites excyst and penetrate
the intestinal wall, liver capsule, and parenchyma. They wander for a
few weeks before entering the bile ducts, where they mature. Adult F.
hepatica (1-­2.5 cm) commence oviposition approximately 12 weeks
after infection; the eggs are large (75-­140 μm) and operculated. They
pass to the intestines with bile and exit the body in the feces (see Fig.
347.1). On reaching freshwater, the eggs mature and hatch into miracidia, which infect specific snail intermediate hosts to multiply into
many cercariae. These then emerge from infected snails and encyst on
aquatic grasses and plants.
Clinical manifestations usually occur either during the liver migratory phase of the parasites or after their arrival at their final habitat
in upper bile ducts. Fever, right upper quadrant pain, and hepatosplenomegaly characterize the first phase of illness. Peripheral blood
eosinophilia is usually marked. As the worms enter bile ducts, most
of the acute symptoms subside. On rare occasions, patients may have
obstructive jaundice or biliary cirrhosis, with signs of cholestasis,
ascending cholangitis, cholelithiasis and jaundice and increased liver
enzymes, direct bilirubin, and γ-­glutamyl transpeptidase. F. hepatica
infection is diagnosed by identifying the characteristic eggs in fecal
smears or duodenal aspirates. Diagnosis can be suggested by positive
serology and imaging that reveals acute, hypodense liver lesions that
change over time. Presentation can be dramatic in children, with features including generalized edema, hepatic cirrhosis with esophageal
varices, and in severe cases, death from generalized organ failure.
The recommended treatment of fascioliasis is triclabendazole (10
mg/kg orally [PO] once or twice) or bithionol (30-­50 mg/kg PO once
daily on alternate days for a total of 10-­15 doses). In the United States,
bithionol is not generally available, but it may be available from compounding pharmacies.

Clonorchiasis (Clonorchis sinensis)

Infection of bile passages with Clonorchis sinensis, the Chinese or oriental liver fluke, is endemic in China, South Korea, northern Vietnam,

P.w.

Several different trematodes, or flukes, can parasitize humans and
cause disease. Flukes are endemic worldwide but are more prevalent in
the less developed parts of the world. They include Schistosoma, or the
blood flukes (see Chapter 346), as well as fluke species that cause infection in the human biliary tree, lung tissue, and intestinal tract. These
latter trematodes are characterized by complex life cycles (Fig. 347.1).
Sexual reproduction of adult worms in the definitive host produces
eggs that are passed in the stool. Larvae, called miracidia, develop in
freshwater. These, in turn, infect certain species of mollusks (aquatic
snails or clams), in which asexual multiplication by parasite larvae
produces cercariae. Cercariae then seek a second intermediate host,
such as an insect, crustacean, or fish, or attach to vegetation to produce
infectious metacercariae. Humans acquire liver, lung, and intestinal
fluke infections by eating uncooked, lightly cooked, pickled, or smoked
foods containing these infectious parasite cysts. The “alternation of
generations” requires that flukes parasitize more than one host (often
three) to complete their life cycle. Because parasitic flukes are dependent on these nonhuman species for transmission, the distribution of
human fluke infection closely matches the ecologic range of the flukes’
intermediate hosts. As a group, these parasites are commonly referred
to as food-­borne trematodes.

F.h., C.s.
F.h.

C.s.

F.b.

P.w.

Fig. 347.1 Life cycle of parasitic liver, lung, and intestinal flukes. C.s.,
Clonorchis sinensis; F.b., Fasciolopsis buski; F.h., Fasciola hepatica; P.w.,
Paragonimus westermani. (Adapted from Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2010: Fig 289-­2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 348 u Adult Tapeworm Infections
and parts of Russia and Japan, affecting more than 15 million people.
Humans acquire infection by ingestion of raw or inadequately cooked
freshwater fish carrying the encysted metacercariae of the parasite
under their scales or skin. Metacercariae excyst in the duodenum and
pass through the ampulla of Vater to the common bile duct and bile
capillaries, where they mature into hermaphroditic adult worms (3-­15
mm). C. sinensis worms deposit small operculated eggs (14-­30 μm),
which are discharged through the bile duct to the intestine and feces
(see Fig. 347.1). The eggs mature and hatch outside the body, releasing motile miracidia into local freshwater streams, rivers, or ponds. If
these are taken up by the appropriate snails, they develop into cercariae, which are, in turn, released from the snail to encyst under the skin
or scales of freshwater fish.
Clinical manifestations are minimal in most individuals with
C. sinensis infection, particularly those with few organisms. Among
heavily infected individuals, who tend to be older (>30 years), localized obstruction of a bile duct results from repeated local trauma and
inflammation. In these patients, cholangitis and cholangiohepatitis
may lead to liver enlargement and jaundice. In Hong Kong, Korea, and
other parts of Asia, cholangiocarcinoma is associated with chronic C.
sinensis infection.
Diagnosis of clonorchiasis is made by examination of feces or duodenal aspirates for the parasite eggs and serology. Radiologic imaging
(CT scan) can detect fibrosis in the biliary tract and cholangiocarcinoma. The recommended treatment of clonorchiasis is praziquantel
(75 mg/kg/day PO divided 3 times daily [tid] for 2 days). An alternative, used in adults, is albendazole (10 mg/kg once daily PO for 7 days).
Tribendimidine (400 mg PO for 3 days) has been used in China with
good cure rates.

Opisthorchiasis (Opisthorchis spp.)

Infections with species of Opisthorchis are clinically similar to those
caused by C. sinensis. Opisthorchis felineus and Opisthorchis viverrini
are liver flukes of cats and dogs that infect humans through ingestion of
metacercariae in freshwater fish. Infection with O. felineus is endemic
in Eastern Europe and Southeast Asia, and O. viverrini is found mainly
in Thailand, affecting an estimated 10 million people. Most individuals
are minimally symptomatic; liver enlargement, relapsing cholangitis,
and jaundice may occur in heavily infected individuals. O. viverrini is
a known carcinogen, much like Clonorchis spp. responsible for cholangiocarcinoma. Diagnosis is based on recovering eggs from stools
or duodenal aspirates and serology. The recommended treatment of
opisthorchiasis is praziquantel (75 mg/kg/day PO tid for 2 days).

LUNG FLUKES
Paragonimiasis (Paragonimus spp.)

Human infection by the lung fluke Paragonimus westermani, and less
frequently other species of Paragonimus, occurs throughout the Far
East, in localized areas of West Africa, and in several parts of Central
and South America, affecting approximately 20 million people. The
highest incidence of paragonimiasis occurs in older children and adolescents 11-­15 years of age. Although P. westermani is found in many
carnivores, human cases are relatively rare and seem to be associated
with specific dietary habits, such as eating raw freshwater crayfish or
crabs. These crustaceans contain the infective metacercariae in their
tissues. After ingestion, the metacercariae excyst in the duodenum,
penetrate the intestinal wall, and migrate to their final habitat in the
lungs. Adult worms (5-­10 mm) encapsulate within the lung parenchyma and deposit brown operculated eggs (60-­100 μm) that pass into
the bronchioles and are expectorated by coughing (see Fig. 347.1). Ova
can be detected in the sputum of infected individuals or in their feces.
If eggs reach freshwater, they hatch and undergo asexual multiplication
in specific snails. The cercariae encyst in the muscles and viscera of
crayfish and freshwater crabs.

Clinical Manifestations

Most individuals infected with P. westermani harbor low or moderate worm loads and are minimally symptomatic. The clinical manifestations include cough, production of rust-­
colored sputum, and

2215

hemoptysis (mimicking tuberculosis), which is the principal manifestation and occurs in 98% of symptomatic children. In addition, children
with paragonimiasis have pleural effusions, hepatomegaly, and subcutaneous nodules. For the diagnosis, there are no characteristic physical findings, but laboratory examination usually demonstrates marked
eosinophilia. Chest radiographs often reveal small, patchy infiltrates
or radiolucencies in the middle lung fields; however, radiographs may
appear normal in one fifth of infected individuals. In rare circumstances, lung abscess, pleural or pericardial effusion, or bronchiectasis may develop. Extrapulmonary localization of P. westermani in the
brain, peritoneum, intestines, or pericardium may rarely occur. Cerebral paragonimiasis occurs primarily in heavily infected individuals
living in highly endemic areas of the Far East. The clinical presentation
resembles jacksonian epilepsy or the symptoms of cerebral tumors.
Definitive diagnosis of paragonimiasis is established by identification
of eggs in fecal or sputum smears and serology. The recommended
treatment of paragonimiasis is praziquantel (75 mg/kg/day PO tid for
2 days). Triclabendazole can also be used (10 mg/kg PO daily for 1-­2
days).

INTESTINAL FLUKES

Several wild and domestic animal intestinal flukes, including Fasciolopsis buski, Nanophyetus salmincola, and Heterophyes heterophyes, may
accidently infect humans who eat uncooked or undercooked fish or
water plants. For example, F. buski is endemic in the Far East, where
humans who ingest metacercariae encysted on aquatic plants become
infected. These develop into large flukes (1-­5 cm) that inhabit the duodenum and jejunum. Mature worms produce operculated eggs that
pass with feces; the organism completes its life cycle through specific
snail intermediate hosts. Individuals with F. buski infection are usually asymptomatic; heavily infected patients complain of abdominal
pain and diarrhea and show signs of malabsorption. Diagnosis of fasciolopsiasis and other intestinal fluke infections is established by fecal
examination and identification of the eggs (see Fig. 347.1). As for other
fluke infections, praziquantel (75 mg/kg/day PO tid for 2 days) is the
drug of choice.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 348

Adult Tapeworm
Infections
Philip R. Fischer and A. Clinton White Jr.
Tapeworms are adult forms of cestodes, multicellular helminth parasites, that live in human intestines and cause non–life-­threatening illness. Invasive larval forms of cestodes are associated with cysts that lead
to severe human disease such as neurocysticercosis (Taenia solium; see
Chapter 349) and echinococcosis (mostly Echinococcus granulosa and
E. multilocularis; Chapter 350). The adult worms themselves are flat and
multisegmented, varying in length from 8 mm to 10 meters (m). Table
348.1 summarizes the key features of tapeworms that affect children.

ETIOLOGY

The beef tapeworm (Taenia saginata), the pork tapeworm (T. solium),
and the Asian tapeworm (Taenia asiatica) are long worms (4-­10 m)
named for their intermediate hosts (T. saginata, T. solium) or geographic distribution (T. asiatica; larval host is the pig). The adult worms
are found only in the human intestine. As with the adult stage of all

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2216 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 348.1  Key Features of Common Tapeworms in Children
PARASITE SPECIES

GEOGRAPHY

SOURCE

SYMPTOMS

TREATMENT

Taenia saginata

Asia, Africa, Latin America

Cysts in beef

Abdominal discomfort,
motile proglottid
migration, passing
segments

Praziquantel or
niclosamide, possibly
nitazoxanide

Taenia solium

Asia, Africa, Latin America

Cysticerci in pork

Minimal, proglottids in
stool

Praziquantel or
niclosamide

Taenia asiatica

Asia

Pigs

Minimal

Praziquantel or
niclosamide

Dibothriocephalus latus

Europe, North America

Plerocercoid cysts in
freshwater fish

Usually minimal; with
prolonged or heavy
infection with D. latus,
vitamin B12 deficiency

Praziquantel or
niclosamide

Dibothriocephalus
nihonkaiense

Northeast Asia, North
Pacific coast of North
America

Plerocercoid cysts in
saltwater fish

Usually minimal; passing
proglottids

Praziquantel or
niclosamide

Adenocephalus pacificus

Pacific Coast of South
America

Infected fish

Usually none or mild

Praziquantel or
niclosamide

Hymenolepis

Worldwide, often northern
areas

Infected humans, rodents

Mild abdominal discomfort

Praziquantel, niclosamide,
or nitazoxanide

Dipylidium caninum

Worldwide

Domestic dogs and cats

Proglottids in stool, anal
pruritus confused with
pinworm

Praziquantel or
niclosamide

tapeworms, their body is a series of hundreds or thousands of flattened
segments (proglottids) with an anterior attachment organ (scolex)
that anchors the parasite to the bowel wall. New segments arise from
the distal aspect of the scolex with progressively more mature segments
attached distally. The gravid terminal segments contain 50,000-­100,000
eggs, and the eggs or even detached intact proglottids pass out of the
child through the anus (with or separate from defecation). These tapeworms differ most significantly in that the intermediate stage of the
pork tapeworm (cysticercus) can also infect humans and cause significant morbidity (see Chapter 349), whereas the larval stage of T. saginata does not cause human disease. T. asiatica is similar to and often
confused with the beef tapeworm.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The pork and beef tapeworms are distributed worldwide, with the highest risk for infection in Latin America, Africa, India, Southeast Asia,
and China, where the relevant intermediate host is raised domestically.
The prevalence in adults may not reflect the prevalence in young children, because cultural practices may dictate how well meat is cooked
and how much is served to children.

PATHOGENESIS

When children ingest raw or undercooked meat containing larval cysts,
gastric acid and bile facilitate release of immature scolices that attach to
the lumen of the small intestine. The parasite grows, adding new segments at the base of the scolex. The terminal segments mature and after
2-­3 months produce eggs that are released in stool. The surface of proglottids serves as an absorptive organ to “steal” nutritional elements from
the child’s small bowel for use by the parasite. There is sometimes a transient eosinophilia before the parasite matures enough to release eggs.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Nonspecific abdominal symptoms have been reported with beef and
pork tapeworm infections, but the most bothersome symptom is the
psychologic distress caused by seeing proglottids in the stool or undergarments. The released segments of the worms are motile (especially

those of T. saginata) and sometimes lead to anal pruritus. The adult beef
and pork tapeworms are only rarely associated with other symptoms.

DIAGNOSIS

Identification of the infecting tapeworm species facilitates understanding of risk for invasive disease. Carriers of adult pork tapeworms are at
increased risk for transmitting eggs with the pathogenic intermediate
stage (cysticercus) to themselves or others, whereas children infected
with the beef tapeworm or T. asiatica are a risk only to livestock.
Because proglottids are generally passed intact, visual examination for
gravid proglottids in the stool is a sensitive test; these segments may be
used to identify species. Eggs, by contrast, are often absent from stool
and cannot distinguish between T. saginata and T. solium (Fig. 348.1).
If the parasite is completely expelled, the scolex of each species is diagnostic. The scolex of T. saginata has only a set of four anteriorly oriented suckers, whereas T. solium is armed with a double row of hooks
in addition to suckers. The proglottids of T. saginata have >20 branches
from a central uterine structure, and the proglottids of T. solium have
≤10 branches. Expelled proglottid segments are usually approximately
0.5 × 1-­2 × 0.1 cm in size. Molecular methods can distinguish T. saginata from T. asiatica. Antigen detection tests are increasingly available.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Anal pruritus may mimic symptoms of pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis) infection. Broad tapeworms such as Dibothriocephalus latus (formerly Diphyllobothrium latum) and Ascaris lumbricoides (a long round
worm) may be mistaken for T. saginata or T. solium in stools.

TREATMENT

Infections with all adult tapeworms respond to praziquantel (25 mg/
kg orally [PO] once). When available, an alternative treatment for taeniasis is niclosamide (50 mg/kg PO once for children; 2 g PO once
for adults). Nitazoxanide is sometimes effective as well. The parasite is
usually expelled on the day of administration. Treatment with electrolyte–polyethylene glycol bowel preparations can increase the yield of
passage of scolices.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 348 u Adult Tapeworm Infections

A

2217

B

Fig. 348.1 Eggs of Taenia saginata recovered from feces (original

magnification ×400). A and B, The eggs are generally bile-­stained, dark,
and prismatic. There is occasionally some surrounding cellular material
from the proglottid in which the egg develops, which is more evident in
B than in A. The larva within the egg shows three pairs of hooklets (A),
which may occasionally be observed in motion.

A
PREVENTION

Prolonged freezing or thorough cooking of beef and pork kills the
larval cystic forms of the parasite. Appropriate human sanitation can
interrupt transmission by preventing infection in livestock. Mass treatment does not lead to lasting reductions in prevalence.

DIPHYLLOBOTHRIASIS (DIBOTHRIOCEPHALUS SPP.)
Etiology

The broad tapeworms of the order Diphyllobothriidea are the longest
human tapeworms, reaching >10 m in length, and have an anatomic
organization similar to that of other adult cestodes. An elongated
scolex, equipped with slits (bothria) along each side but no suckers
or hooks, is followed by thousands of segments looped in the small
bowel. Gravid terminal proglottids detach periodically but tend to disintegrate before expulsion, thus releasing eggs rather than intact worm
segments in the feces. In contrast to taeniids, the life cycle of Diphyllobothriid spp. requires two intermediate hosts. Small, freshwater crustaceans (copepods) take up the larvae that hatch from parasite eggs. The
parasite passes up the food chain as small fish eat the copepods and are,
in turn, eaten by larger fish. In this way, the juvenile parasite becomes
concentrated in pike, walleye, perch, burbot, and salmon. Consumption of raw or undercooked fish leads to human infection with adult
fish tapeworms. Recent molecular studies have led to marked revision
in the taxonomy with regional differences in the predominant species
(Dibothriocephalus latus in Europe, North America; Dibothriocephalus nihonkaiense in Japan, Northeast Asia, and the northern Pacific
coast of North America, and Adenocephalus pacificus in coastal South
America).

Epidemiology

The fish tapeworms are most prevalent in the temperate climates of
Europe, North America, and northeastern Asia and along the Pacific
coast of South America and in Africa. In North America the prevalence is highest in Alaska, Canada, and northern areas of the continental United States. The tapeworm is found in fish from those areas
that are then taken to market. Persons who prepare raw fish for home
or commercial use or who sample fish before cooking are particularly
at risk for infection.

Pathogenesis

The adult worm of Dibothriocephalus latus (found in northern
Europe) has high-­affinity receptors and efficiently scavenges vitamin
B12 for its own use in the constant production of large numbers of
segments and as many as 1 million eggs per day. As a result, diphyllobothriasis causes megaloblastic anemia in 2–9% of infections.
Interestingly, other Diphyllobothriid spp. do not out-­compete the
host for vitamin B12. Children with other causes of vitamin B12 or
folate deficiency, such as chronic infectious diarrhea, celiac disease,

B

Fig. 348.2 Eggs of Dibothriocephalus latus as seen in feces (original
magnification ×400). A and B, The caplike operculum is at the upper
end of the eggs here.

or congenital malabsorption, are more likely to develop symptomatic
infection.

Clinical Manifestations

Infection is largely asymptomatic. Segments may be noted in stool.
Those who develop vitamin B12 or folate deficiency present with megaloblastic anemia with leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, glossitis, and/or
signs of spinal cord posterior column dysfunction (loss of vibratory
sense, proprioception, and coordination).

Diagnosis

Parasitologic examination of the stool is useful because eggs are abundant in the feces and have morphology distinct from that of all other
tapeworms. The eggs are ovoid and have an operculum, which is a cap
structure at one end that opens to release the embryo (Fig. 348.2). The
worm itself has a distinct scolex and proglottid morphology; however,
these are not likely to be passed spontaneously.

Differential Diagnosis

A segment or a whole section of the worm might be confused with
Taenia or Ascaris after it is passed. Pernicious anemia, bone marrow
toxicity, and dietary restriction may contribute to or mimic the nutritional deficiencies associated with diphyllobothriasis.

Treatment

As with all adult tapeworms, D. latus infections respond to praziquantel (5-­10 mg/kg PO once). Niclosamide (50 mg/kg PO in a single dose)
is also effective.

Prevention

The intermediate stage is easily killed by brief cooking or prolonged
freezing of fish before ingestion. Because humans are the major reservoir for adult worms, health education is one of the most important tools
for preventing transmission, together with improved human sanitation.

HYMENOLEPIASIS (HYMENOLEPIS)

Infection with Hymenolepis nana, the dwarf tapeworm, is very common in developing countries. Most cases are asymptomatic. However,
heavy infection has been associated with diarrhea, weight loss, fever,
anemia, and eosinophilia. The intermediate stage of Hymenolepis
diminuta develops in various hosts (e.g., rodents, ticks, fleas), but the
entire life cycle of H. nana is completed in humans. Therefore hyperinfection with thousands of small adult worms in a single child may
occur. A similar infection may occur less often with H. diminuta. Eggs

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2218 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
but not segments may be found in the stool. H. nana infection responds
to praziquantel (25 mg/kg PO once). Nitazoxanide is effective in about
three fourths of children (100 mg PO twice daily [bid] for 3 days for
children 1-­3 years old, 200 mg bid for 3 days for children 4-­11 years
old, and 500 mg bid for 3 days for older children).

DIPYLIDIASIS (DIPYLIDIUM CANINUM)

Dipylidium caninum is a common tapeworm of domestic dogs and
cats. Human infection is relatively rare. Direct transmission between
pets and humans does not occur; human infection requires ingestion
of the parasite’s intermediate host, the dog or cat flea. Infants and small
children are particularly susceptible because of their level of hygiene,
generally more intimate contact with pets, and activities in areas where
fleas can be encountered. Thus children are most at risk of inadvertent
ingestion of fleas infected with the larvae. The most common symptom is passage of proglottids in stool. The proglottids are similar in size
and shape to white rice grains. Anal pruritus, vague abdominal pain,
and diarrhea have at times been associated with dipylidiasis, which is
thus sometimes confused with pinworm (E. vermicularis). Dipylidiasis
responds to treatment with praziquantel (5-­10 mg/kg PO once) and
niclosamide (50 mg/kg PO as a single dose). Deworming of pets and
flea control are the best preventive measures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 349

Cysticercosis
A. Clinton White Jr., Miguel M. Cabada,
and Philip R. Fischer

remain asymptomatic for a few years. Symptoms typically develop as
the cysticerci begin to degenerate, associated with a host inflammatory response. The natural history of cysts is eventually to resolve by
complete resorption or calcification, but this process may take years.
Cysticerci can also present as subcutaneous nodules, ocular infection,
or spinal lesions with myelopathy or radiculopathy.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Seizures and headache are the presenting findings in the vast
majority of children with neurocysticercosis. Less common manifestations include hydrocephalus, diffuse cerebral edema, or focal
neurologic findings. It is important to classify neurocysticercosis
as parenchymal, intraventricular, subarachnoid, spinal, or ocular
on the basis of anatomic location, clinical presentation, and radiologic appearance because the prognosis and management vary with
location.
Parenchymal neurocysticercosis typically presents with seizures.
The seizures are usually focal, but often generalize. Children may
present with a single seizure or recurrent epilepsy. Mild neurocognitive defects have been documented from cysticerci alone but
are more commonly associated with poorly controlled seizures.
A fulminant encephalitis-­like presentation may rarely occur after
a massive initial infection associated with cerebral edema. Intraventricular neurocysticercosis (up to 20% of cases) is associated
with obstructive hydrocephalus and acute, subacute, or intermittent
signs of increased intracranial pressure, usually without localizing
signs. Subarachnoid neurocysticercosis is rare in children. It can
be associated with basilar arachnoiditis that can present with signs
of meningeal irritation, communicating hydrocephalus, cerebral
infarction, or spinal disease with radiculitis or transverse myelitis.
Cysticerci in the tissues may present with focal findings from mass
effect. Ocular neurocysticercosis causes decreased visual acuity
because of cysticerci in the retina or vitreous, retinal detachment,
or iridocyclitis.

DIAGNOSIS

The pork tapeworm is widely distributed wherever pigs are raised and
have contact with human fecal material. Intense transmission occurs in
Central and South America, southern and Southeast Asia, and much
of sub-­Saharan Africa. In these areas, approximately 30% of cases of
seizures may be a result of cysticercosis. Most cases of cysticercosis in
the United States are imported; however, local transmission has been
documented.

Neurocysticercosis should be suspected in a child with onset of seizures or hydrocephalus and who also has a history of residence in an
endemic area and/or a care provider from an endemic area. The most
useful diagnostic study for parenchymal disease is MRI of the head.
MRI provides the most information about cyst location, cyst viability, and associated inflammation. The scolex can appear as a 1-2 mm
nodule attached to the cyst wall, and, when identified, is diagnostic for
cysticercosis (Fig. 349.1A). The MRI also better detects basilar arachnoiditis (Fig. 349.1B), intraventricular cysts (Fig. 349.1C), and cysts
in the spinal cord. CT is best for identifying calcifications. A solitary
parenchymal cyst, with or without contrast enhancement, or CNS
calcifications are the most common findings in children (Fig. 349.2).
Plain films may reveal calcifications in muscle or brain consistent with
cysticercosis. In children from endemic regions, the presentation with
a single enhancing lesion that is round and <2 cm in diameter, absence
of symptoms or signs of other diseases (e.g., no fever or lymph nodes),
no focal findings, and no evidence of increased intracranial pressure is
highly specific for neurocysticercosis.
Serologic diagnosis using the enzyme-­linked immunotransfer blot
is available commercially in the United States and through the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Serum antibody testing is
highly specific but is frequently negative in children with single lesions
or just calcifications. Antigen-­detection assays and polymerase chain
reaction assays show promise for diagnosis of ventricular and subarachnoid disease and are available from the Laboratory for Parasitic
Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH). They are not commercially available in the United States.

PATHOGENESIS

Differential Diagnosis

Taenia solium, also known as the pork tapeworm, causes two different infections in children. In its normal life cycle, children can acquire
the tapeworm form by ingestion of undercooked pork containing the
larval cysts (see Chapter 348). In the intestines, the cyst converts into
the tapeworm form. Children are also susceptible to infection by the
eggs shed by tapeworm carriers. After the eggs are ingested, the larvae
are released from the eggs, invade through the intestines, and migrate
through the bloodstream to the muscles (and other organs), where they
form tissue cysts (0.2-­2.0 cm fluid-­filled bladders containing a single
invaginated scolex). Infection with the cystic form is termed cysticercosis, and involvement of the central nervous system (CNS) is termed
neurocysticercosis. The tapeworm form only develops after ingestion
of undercooked pork. Ingestion of pork is not necessary to develop cysticercosis, but individuals harboring an adult worm may infect themselves with the eggs by the fecal-­oral route.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Living, intact cystic stages usually suppress the host immune and
inflammatory responses. Intact cysts can be associated with disease when they obstruct the flow of cerebrospinal fluid. Most cysts

Neurocysticercosis is often confused clinically with other seizure disorders. Clinical suspicion is based on travel history, a history of contact
with an individual who might carry an adult tapeworm, or suggestive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 349 u Cysticercosis

A

B

C

D

2219

C
ON

Fig. 349.1 Neurocysticercosis. A, T1-­weighted MRI demonstrating two parenchymal cysts with scolices. B, T1-­weighted MRI of cysticercal basilar

arachnoiditis. C, T1-­weighted MRI showing a cyst below the fourth ventricle (arrow). D, T2-­weighted MRI showing a cysticercus (C) above the optic
nerve (ON).

A

B

Fig. 349.2 Neurocysticercosis. CT image of a solitary lesion with (A)

and without (B) contrast, showing contrast enhancement. (Courtesy Dr.
Wendy G. Mitchell and Dr. Marvin D. Nelson, Children’s Hospital, Los
Angeles.)

imaging studies. The imaging appearance can be confused with brain
abscess, granulomas (including tuberculomas, fungal infections, Langerhans histiocytosis, and toxoplasmosis), and tumors.

TREATMENT

The initial management of cysticercosis should focus on symptomatic
therapy for seizures and/or hydrocephalus. Seizures can usually be
controlled using standard antiepileptic drugs. If the lesions resolve,
antiepileptic drugs can often be tapered and stopped. Frequent seizures or the development of calcified lesions are risk factors for recurrent seizures and indications for prolonged or lifelong antiepileptic
therapy.
The natural history of parenchymal lesions is to resolve spontaneously, with or without antiparasitic drugs, but this process is often prolonged (months to years). Solitary parenchymal cysts resolve slightly
more rapidly with antiparasitic therapy. Antiparasitic drugs also
decrease the frequency of recurrent seizures. Other forms of the disease
are less common in children. In adults with cystic lesions, randomized
controlled trials suggested an overall 50% decrease in recurrence of
generalized seizures with albendazole treatment. The benefit to children was significantly less, perhaps because most of these infections
were with only one to two cysts. Corticosteroids likely also decrease
seizure frequency.
The most commonly used antiparasitic is albendazole (15 mg/kg/
day orally [PO] divided twice daily [bid]). It should be taken with a
fatty meal to improve absorption. The most common duration of
therapy is 7 days for single parenchymal lesions. However, longer
duration (months), higher doses (up to 30 mg/kg/day), or combination therapy with praziquantel is often required for multiple lesions
or subarachnoid disease. For example, in adults with more than two
cysticerci, trials note improved resolution with combination therapy

with corticosteroids, albendazole, and praziquantel (50 mg/kg/day PO
divided three times daily for 14 days). Praziquantel (50-100 mg/kg/
day for 28 days) may be used as an alternative to albendazole. First-­pass
metabolism is common with corticosteroids or antiepileptic drugs.
Cimetidine can be used in conjunction with praziquantel to blunt the
first-­pass metabolism. A worsening of symptoms can follow the use
of either drug based on the host’s inflammatory response to the dying
parasite. Patients should be medicated with prednisone (1-­2 mg/kg/
day) or oral dexamethasone (0.15 mg/kg/day) beginning before the
first dose of antiparasitic drugs and continuing for at least 2 weeks.
Most patients with hydrocephalus require neurosurgical interventions. Some cases require emergent placement of a ventriculostomy,
but most can be managed by cystectomy alone. For obstructive hydrocephalus caused by ventricular cysticercosis, many patients can be
cured by minimally invasive surgery. Neuroendoscopy is the preferred
approach to cysticerci in the lateral or third ventricle. Cysticerci in the
fourth ventricle can be removed by a suboccipital craniotomy. There
are also reports of endoscopic removal of fourth ventricular cysticerci using flexible neuroendoscopy. Adherent cysticerci that cannot
be removed can be treated by placement of a ventriculoperitoneal
shunt (VPS). However, there is a high rate of shunt failure, which can
be minimized somewhat by treatment with antiparasitic drugs plus
corticosteroids.
Subarachnoid disease has a poor prognosis. The prognosis is much
improved by aggressive therapy, including antiparasitic drugs, antiinflammatory treatment, and neurosurgical procedures for hydrocephalus (e.g., VPS placement). However, the duration of antiparasitic and
antiinflammatory therapy often needs to be prolonged. Methotrexate
and/or tumor necrosis factor inhibitors can be used as a steroid-­sparing
agent in patients requiring prolonged anti-­inflammatory therapy. Ocular cysticercosis is usually treated surgically, although there are reports
of cure using medical therapy alone.

PREVENTION

In areas with evolved public health systems, cysticercosis can largely
be eliminated by meat inspection, condemnation of infected meat,
thorough cooking of pork, and improved sanitation. This approach
has not worked in countries where most meat is butchered informally.
Mass chemotherapy for tapeworm carriers, mass treatment of pigs, and
improved personal hygiene have decreased or eliminated transmission
in some areas. Screening family members and those preparing food
for index cases for cysticercosis has a very low yield, in part because
of the poor sensitivity of current tests. Those who have noted passing
material consistent with taeniasis should be treated with praziquantel
regardless of the results of stool studies. Veterinary vaccines for several
cestode infections have a high degree of efficacy and have a potential
role in decreasing parasite transmission.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2220 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 350

Echinococcosis
(Echinococcus
granulosus sensu lato
and Echinococcus
multilocularis)
Miguel M. Cabada, Philip R. Fischer, and
A. Clinton White Jr.
ETIOLOGY

Echinococcosis (hydatid disease or hydatidosis) is a widespread,
serious human cestode infection (Fig. 350.1). Two major Echinococcus groups of species are responsible for distinct clinical presentations.
Echinococcus granulosus sensu lato causes cystic echinococcosis, and
Echinococcus multilocularis causes alveolar echinococcosis. The adult
parasites are small (2-­7 mm) tapeworms with only two to six segments
that inhabit the intestines of canines such as dogs, wolves, dingoes, jackals, coyotes, and foxes. Canines are infected by ingesting contaminated
viscera from ungulates (E. granulosus sensu lato) or mice (E. multilocularis). These carnivores pass the eggs in their stool, which contaminate
the soil, pasture, and water, as well as their own fur. Domestic animals,
such as sheep, goats, cattle, and camels, ingest E. granulosus complex
eggs while grazing. Some species of E. granulosus sensu lato have a sylvatic cycle involving wild cervids such as moose, elk, and deer. For E.
multilocularis, the main intermediate hosts are small rodents. Humans
are infected by consuming eggs by direct contact with infected canines
or from ova in the environment. In Europe, contamination of gardens
by fox excrement is a major risk factor for transmission. The larvae
hatch, penetrate the gut, and are carried by the vascular or lymphatic
systems to the liver, lungs, and less frequently, bones, kidney, brain, or
heart in E. granulosus infection. E. multilocularis larvae infect the liver
almost exclusively.

Echinococcus granulosus sensu lato comprises several recognized
species, including E. granulosus sensu stricto, E. equinus, E. ortleppi,
and E. canadensis. The species within E. granulosus sensu lato show
significant variation not only in genetics but also in ecology. While E.
granulosus sensu stricto is mainly found in domesticated ovines and
dogs around the world, E. canadensis is found in a sylvatic wolf/moose
cycle in North America and Siberia and has been identified in bovines
and swine in South America.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

There is potential for transmission of E. granulosus to humans wherever dogs are allowed to ingest the entrails of herd animals. Disease is
highly endemic in the Middle East and Central Asia. Cysts have been
detected in up to 10% of the human population in northern Kenya and
western China. In South America, the disease is prevalent in sheepherding areas of the Andes, the beef-­herding areas of the Brazilian/
Argentine Pampas, and Uruguay. Among developed countries, the disease is recognized in Italy, Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Australia and is
reemergent in dogs in Great Britain. In North America, transmission
occurs rarely through a sylvatic cycle in the Artic regions and in sheep-­
raising areas of the western United States.
Transmission of E. multilocularis occurs primarily in Western
China, Central Europe, Siberia, and Turkey. Transmission is now rare
in western Canada and the Arctic regions of North America. Ingestion
of infected rodents by dogs or foxes facilitates transmission to children.
Separate species, E. vogeli and E. oligarthrus, have mainly a sylvatic
cycle involving canines and felines causing polycystic disease in northern South America.

PATHOGENESIS

E. granulosus sensu lato parasites are often acquired in childhood,
and cysts require many years to become large enough to be detected
or cause symptoms. In children the lung is a common site of infection, whereas in adults up to 70% of cysts develop in the liver. Cysts
can also develop in bone, the genitourinary system, spleen, subcutaneous tissues, and brain. The host surrounds the primary cyst with a
tough, fibrous capsule. Inside this capsule, the parasite produces a thick
lamellar layer with the consistency of a soft-­boiled egg white. Inside
the lamellar layer is the thin germinal layer of cells responsible for production of 1000s of protoscoleces that remain attached to the wall or
float free in the cyst fluid (Video 350.1). Smaller internal daughter cysts
may develop within the primary cyst capsule. The fluid in a healthy
cyst is clear, colorless, and watery. Rupture of the cyst, which can occur

E. multilocularis and E. granulosus sensu lato highly endemic
E. granulosus sensu lato highly endemic
E. granulosus sensu lato endemic
E. multilocularis endemic
Nonendemic or not known

Fig. 350.1 Global distribution of cystic
echinococcosis and alveolar echinococcosis. (From Wen H, Vuitton L, Tuxun
T, et al. Echinococcosis: advances in
the 21st century. Clin Microbiol Rev.
2019;32[2]:e00075–18. Fig 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 350 u Echinococcosis (Echinococcus granulosus sensu lato and Echinococcus multilocularis)
spontaneously, with trauma, or during surgery, can be associated with
immediate hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis. Protoscoleces released into the tissues can also develop into new cysts.
E. multilocularis almost always involves the liver. The lesions grow
very slowly and rarely present in children. The secondary reproductive
units bud externally and are not confined within a single, well-­defined
structure. Thus the lesions are invasive and often confused with a
malignancy. Furthermore, the cyst tissues are poorly demarcated from
those of the host, making surgical removal difficult. The secondary
cysts are also capable of distant metastatic spread. The growing cyst
mass eventually replaces a significant portion of the liver and compromises adjacent tissues and structures.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In the liver, cysts may remain asymptomatic, may regress spontaneously, or may produce nonspecific symptoms. Symptomatic cysts
can cause increased abdominal girth, hepatomegaly, a palpable mass,
vomiting, or abdominal pain. In the lung, cysts produce chest pain,
chronic cough, or hemoptysis. Expectorated fluid from ruptured lung
cysts is often described as “salty.” Mass effects can be noted in the brain
and bone. Serious complications result from compression of adjacent
structures or spillage of cyst contents. Type I hypersensitivity reactions,
including anaphylaxis, can occur with spontaneous spillage or with
cyst rupture from trauma or during surgery. Fluid from ruptured lung
cysts can cause hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Spillage of fluid from a
viable cyst can cause catastrophic long-­term complications. Each protoscolex can form a new cyst and fill up the abdominal cavity or other
spaces, including the pleura, biliary tree, and pelvis. Jaundice from cystic hydatid disease is rare.
Alveolar hydatid disease is sometimes diagnosed incidentally, but
often the proliferating mass compromises the biliary system and/or
hepatic tissue, causing progressive obstructive jaundice and hepatic
failure. Symptoms also occur from expansion of extrahepatic foci.

2221

CE1 (type I)

Fluid collection (hyaline)

CE2 (type II)

Multivescular

CE3 (type III)

Fluid collection with split wall

CE4 (type IV)

Heterogeneous pattern

CE5 (type V)

Calcified

DIAGNOSIS

Ultrasonography is the most valuable tool for both the diagnosis and treatment of cystic echinococcosis of the liver. The World
Health Organization (WHO) standardized ultrasound criteria for
classification of liver cystic echinococcosis have been shown to be
reliable with excellent inter/intraobserver reliability. Ultrasonography staging has a direct use in defining optimal therapy with cystic
echinococcosis types 1 and type 2 (CE1 and CE2) cysts considered
fully active, CE3a and CE3b transitional, and CE4 and CE5 inactive (Fig. 350.2). Chest radiographs frequently reveal characteristic
rounded masses in lung cystic echinococcosis (Fig. 350.3). Alveolar
disease resembles a diffuse solid tumor. CT findings are similar to
those of ultrasonography and may at times be useful in distinguishing alveolar from cystic echinococcosis in geographic regions where
both occur (Fig. 350.4). CT or MRI is also important in planning a
surgical intervention.
Serologic studies are used to confirm the diagnosis of cystic echinococcosis, although some children with active cystic echinococcosis
do not have detectable levels of specific antibody. Cross-­reaction with
other helminths is possible when using crude hydatid fluid antigens for
the serology. The sensitivity and specificity of serologic assays to diagnose cystic echinococcosis vary significantly by location of the cyst,
stage, and treatment status. The enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay
performs better than Western blot and indirect hemagglutination with
the highest sensitivity for CE2, CE3, and CE1 cysts (64–99%) compared to CE4 and CE5 (51–91%). The sensitivity is higher for hepatic or
bone disease, but the false-­negative rate may be >50% with pulmonary
or central nervous system (CNS) infection.

Differential Diagnosis

Benign hepatic cysts are common but can be distinguished from cystic echinococcosis by the absence of a distinct three-­layer wall, internal membranes, and hydatid sand. The density of bacterial hepatic
abscesses is distinct from the watery cystic fluid characteristic of E.
granulosus infection, but Echinococcus cysts may also be complicated

Fig. 350.2 Ultrasound classification of cystic echinococcosis (CE)
cysts. The WHO informal working group on echinococcosis classification differs from that of Gharbi and colleagues by the addition of a
“cystic lesion” (CL) stage (undifferentiated) (not shown) and by reversing the order of CE types 2 and 3. CE3 transitional cysts may be differentiated into CE3a (with detached endocyst) and CE3b (predominantly
solid with daughter vesicles). CE1 and CE3a are early-­stage cysts and
CE4 and CE5 late-­stage cysts. (From McManus DP, Gray DJ, Zhang
W, Yang Y. Diagnosis, treatment, and management of echinococcosis.
BMJ. 2012;344:e3866. Fig 4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2222 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Mar-5

Apr-16

Apr-27

May-17

Jun-7

Jun-21

Fig. 350.3 Serial chest radiographs

of bilateral hydatid cysts. After 2
months of albendazole therapy, sudden rupture of the right cyst was associated with massive aspiration and
acute respiratory distress.

Fig. 350.4 Liver cystic echinococcosis (hydatid disease). Abdominal

CT revealed hepatomegaly and multiple (>20) liver cysts. (From Ben-­
Shimol S, Zelcer I. Liver hydatid cysts. J Pediatr. 2013;163:1792.)

by secondary bacterial infection. Alveolar echinococcosis is often confused with hepatoma or metastatic tumor.

TREATMENT

Management of cystic echinococcosis should be individualized and
guided by disease stage and location. Approaches range from surgical resection for disease that tends to respond poorly to drugs and
complicated cysts to watchful waiting for cysts that have already
degenerated. For CE1 or CE3a cysts (see Fig. 350.2) that are <5 cm
in diameter, albendazole chemotherapy alone (15 mg/kg/day orally
divided twice daily for 1-­6 months; maximum 800 mg/day) may
result in a high rate of cure. Adverse effects include occasional alopecia, mild gastrointestinal disturbance, and elevated transaminases
on prolonged use. Because of leukopenia, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) recommends that blood counts be monitored at the beginning and every 2 weeks during the first 3 months of
therapy and monthly afterward. Medical treatment with albendazole
may also be used for cysts that are not suitable for interventions such
as PAIR (percutaneous, aspiration, instillation, and reaspiration) or
surgery, but response rates are low.
For larger CE1 and CE3a lesions, ultrasound-­or CT-­guided PAIR
is the preferred therapy. Compared with surgical treatment alone,
PAIR plus albendazole results in similar cyst disappearance with
fewer adverse events and fewer days in the hospital. Spillage with
PAIR is uncommon, but prophylactic albendazole therapy is routinely administered at least 1 week before PAIR and 1 month
afterward. PAIR is contraindicated in pregnancy and for bile-­
stained cysts, which may indicate the presence of a biliary fistula.
The scolicidal agents instilled during PAIR may increase risk for
biliary complications in these patients. Surgery with albendazole

treatment is the recommended approach for CE2 and CE3b cysts of
the liver. In experienced centers, cysts with thick internal septation
(CE2) can be managed using a trocar to break up the membranes
and external drainage. CE4 and CE5 cysts do not require immediate interventions and are followed ultrasonographically for signs
of reactivation.
Surgery is the treatment of choice for complicated cysts, including ruptured cysts, cysts communicating with the biliary tract, large
pulmonary cysts, or cysts of the CNS or bones. Small thoracic cysts
may resolve with albendazole, but most cysts require operative
removal.
For conventional surgery, the inner cyst wall (only laminate and
germinal layers are of parasite origin) can be easily peeled from the
fibrous layer, although some studies suggest that removal of the whole
capsule has a better outcome in terms of recurrent disease. Considerable care must be taken to avoid spillage of cyst contents, and surgical drapes should be soaked in hypertonic saline because cyst fluid
contains viable protoscoleces, each capable of producing secondary
cysts. An additional risk is anaphylaxis because of spilled cyst fluid,
making it useful to employ a surgeon experienced in this surgery. For
hepatic cysts, patients should begin therapy with albendazole (ideally in combination with praziquantel) for several days to weeks preoperatively. Antiparasitic drugs should be continued for 4-­12 weeks
postoperatively.
Alveolar hydatidosis frequently requires radical surgery, including partial hepatectomy, lobectomy, or liver transplantation. Medical
therapy with albendazole should be continued for at least 2 years
after presumably curative surgery. In patients who are not operative candidates or whose lesions are not amenable to surgical cure,
albendazole long-­term suppressive therapy should be used to slow
the progression, but the infection generally recurs if albendazole is
stopped.

PROGNOSIS

Factors predictive of success with chemotherapy are age of the cyst (<2
years), low internal complexity of the cyst, and small size. The site of
the cyst is not important, although cysts in bone respond poorly. For
alveolar echinococcosis, if surgical removal is unsuccessful, the average
mortality is 92% by 10 years after diagnosis.

PREVENTION

Important measures to interrupt transmission include thorough handwashing, avoiding contact with dogs in endemic areas, and boiling or
filtering water when camping. Strict procedures for proper disposal of
refuse from slaughterhouses must be instituted and followed so that
dogs and wild carnivores do not have access to entrails. Other useful
measures are control or treatment of the feral dog population and regular praziquantel treatment of pets and working dogs in endemic areas.
Vaccines have been developed to prevent infection in grazing animals
but are not widely used.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Nelson

TEXTBOOK OF

PEDIATRICS
Robert M. Kliegman
Joseph W. St Geme III
NATHAN J. BLUM
ROBERT C. TASKER
KAREN M. WILSON
ABIGAIL M. SCHUH
CARA L. MACK

ELSEVIER

EDITION

Volume 2

The Digestive System
Section 1

Clinical Manifestations
of Gastrointestinal
Disease
Chapter 351

Normal Digestive Tract
Phenomena
Asim Maqbool and Chris A. Liacouras
Gastrointestinal function varies with maturity; what is a physiologic
event in a newborn or infant might be a pathologic symptom at an
older age. A fetus can swallow amniotic fluid as early as 12 weeks of
gestation, but nutritive sucking in neonates first develops at about 34
weeks of gestation. The coordinated oral and pharyngeal movements
necessary for swallowing solids develop within the first few months
of life. Before this time, the tongue thrust is upward and outward to
express milk from the nipple, instead of a backward motion, which
propels solids toward the esophageal inlet. By 1 month of age, infants
appear to show preferences for sweet and salty foods. Infants’ interest in solids increases at approximately 4 months of age. The recommendation to begin solids at 6 months of age is based on nutritional
and cultural concepts rather than maturation of the swallowing process
(see Chapter 61). Infants swallow air during feeding, and burping is
encouraged to prevent gaseous distention of the stomach.
A number of normal anatomic variations may be noted in the
mouth. A short lingual frenulum (“tongue-­tie”) may be worrisome to
parents but only rarely interferes with nursing, bottle feeding, eating,
or speech, generally requiring no treatment. Surface furrowing of the
tongue (a geographic or scrotal tongue) is usually a normal finding. A
bifid uvula may be isolated or associated with a submucous cleft of the
soft palate (Fig. 351.1).
Regurgitation, the result of gastroesophageal reflux, occurs commonly in the first year of life. Effortless regurgitation can dribble out
of an infant’s mouth but also may be forceful. In an otherwise healthy
infant with regurgitation; volumes of emesis are commonly approximately 15-­30 mL but occasionally are larger. Most often, the infant
remains happy, although possibly hungry, after an episode of regurgitation. Episodes can occur from one to several times per day. Regurgitation gradually resolves in 80% of infants by 6 months of age and in
90% by 12 months. If complications develop or regurgitation persists,
gastroesophageal reflux is considered pathologic rather than merely
developmental and deserves further evaluation and treatment. Complications of gastroesophageal reflux include failure to thrive, pulmonary disease (apnea or aspiration pneumonitis), and esophagitis with
its sequelae (see Chapters 369 and 370).
Infants and young children may be erratic eaters; this may be a worry
to parents. A toddler might eat insatiably or refuse to consume food

PART

XVI

during a meal. Toddlers and young children also tend to eat only a limited variety of foods. Parents should be encouraged to view nutritional
intake over several days and not be overly concerned about individual meals. Infancy and adolescence are periods of rapid growth; high
nutrient requirements for growth may be associated with voracious
appetites. The reduced appetite of toddlers and preschool children is
often a worry to parents who are used to the relatively greater dietary
intake during infancy. Demonstration of age-­appropriate growth on a
growth curve is reassuring.
The number, color, and consistency of stools can vary greatly in
the same infant and between infants of similar age, without apparent
explanation. The earliest stools after birth consist of meconium, a dark,
viscous material that is normally passed within the first 48 hours of
life. With the onset of feeding, meconium is replaced by green-­brown
transition stools, often containing curds, and, after 4-­5 days, by yellow-­
brown milk stools. Stool frequency is extremely variable in normal
infants and can vary from none to seven per day. Breastfed infants can
have frequent small, loose stools early (transition stools), and then after
2-­3 weeks can have very infrequent soft stools. Some nursing infants
might not pass any stool for 1-­2 weeks and then have a normal soft
bowel movement. The color of stool has little significance except for the
presence of blood or absence of bilirubin products (white-­gray rather
than yellow-­brown). The presence of vegetable matter, such as peas or
corn, in the stool of an older infant or toddler ingesting solids is normal and suggests poor chewing and not malabsorption. A pattern of
intermittent loose stools, known as toddler’s diarrhea, occurs commonly between 1 and 3 years of age. These otherwise healthy growing children often drink excessive carbohydrate-­containing beverages.
The stools typically occur during the day and not overnight. The volume of fluid intake is often excessive; limiting sugar and unabsorbable
carbohydrate-­containing beverages and increasing fat in the diet often
lead to resolution of the pattern of loose stools.
A protuberant abdomen is often noted in infants and toddlers, especially after large feedings. This can result from the combination of weak
abdominal musculature, relatively large abdominal organs, and lordotic
stance. In the first year of life, it is common to palpate the liver 1-­2 cm

Fig. 351.1 Classic submucous cleft palate with triad of bifid uvula

(large arrow), furrow along the midline of the soft palate (arrowheads),
and a notch in the posterior margin of the hard palate (small arrow). The
midline furrow is sometimes referred to as the zona pellucida, reflecting the translucent nature of this area in some patients. (From Hasan A,
Gardner A, Devlin M, Russell C. Submucous cleft palate with bifid uvula.
J Pediatr. 2014;165:872.)

2223
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2224 Part XVI u The Digestive System
below the right costal margin. The normal liver is soft in consistency
and percusses to normal size for age. A Riedel lobe is a thin projection
of the right lobe of the liver that may be palpated low in the right lateral
abdomen. A soft spleen tip might also be palpable as a normal finding.
In thin young children, the vertebral column is easily palpable, and an
overlying structure may be mistaken for a mass. Pulsation of the aorta
can be appreciated. Normal stool can often be palpated in the left lower
quadrant in the descending or sigmoid colon.
Blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract is never normal, but
swallowed blood may be misinterpreted as gastrointestinal bleeding.
Maternal blood may be ingested at the time of birth or later by a nursing infant if there is bleeding near the mother’s nipple. Nasal or oropharyngeal bleeding is occasionally mistaken for gastrointestinal bleeding
(see Chapter 142). Red dyes in foods or drinks can turn the stool red
but do not produce a positive test result for occult blood.
Jaundice is common in neonates, especially among premature
infants, and usually results from the inability of an immature liver to
conjugate bilirubin, leading to an elevated indirect component (see
Chapter 137). Persistent elevation of indirect bilirubin levels in nursing infants may be a result of breast milk jaundice, which is usually
a benign entity in full-­term infants. An elevated direct bilirubin is
not normal and suggests liver disease, although in infants it may be
a result of extrahepatic infection (urinary tract infection). The direct
bilirubin fraction should account for no more than 15–20% of the
total serum bilirubin. Elevations in direct bilirubin levels can follow
indirect hyperbilirubinemia as the liver converts excessive indirect to
direct bilirubin and the rate-­limiting step in bilirubin excretion shifts
from the glucuronidation of bilirubin to excretion of direct bilirubin
into the bile canaliculus. Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, which occurs
commonly in normal newborns, tends to tint the sclerae and skin
golden yellow, whereas direct hyperbilirubinemia produces a greenish
yellow hue. The degree of jaundice does not always directly correlate
with serum bilirubin levels. An elevated total serum bilirubin warrants
closer examination, fractionation of bilirubin (direct and indirect), and
ongoing surveillance. Atypical elevations of unconjugated bilirubin are
associated with risk for kernicterus (see Chapter 140). Elevations in
conjugated bilirubin are reviewed in the chapter on cholestasis (see
Chapter 404.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 352

Major Symptoms and
Signs of Digestive Tract
Disorders
Asim Maqbool and Chris A. Liacouras
Disorders of organs outside the gastrointestinal (GI) tract can produce
symptoms and signs that mimic digestive tract disorders and should be
considered in the differential diagnosis (Table 352.1). In children with
normal growth and development, treatment may be initiated without
a formal evaluation based on a presumptive diagnosis after taking a
history and performing a physical examination. Poor weight gain or
weight loss is often associated with a significant pathologic process and
usually necessitates a more formal evaluation.

Table 352.1  Some Nondigestive Tract Causes of
Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Children
ANOREXIA
Systemic disease: inflammatory, neoplastic
Cardiorespiratory compromise
Iatrogenic: drug therapy, unpalatable therapeutic diets
Depression
Anorexia nervosa
VOMITING
Inborn errors of metabolism
Medications: erythromycin, chemotherapy, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs, marijuana
Increased intracranial pressure
Brain tumor
Infection of the urinary tract
Labyrinthitis
Adrenal insufficiency
Pregnancy
Psychogenic
Abdominal migraine
Poisoning/toxins
Renal disease
DIARRHEA
Infection: otitis media, urinary tract infection
Uremia
Medications: antibiotics, cisapride
Tumors: neuroblastoma
Pericarditis
Adrenal insufficiency
CONSTIPATION
Hypothyroidism
Spina bifida
Developmental delay
Dehydration: diabetes insipidus, renal tubular lesions
Medications: narcotics
Lead poisoning
Infant botulism
ABDOMINAL PAIN
Pyelonephritis, hydronephrosis, renal colic
Pneumonia (lower lobe)
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Porphyria
Fabry disease
Angioedema
Endocarditis
Abdominal migraine
Familial Mediterranean fever
Sexual or physical abuse
Systemic lupus erythematosus
School phobia
Sickle cell crisis
Vertebral disk inflammation
Psoas abscess
Pelvic osteomyelitis or myositis
Medications
Anterior (abdominal) cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome (ACNES)
ABDOMINAL DISTENTION OR MASS
Ascites: nephrotic syndrome, neoplasm, heart failure
Discrete mass: Wilms tumor, hydronephrosis, neuroblastoma,
mesenteric cyst, hepatoblastoma, lymphoma
Pregnancy
JAUNDICE
Hemolytic disease
Urinary tract infection
Sepsis
Hypothyroidism
Panhypopituitarism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders
DYSPHAGIA

Difficulty in swallowing is termed dysphagia. Painful swallowing is
termed odynophagia. Globus is the sensation of something stuck in
the throat without a clear etiology. Swallowing is a complex process
that starts in the mouth with mastication and lubrication of food that
is formed into a bolus. The bolus is pushed into the pharynx by the
tongue. The pharyngeal phase of swallowing is rapid and involves protective mechanisms to prevent food from entering the airway. The epiglottis is lowered over the larynx while the soft palate is elevated against
the nasopharyngeal wall; respiration is temporarily arrested while the
upper esophageal sphincter opens to allow the bolus to enter the esophagus. In the esophagus, peristaltic coordinated muscular contractions
push the food bolus toward the stomach. The lower esophageal sphincter relaxes shortly after the upper esophageal sphincter, so liquids that
rapidly clear the esophagus enter the stomach without resistance.
Dysphagia is classified as oropharyngeal dysphagia and esophageal
dysphagia. Oropharyngeal dysphagia occurs when the transfer of the
food bolus from the mouth to the esophagus is impaired (also termed
transfer dysphagia). The striated muscles of the mouth, pharynx, and
upper esophageal sphincter are affected in oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Neurologic and muscular disorders can give rise to oropharyngeal
dysphagia (Table 352.2). Chiari malformations, Russell-­
Silver syndrome, and cri du chat may present with upper esophageal sphincter

Table 352.2  Causes of Oropharyngeal Dysphagia
NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS
Cerebral palsy
Brain tumors
Cerebrovascular disease/stroke
Chiari malformation
Polio and postpolio syndromes
Multiple sclerosis
Myositis
Dermatomyositis
Myasthenia gravis
Muscular dystrophies
Acquired or inherited dystonia syndrome
Dysautonomia
METABOLIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Hyperthyroidism
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sarcoidosis
Amyloidosis

dysfunction, manifest by dysphagia with solids. The most serious complication of oropharyngeal dysphagia is life-­threatening aspiration.
A complex sequence of neuromuscular events is involved in the
transfer of foods to the upper esophagus. Abnormalities of the muscles
involved in the ingestion process and their innervation, strength, or
coordination are associated with transfer dysphagia in infants and children. In such cases, an oropharyngeal problem is usually part of a more
generalized neurologic or muscular problem (botulism, diphtheria,
neuromuscular disease). Painful oral lesions, such as acute viral stomatitis or trauma, occasionally interfere with ingestion. If the nasal air
passage is seriously obstructed, the need for respiration causes severe
distress when suckling. Although severe structural, dental, and salivary
abnormalities would be expected to create difficulties, ingestion proceeds relatively well in most affected children if they are hungry.
Esophageal dysphagia occurs when there is difficulty in transporting the food bolus down the esophagus. Esophageal dysphagia can
result from neuromuscular disorders or mechanical obstruction (Table
352.3). Primary motility disorders causing impaired peristaltic function and dysphagia are rare in children. Eosinophilic esophagitis can
present with esophageal dysphagia. Achalasia is an esophageal motility
disorder with associated inability of relaxation of the lower esophageal
sphincter; it rarely occurs in children. Motility of the distal esophagus
is disordered after surgical repair of tracheoesophageal fistula or achalasia. Abnormal motility can accompany collagen vascular disorders.
Mechanical obstruction can be intrinsic or extrinsic. Intrinsic structural defects cause a fixed impediment to the passage of food bolus
because of a narrowing within the esophagus, as in a stricture, web,
or tumor. Extrinsic obstruction is caused by compression from vascular rings, mediastinal lesions, or vertebral abnormalities. Structural
defects typically cause more problems in swallowing solids than liquids. In infants, esophageal web, tracheobronchial remnant, or vascular ring can cause dysphagia. An esophageal stricture secondary to
esophagitis (chronic gastroesophageal reflux, eosinophilic esophagitis,
chronic infections) occasionally has dysphagia as the first manifestation. An esophageal foreign body or a stricture secondary to a caustic
ingestion also causes dysphagia. A Schatzki ring, a thin ring of mucosal
tissue near the lower esophageal sphincter, is another mechanical cause
of recurrent dysphagia, and again is rare in children.
When dysphagia is associated with a delay in passage through the
esophagus, the patient may be able to point to the level of the chest
where the delay occurs, but esophageal symptoms are usually referred

Table 352.3  Causes of Esophageal Dysphagia

INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Meningitis
Botulism
Diphtheria
Lyme disease
Neurosyphilis
Viral infection: polio, coxsackievirus, herpes, cytomegalovirus

NEUROMUSCULAR
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Achalasia cardia
Diffuse esophageal spasm
Scleroderma

STRUCTURAL LESIONS
Inflammatory: abscess, pharyngitis
Congenital web
Cricopharyngeal bar
Dental problems
Bullous skin lesions
Plummer-­Vinson syndrome
Zenker diverticulum
Extrinsic compression: osteophytes, lymph nodes, thyroid swelling,
aberrant
right subclavian artery (dysphagia lusoria)

INTRINSIC LESIONS
Foreign bodies including pills
Esophagitis: GERD, eosinophilic esophagitis, infections
Stricture: corrosive injury, pill induced, peptic
Esophageal webs
Esophageal rings
Esophageal diverticula
Neoplasm
Chagas disease

OTHER
Corrosive injury
Side effects of medications
After surgery
After radiation therapy
Adapted from Gasiorowska A, Faas R. Current approach to dysphagia. Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2009;5(4):269–279.

2225

GERD

EXTRINSIC LESIONS
Vascular compression
Mediastinal lesion
Cervical osteochondritis
Vertebral abnormalities
GERD, Gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Adapted from Gasiorowska A, Faas R. Current approach to dysphagia. Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2009;5(4):269–279.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2226 Part XVI u The Digestive System
to the suprasternal notch. When a patient points to the suprasternal
notch, the impaction can be found anywhere in the esophagus.

REGURGITATION

Regurgitation is the effortless movement of stomach contents into the
esophagus and mouth. It is not associated with distress, and infants
with regurgitation are often hungry immediately after an episode. The
lower esophageal sphincter prevents reflux of gastric contents into the
esophagus. Regurgitation is a result of gastroesophageal reflux through
an incompetent or, in infants, immature lower esophageal sphincter.
This is often a developmental process, and regurgitation or “spitting”
resolves with maturity. Regurgitation should be differentiated from
vomiting, which denotes an active reflex process with an extensive differential diagnosis (Table 352.4).

NAUSEA

Nausea has been described as an unpleasant, subjective sensation of
impending/imminent vomiting, often with epigastric sensation that
may be painless. Nausea is frequently associated with typical autonomic signs that accompany vomiting. Not all nausea is a prodrome
to vomiting. There are multiple potential triggers to nausea, including environmental exposures (toxins, odors), unpleasant visual stimuli, visceral pain, anxiety, stress, and a variety of additional etiologies
(Table 352.5).
The central nervous system (CNS) is frequently implicated for nausea. Receptors and neural pathways at the chemoreceptor trigger zone

(CTZ) are most often implicated by chemical stimuli with chemotherapy a prime example. Visceral stimuli can include ingestions, gastric
hyperacidity, physical stress, psychologic stressors, mechanical distention of the stomach, and impaired GI motility; vagal and sympathetic
nerves are involved in this process. Vestibular pathways are most often
implicated in nausea related to motion sickness. Increased intracranial
pressure can also present with nausea plus or minus vomiting.
Chronic nausea is more common in adolescents and may be coincidental with other functional GI disorders, including functional dyspepsia, delayed gastric emptying/gastroparesis, and constipation. There are
gender and ethnic differences with respect to chronic nausea in adolescence, with adolescent White females with anxiety more at risk than
other groups; there may be alterations in the brain gut axis coupled
with increased visceral hypersensitivity and hyperalgesia at play in the
setting (see Chapter 212). Dehydration and autonomic dysfunction
may also present with nausea as one facet of GI manifestations.
Nausea is often a clinical diagnosis, and while the differential diagnosis is extensive, negative findings do not equate to the patient not
having nausea. Nausea is often distressing, disruptive, and may be
disabling with respect to normal function. Table 352.5 reviews common medical conditions associated with nausea, as well as treatment
strategies. Hydration is important in many of these conditions. Many
of the medications used employ antihistamine, serotonergic, dopaminergic, and potentially even opioid pathways (although these are
still controversial). These agents are active at both the CNS and GI
level, with significant brain-­gut axis interplay. Complementary and

Table 352.4  Differential Diagnosis of Emesis During Childhood
INFANT
COMMON
Gastroenteritis
Gastroesophageal reflux
Overfeeding
Anatomic obstruction*
Systemic infection†
Pertussis syndrome
Otitis media

RARE
Adrenogenital syndrome
Inborn errors of metabolism
Brain tumor (increased intracranial pressure)
Subdural hemorrhage
Food poisoning
Rumination
Renal tubular acidosis
Ureteropelvic junction obstruction
Pseudoobstruction

CHILD

ADOLESCENT

Gastroenteritis
Systemic infection
Gastritis
Toxic ingestion/poisoning
Pertussis syndrome
Medication
Reflux (GERD)
Sinusitis
Otitis media
Anatomic obstruction*
Eosinophilic esophagitis

Gastroenteritis
GERD
Systemic infection
Toxic ingestion/poisoning/marijuana
Gastritis
Sinusitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Appendicitis
Migraine
Pregnancy
Medications
Ipecac abuse, bulimia
Concussion

Reye syndrome
Hepatitis
Peptic ulcer
Pancreatitis
Brain tumor
Increased intracranial pressure
Middle ear disease/labyrinthitis
Chemotherapy
Achalasia
Cyclic vomiting (migraine)
Esophageal stricture
Duodenal hematoma
Inborn error of metabolism
Pseudoobstruction
Gastroparesis

Reye syndrome
Hepatitis
Peptic ulcer
Pancreatitis
Cholecystitis
Brain tumor
Increased intracranial pressure
Concussion
Middle ear disease/labyrinthitis
Chemotherapy
Cyclic vomiting (migraine)
Biliary colic
Renal colic
Porphyria
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Adrenal insufficiency
Pseudoobstruction
Intestinal tumor
Gastroparesis
Achalasia
Superior mesentery artery syndrome
Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome

*Includes malrotation, pyloric stenosis, intussusception, Hirschsprung disease, adhesions, and hernias.
†Meningitis, sepsis.
GERD, Gastroesophageal reflux disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2227

Table 352.5  Examples of Causes and Management of Nausea
FUNCTIONAL GASTROINTESTINAL
DISORDERS
Gastroesophageal reflux
Esophagitis (reflux related, eosinophilic, etc.)
Dyspepsia
Gastroparesis
Constipation
Visceral hyperalgesia
OTHER GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Gastritis (medication/NSAID induced;
Helicobacter pylori)
Gastrointestinal dysmotility
Biliary dysfunction (cholelithiasis,
cholecystitis, biliary dyskinesia)
Fundoplication
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Increased intracranial pressure
Migraines, headaches
Motion sickness/vestibular dysfunction
Autonomic dysfunction
Chemotherapy-­induced nausea and vomiting
Postoperative nausea and vomiting

TREATMENT APPROACHES
Diet and lifestyle; acid reduction, refluxate management
Acid reduction, identifying and restricting environmental/dietary triggers
Dietary and lifestyle modification; acid reduction; cyproheptadine
Smaller, more frequent meals; dietary modification; prokinetic agents (D2 antagonists such as
metoclopramide and domperidone*; low-­dose erythromycin or azithromycin)
Adequate hydration, diet and lifestyle modification, stool softeners, stimulant laxatives, additional
adjunct measures if/as indicated
Tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., amitriptyline), cognitive behavioral therapy, hypnotherapy,
biofeedback, physical therapy for desensitization; biofeedback; stress reduction
Reduce/remove medications involved; treat the underlying cause
Adequate hydration; diet/feeding or eating modification; promotility agents
Treat the underlying cause
Smaller, more frequent meals; cyproheptadine to improve gastric accommodation
Treat underlying cause
Migraine prophylactic agents, including cyproheptadine. Abortive medications including triptans.
Antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine) anticholinergics (e.g., scopolamine)
Adequate hydration, increased salt intake, diet and lifestyle modification
5-­HT3 receptor antagonists; D2 antagonists; NK-­1 antagonists; butyrophenones; benzodiazepines;
dexamethasone; synthetic cannabinoids
5-­HT3 receptor antagonists

NON-­GI AND NON-­CNS ETIOLOGIES OF NAUSEA
Uremia
Treat the underlying disorder
Endocrine disorders [e.g., hypothyroidism]
Treat the underlying disorder
*D2 receptor antagonists such as metoclopramide and domperidone have a significant side effect profile, and have a U.S. Food and Drug Administration black box warning, and
should be used with caution.
NK-­1, Neurokinin 1.

alternative medicine approaches including using ginger, peppermint,
aromatherapy, and biofeedback may be helpful. Behavior psychology
and social work may be helpful in decreasing disability and enhancing
functionality.

VOMITING

Vomiting is a highly coordinated reflex process that may be preceded by increased salivation and begins with involuntary retching.
Violent descent of the diaphragm and constriction of the abdominal
muscles with relaxation of the gastric cardia actively force gastric
contents back up the esophagus. This process is coordinated in the
medullary vomiting center, which is influenced directly by afferent innervation and indirectly by the CTZ and higher CNS centers.
Many acute or chronic processes can cause vomiting (see Tables
352.1 and 352.4).
Vomiting caused by obstruction of the GI tract is probably mediated by intestinal visceral afferent nerves stimulating the vomiting center (Table 352.6). If obstruction occurs below the second
part of the duodenum, vomitus is usually bile stained. Emesis can
also become bile stained with repeated vomiting in the absence of
obstruction when duodenal contents are refluxed into the stomach.
Nonobstructive lesions of the digestive tract can also cause vomiting; this includes diseases of the upper bowel, pancreas, liver, or
biliary tree. CNS or metabolic derangements and cyclic vomiting
syndrome (see Chapter 390) can lead to severe, persistent emesis.
Marijuana use among teens has also led to cannabis hyperemesis
syndrome (see Chapter 157.3)
Potential complications of emesis are noted in Table 352.7. Broad
management strategies for vomiting in general and specific causes of
emesis are noted in Tables 352.8 and 352.9.

DIARRHEA

Diarrhea is best defined as excessive loss of fluid and electrolyte in the
stool. Acute diarrhea is defined as sudden onset of excessively loose
stools of >10 mL/kg/day in infants and >200 g/24 hr in older children,
which lasts <14 days. When the episode lasts longer than 14 days, it is
called chronic or persistent diarrhea.
Normally, a young infant has approximately 5 mL/kg/day of stool
output; the volume increases to 200 g/24 hr in an adult. The greatest
volume of intestinal water is absorbed in the small bowel; the colon
concentrates intestinal contents against a high osmotic gradient. The
small intestine of an adult can absorb 10-­11 L/day of a combination of
ingested and secreted fluid, whereas the colon absorbs approximately
0.5 L. Disorders that interfere with absorption in the small bowel tend
to produce voluminous diarrhea, whereas disorders compromising
colonic absorption produce lower-­volume diarrhea. Dysentery (small-­
volume, frequent bloody stools with mucus, tenesmus, and urgency) is
the predominant symptom of colitis.
The basis of all diarrheas is disturbed intestinal solute transport and
water absorption. Water movement across intestinal membranes is
passive and is determined by both active and passive fluxes of solutes,
particularly sodium, chloride, and glucose. The pathogenesis of most
episodes of diarrhea can be explained by secretory, osmotic, or motility
abnormalities or a combination of these (Table 352.10).
Secretory diarrhea occurs when the intestinal epithelial cell solute transport system is in an active state of secretion. It is often
caused by a secretagogue, such as cholera toxin, binding to a receptor on the surface epithelium of the bowel and thereby stimulating intracellular accumulation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
or cyclic guanosine monophosphate. Some intraluminal fatty acids
and bile salts cause the colonic mucosa to secrete through this

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2228 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.6  Causes of Gastrointestinal Obstruction
Ileal atresia
Meconium ileus
Meckel diverticulum with volvulus or intussusception
Inguinal hernia
Internal hernia
Intestinal duplication
Pseudoobstruction

ESOPHAGUS
Congenital
Esophageal atresia
Vascular rings
Schatzki ring
Tracheobronchial remnant
Acquired
Esophageal stricture
Foreign body
Achalasia
Chagas disease
Collagen vascular disease

Acquired
Postsurgical adhesions
Crohn disease
Intussusception
Distal ileal obstruction syndrome (cystic fibrosis)
Duodenal hematoma
Superior mesenteric artery syndrome

STOMACH
Congenital
Antral webs
Pyloric stenosis

COLON
Congenital
Meconium plug
Hirschsprung disease
Colonic atresia, stenosis
Imperforate anus
Rectal stenosis
Pseudoobstruction
Volvulus
Colonic duplication

Acquired
Bezoar, foreign body
Pyloric stricture (ulcer)
Chronic granulomatous disease of childhood
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Crohn disease
Epidermolysis bullosa
SMALL INTESTINE
Congenital
Duodenal atresia
Annular pancreas
Malrotation/volvulus
Malrotation/Ladd bands

Acquired
Ulcerative colitis (toxic megacolon)
Chagas disease
Crohn disease
Fibrosing colonopathy (cystic fibrosis)

Table 352.7  Complications of Vomiting
COMPLICATION

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

HISTORY, PHYSICAL EXAMINATION,
AND LABORATORY STUDIES

Metabolic

Fluid loss in emesis
HCl loss in emesis
Na, K loss in emesis
Acidosis

Dehydration
Alkalosis; hypochloremia
Hyponatremia; hypokalemia
Dehydration

Nutritional

Emesis of calories and nutrients
Anorexia for calories and nutrients

Malnutrition; “failure to thrive”

Mallory-­Weiss tear

Retching → tear at lesser curve of gastroesophageal junction

Forceful emesis → hematemesis

Esophagitis

Chronic vomiting → esophageal acid exposure

Heartburn; Hemoccult + stool

Aspiration

Aspiration of vomitus, especially in context of obtundation

Pneumonia; neurologic dysfunction

Shock

Severe fluid loss in emesis or in accompanying diarrhea
Severe blood loss in hematemesis

Dehydration (accompanying diarrhea
can explain acidosis?)
Blood volume depletion

Pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax

Increased intrathoracic pressure

Chest x-­ray

Petechiae, retinal hemorrhages

Increased intrathoracic pressure

Normal platelet count

From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 318.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2229

Table 352.8   Pharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes
DISORDER – THERAPEUTIC
CLASS
REFLUX – ANTACIDS
Histamine-­2 receptor antagonist

Proton pump inhibitors

DRUG

DOSAGE

COMMENTS

Famotidine (Pepcid)

<3 months: 0.5 mg/kg/dose PO
daily
≥ 3 months: 0.5 mg/kg/dose PO
twice daily
Children >40 kg: 20 mg twice
daily, max: 40 mg/dose

Nizatidine (Axid)

<12 years: 5 mg/kg/dose PO twice
daily*
≥12 years: 150 mg PO twice daily,
max 300 mg/day

• H2RAs are associated with
tachyphylaxis
• Ranitidine was withdrawn in
2020
• Cimetidine has antiandrogenic
potential, can stimulate
prolactin secretion, and may
be subject to drug interactions
due to enzyme inhibition

Cimetidine

<16 years: 30-­40 mg/kg/day PO
divided 2-­3x daily,* max:
400 mg/dose
≥16 years: 400 mg PO 4 times
daily or 800 mg PO twice daily

Omeprazole (Prilosec)
Lansoprazole (Prevacid)
Esomeprazole (Nexium)
Pantoprazole (Protonix)

1-­2 mg/kg/day PO in 1-­2 divided
doses
Maximum dose: omeprazole,
esomeprazole, pantoprazole:
40 mg/dose; lansoprazole:
30 mg/dose

• Administer 30 minutes before
first meal of the day for optimal
effect
• Long-­term side effects include
increased risk of infections,
bone health abnormalities,
hypomagnesemia, vitamin B12
deficiency
• Consider weaning in patients
on prolonged course
(>6 months) to avoid rebound
symptoms

0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose PO/IV every
6 to 8 hours, max: 10 mg/dose

• Use minimum effective dose
and limit duration due to
increased risk of extrapyramidal
symptoms (EPS) with
cumulative exposure
• Although some clinicians use
diphenhydramine to limit
EPS, anticholinergic effects of
diphenhydramine may negate
prokinetic benefit

5 mg/kg/dose PO 3-­4 times daily,
titrate up to 10 mg/kg/dose,
max: 250 mg/dose

• Prescribe suspension for
optimal pharmacokinetic profile
in patients with hypomotility
• Cycling or drug-­holidays may
mitigate tachyphylaxis
• Subject to drug interactions
due to CYP3A4 inhibition
• Associated with QTc prolongation,
consider baseline EKG and/or
periodic monitoring in
patients with risk factors
(underlying cardiac disorder,
concomitant QT prolonging
medications, electrolyte
derangements)
• Routine use of other macrolides
(azithromycin, clarithromycin)
is not recommended due to
limited data to support use,
unknown optimal dose/
frequency, and concerns for
antibiotic resistance

GASTROPARESIS – PROKINETICS
Dopamine antagonist
Metoclopramide (Reglan)

Motilin agonist

Erythromycin

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2230 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.8   Pharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes—cont’d
DISORDER – THERAPEUTIC
CLASS
Serotonin (5HT-­4) agonist

Cholinergic agonist

DRUG

DOSAGE

COMMENTS

Cisapride

Consult GI specialist

• Withdrawn from the market
in most countries due to QTc
prolongation risk
• Use restricted to regulated/
limited-­access programs with
specialist supervision

Prucalopride* (Motegrity)

>4 years: 0.04 mg/kg/dose PO
once daily, max: 2 mg/dose
Dosing range 0.02-­0.06 mg/kg/
dose to accommodate tablets

• Approved for constipation
in adults, but a single-­center
retrospective study showed
improvement in children with
refractory upper GI symptoms

Bethanechol*

0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose PO 3 to 4
times daily, max: 10 mg/dose

• Administer before feeds/meals
• Stimulates antral contractions
but does not impact gastric
emptying
• Caution when using with
anticholinergic agents (e.g.,
glycopyrrolate) due to potential
for reduced efficacy/negating
effect

CHEMOTHERAPY-­INDUCED NAUSEA/VOMITING (CINV), POSTOPERATIVE, GENERAL
Serotonin 5HT3 antagonist
Ondansetron (Zofran)
0.1-­0.15 mg/kg/dose PO/IV q8h,
max: 24 mg/day
Single dose regimen: 0.3 mg/kg/
dose PO/IV, max: 16 mg/dose

• Adverse effects: constipation,
headache, QTc prolongation
• Dose varies based on
chemotherapy emetogenicity

Granisetron (Kytril)

≥2 years: 0.01 mg/kg/dose PO/IV
q12h, max: 2 mg/dose
*Single daily dose: 0.02-­0.04 mg/
kg PO/IV

Prochlorperazine (Compazine)

≥2 years: 0.1 mg/kg/dose PO/IV
q6-­8h PRN, max: 10 mg/dose

Promethazine (Phenergan)

≥2 years: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg/dose
PO/rectal q4-­6h PRN, max:
25 mg/dose

Chlorpromazine (Thorazine)

≥6 months: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/dose
PO/IM/IV q6-­8h PRN

Substance P / neurokinin 1
antagonist

Aprepitant (Emend), for CINV

≥6 months and children <30 kg:
3 mg/kg PO on day 1, then
2 mg/kg once daily on days 2 and 3
Children >30 kg: 125 mg PO daily
on day 1, then 80 mg PO daily
on days 2 and 3

• Subject to drug interactions
due to enzyme inhibition

Steroids

Dexamethasone, for CINV

0.1 mg/kg/dose or 3 mg/m2/dose
PO/IV q12h-­24h

• Reported regimens vary, dose
depends on chemotherapy
emetogenicity
• May require dose reduction
with concomitant aprepitant

Phenothiazine

• Due to safety concerns (EPS,
sedation, respiratory depression),
routine use of phenothiazines is
not recommended
• Consider concomitant
diphenhydramine to decrease
risk of dystonic reactions
• Promethazine is associated with
extravasation; IV/IM administration
is generally avoided

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2231

Table 352.8   Pharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes—cont’d
DISORDER – THERAPEUTIC
CLASS

DRUG

MOTION SICKNESS, VESTIBULAR DISORDERS
Antihistamine
Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)

DOSAGE
0.5-­1 mg/kg/dose PO/IV/IM
q6-­8h, max: 50 mg/dose

COMMENTS
• Anticholinergic effects may
contribute to decreased
motility
• Dimenhydrinate is available as
50 mg tablets, prescribe in
12.5 mg increments
• Do not cut or manipulate
scopolamine transdermal
patches
• Withdrawal (cholinergic
rebound) symptoms reported
with long-­term use, limit
duration or consider weaning
with extended use

Dimenhydrinate (Dramamine)

>2 years: 1 to 1.5 mg/kg/dose PO
q6-­8h, max: 25 mg/dose

Meclizine (Antivert)

>2 to <12 years: 6.25 mg to 12.5
mg PO three times daily PRN
>12 years: 25 mg to 50 mg PO
1 to 4 times daily, max:
100 mg/day

Scopolamine (Transderm-­Scop)

>15 kg: 1 transdermal patch
applied behind the ear every
3 days

Cyproheptadine*

0.25 mg/kg/day PO in 1-­3 divided
doses, usual max: 4 mg/dose

• Consider starting with bedtime
dose and titrating up to prevent
daytime sedation
• Associated with tachyphylaxis
• Benefit reported in patients
with visceral hypersensitivity
• Anticholinergic effects may
decrease motility

Pseudo-­obstruction
Somatostatin analog

Octreotide*

0.5 to 1 mcg/kg subQ once daily,
max: 100 mcg/dose

• May cause bradycardia,
hypoglycemia

Adrenal Crisis

Hydrocortisone

100 mg/m2 IV/IM x1, followed by
25 mg/m2/dose IV/IM q6h, max:
100 mg/day
Taper as clinically indicated

• Reported regimens vary, refer
to individual protocols

MISCELLANEOUS
Visceral Hypersensitivity, Feeding
Intolerance
Antihistamine/serotonin
antagonist

*Limited data available

Table 352.9  Supportive and Nonpharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes
DISEASE

THERAPY

All

Treat cause
• Obstruction: operate
• Allergy: change diet (±steroids)
• Metabolic error: Rx defect
• Acid peptic disease: H2Ras, PPIs, etc.

COMPLICATIONS
Dehydration
Hematemesis
Esophagitis
Malnutrition
Meconium ileus
DIOS
Intussusception
Hematemesis
Sigmoid volvulus
Reflux
Psychogenic components

IV fluids, electrolytes
Transfuse, correct coagulopathy
H2Ras, PPIs
NG or NJ drip feeding useful for many chronic conditions
Gastrografin enema
Gastrografin enema; balanced colonic lavage solution (e.g., GoLYTELY)
Barium enema; air reduction enema
Endoscopic: injection sclerotherapy or banding of esophageal varices; injection therapy, fibrin sealant application,
or heater probe electrocautery for selected upper GI tract lesions
Colonoscopic decompression
Positioning; dietary measures (infants: rice cereal, 1 tbs/oz of formula)
Psychotherapy; tricyclic antidepressants; anxiolytics (e.g., diazepam: 0.1 mg/kg PO tid-­qid)

DIOS, Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome; GI, gastrointestinal; H2RA, H2-­receptor antagonist; NG, nasogastric; NJ, nasojejunal; PPIs, proton pump inhibitors; tbs, tablespoon.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 319.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2232 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.10  Mechanisms of Diarrhea
PRIMARY MECHANISM

STOOL EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES

COMMENT

Secretory

Decreased absorption,
increased secretion,
electrolyte transport

DEFECT

Watery, normal
osmolality with ion gap
<100 mOsm/kg

Cholera, toxigenic
Escherichia coli; carcinoid,
VIP, neuroblastoma,
congenital chloride
diarrhea, Clostridium
difficile, cryptosporidiosis
(AIDS)

Persists during fasting; bile
salt malabsorption can
also increase intestinal
water secretion; no stool
leukocytes

Osmotic

Maldigestion, transport
defects ingestion of
unabsorbable substances

Watery, acidic, and reducing
substances; increased
osmolality with ion gap
>100 mOsm/kg

Lactase deficiency,
glucose-­galactose
malabsorption, lactulose,
laxative abuse

Stops with fasting;
increased breath
hydrogen with
carbohydrate
malabsorption; no stool
leukocytes

Increased motility

Decreased transit time

Loose to normal-­appearing
stool, stimulated by
gastrocolic reflex

Irritable bowel syndrome,
thyrotoxicosis,
postvagotomy dumping
syndrome

Infection can also contribute
to increased motility

Decreased motility

Defect in neuromuscular
unit(s) stasis (bacterial
overgrowth)

Loose to
normal-­appearing stool

Pseudoobstruction, blind
loop

Possible bacterial
overgrowth

Decreased surface area
(osmotic, motility)

Decreased functional
capacity

Watery

Short bowel syndrome,
celiac disease, rotavirus
enteritis

Might require elemental
diet plus parenteral
alimentation

Mucosal invasion

Inflammation, decreased
colonic reabsorption,
increased motility

Blood and increased
WBCs in stool

Salmonella, Shigella
infection; amebiasis;
Yersinia, Campylobacter
infection

Dysentery evident in
blood, mucus, and WBCs

VIP, Vasoactive intestinal peptide; WBC, white blood cell.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS. eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p 274.

mechanism. Diarrhea not associated with an exogenous secretagogue can also have a secretory component (congenital microvillus
inclusion disease). Secretory diarrhea is usually of large volume and
persists even with fasting. The stool osmolality is predominantly
indicated by the electrolytes, and the ion gap is 100 mOsm/kg or
less. The ion gap is calculated by subtracting the concentration of
electrolytes from total osmolality:
Ion
gap Stool osmolality  [(Stool Na  stool K) 2]
Osmotic diarrhea occurs after ingestion of a poorly absorbed
solute. The solute may be one that is normally not well absorbed
(magnesium, phosphate, lactulose, or sorbitol) or one that is not
well absorbed because of a disorder of the small bowel (lactose with
lactase deficiency or glucose with rotavirus diarrhea). Malabsorbed
carbohydrate is fermented in the colon, and short-­chain fatty acids
are produced. Although short-­chain fatty acids can be absorbed in
the colon and used as an energy source, the net effect is increase in
the osmotic solute load. This form of diarrhea is usually of lesser
volume than a secretory diarrhea and stops with fasting. The osmolality of the stool will not be explained by the electrolyte content,
because another osmotic component is present and so the anion
gap is >100 mOsm.
Motility disorders can be associated with rapid or delayed transit and
are not generally associated with large-­volume diarrhea. Slow motility
can be associated with bacterial overgrowth leading to diarrhea. The
differential diagnosis of common causes of acute and chronic diarrhea
is noted in Table 352.11.

CONSTIPATION

Any definition of constipation is relative and depends on stool
consistency, stool frequency, and difficulty in passing the stool. A
normal child might have a soft stool only every second or third day
without difficulty; this is not constipation. A hard stool passed with

difficulty every third day should be treated as constipation. Constipation can arise from defects either in filling or emptying the rectum
(Table 352.12).
A nursing infant might have very infrequent stools of normal consistency, which is usually a normal pattern. True constipation in the
neonatal period is most likely secondary to Hirschsprung disease,
intestinal pseudoobstruction, or hypothyroidism.
Defective rectal filling occurs when colonic peristalsis is ineffective (in cases of hypothyroidism or opiate use and when
bowel obstruction is caused either by a structural anomaly or by
Hirschsprung disease). The resultant colonic stasis leads to excessive drying of stool and a failure to initiate reflexes from the rectum
that normally trigger evacuation. Emptying the rectum by spontaneous evacuation depends on a defecation reflex initiated by pressure receptors in the rectal muscle. Therefore stool retention can
also result from lesions involving these rectal muscles, the sacral
spinal cord afferent and efferent fibers, or the muscles of the abdomen and pelvic floor. Disorders of anal sphincter relaxation can also
contribute to fecal retention.
Constipation tends to be self-­p erpetuating, whatever its cause.
Hard, large stools in the rectum become difficult and even painful to evacuate; thus more retention occurs and a vicious circle
ensues. Distention of the rectum and colon lessens the sensitivity
of the defecation reflex and the effectiveness of peristalsis. Fecal
impaction is common and leads to other problems. Eventually,
watery content from the proximal colon might percolate around
hard retained stool and pass per rectum unperceived by the child.
This involuntary encopresis may be mistaken for diarrhea. Constipation itself does not have deleterious systemic organic effects,
but urinary tract stasis with increased risk of urinary tract infections can accompany severe long-­standing cases and constipation
can generate anxiety, having a marked emotional impact on the
patient and family.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 352.11

Differential Diagnosis of Diarrhea

INFANT

CHILD

ACUTE
Common
Gastroenteritis (viral > bacterial > protozoal)
Systemic infection
Antibiotic associated
Overfeeding
Rare
Primary disaccharidase deficiency
Hirschsprung toxic colitis
Adrenogenital syndrome
Neonatal opiate withdrawal
CHRONIC
Common
Postinfectious secondary lactase deficiency
Cow’s milk or soy protein intolerance (allergy)
Chronic nonspecific diarrhea of infancy
Excessive fruit juice (sorbitol) ingestion
Celiac disease
Cystic fibrosis
AIDS enteropathy
Rare
Primary immune defects
Autoimmune enteropathy
IPEX and IPEX-­like syndromes
Glucose-­galactose malabsorption
Microvillus inclusion disease (microvillus atrophy)
Congenital transport defects (chloride, sodium)
Primary bile acid malabsorption
Factitious syndrome by proxy
Hirschsprung disease
Shwachman syndrome
Secretory tumors
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
Lymphangiectasia
Abetalipoproteinemia
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Short bowel syndrome

ADOLESCENT

Gastroenteritis (viral > bacterial > protozoal) Gastroenteritis (viral > bacterial > protozoal)
Food poisoning
Food poisoning
Systemic infection
Antibiotic associated
Antibiotic associated
Toxic ingestion
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Intussusception

Hyperthyroidism
Appendicitis

Postinfectious secondary lactase deficiency
Irritable bowel syndrome
Celiac disease
Cystic fibrosis
Lactose intolerance
Excessive fruit juice (sorbitol) ingestion
Giardiasis
Inflammatory bowel disease
AIDS enteropathy

Irritable bowel syndrome
Inflammatory bowel disease
Lactose intolerance
Giardiasis
Laxative abuse (anorexia nervosa)
Constipation with encopresis

Primary and acquired immune defects
Secretory tumors
Pseudoobstruction
Sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Secretory tumors

Secretory tumor
Primary bowel tumor
Parasitic infections and venereal diseases
Appendiceal abscess
Addison disease

IPEX, Immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 272.

Table 352.12

Causes of Constipation

NONORGANIC (FUNCTIONAL): RETENTIVE
Anatomic
Anal stenosis, atresia with fistula
Imperforate anus
Anteriorly displaced anus
Intestinal stricture (postnecrotizing enterocolitis)
Anal stricture
Abnormal Musculature
Prune-­belly syndrome
Gastroschisis
Down syndrome
Muscular dystrophy
Intestinal Nerve or Muscle Abnormalities
Hirschsprung disease
Pseudoobstruction (visceral myopathy or neuropathy)
Intestinal neuronal dysplasia
Spinal cord lesions
Tethered cord
Autonomic neuropathy
Spinal cord trauma
Spina bifida
Chagas disease

Drugs
Anticholinergics
Narcotics
Methylphenidate
Phenytoin
Antidepressants
Chemotherapeutic agents (vincristine)
Pancreatic enzymes (fibrosing colonopathy)
Lead, arsenic, mercury
Vitamin D intoxication
Calcium channel blocking agents
Metabolic Disorders
Hypokalemia
Hypercalcemia
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus
Porphyria
Intestinal Disorders
Celiac disease
Cow’s milk protein intolerance
Cystic fibrosis (meconium ileus equivalent)
Inflammatory bowel disease (stricture)
Tumor
Connective tissue disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Scleroderma
Psychiatric Diagnosis
Anorexia nervosa

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2234 Part XVI u The Digestive System
ANOREXIA

Anorexia means prolonged lack of appetite. Hunger and satiety centers
are located in the hypothalamus; it seems likely that afferent nerves
from the GI tract to these brain centers are important determinants
of the anorexia that characterizes many diseases of the stomach and
intestine. Satiety is stimulated by distention of the stomach or upper
small bowel, the signal being transmitted by sensory afferents, which
are especially dense in the upper gut. Chemoreceptors in the intestine,
influenced by the assimilation of nutrients, also affect afferent flow to
the appetite centers. Impulses reach the hypothalamus from higher
centers, possibly influenced by pain or the emotional disturbance
of an intestinal disease. Other regulatory factors include hormones,
ghrelin, leptin, and plasma glucose, which, in turn, reflect intestinal
function.

ABDOMINAL PAIN

There is considerable variation among children in their perception
and tolerance for abdominal pain. This is one reason the evaluation of
chronic abdominal pain is difficult. A child with functional abdominal pain (also known as centrally mediated abdominal pain syndrome
or brain-­gut axis dysfunction) may be as uncomfortable as one with
an organic cause. It is very important to distinguish between organic
and nonorganic (functional) abdominal pain because the approach for
the management is based on this (Table 352.13). Normal growth and
physical examination (including a rectal examination) and the absence
of anemia or hematochezia are reassuring in a child who is suspected
of having functional pain.
A specific cause may be difficult to find, but the nature and location
of a pain-­provoking lesion can usually be determined from the clinical
description. Two types of nerve fibers transmit painful stimuli in the
abdomen. In skin and muscle, A fibers mediate sharp localized pain;
C fibers from viscera, peritoneum, and muscle transmit poorly localized, dull pain. These afferent fibers have cell bodies in the dorsal root
Table 352.13  Red Flags and Clues to an Organic Cause
of Abdominal Pain
Age <5 yr old
Localized pain in nonperiumbilical site
Referred pain
Sudden onset of excruciating pain
Crescendo nature of pain
Sudden worsening of pain
Fever (high fever >39.4°C suggests pneumonia, pyelonephritis,
dysentery, cholangitis, more than perforation or abscess)
Jaundice
Distention*
Dysphagia
Dysuria
Emesis (especially bilious)
Anorexia
Weight loss, failure to thrive
Positive family history (metabolic disorders, peptic ulcer disease)†
Change in urine or stool color (blood, acholic) or frequency
Vaginal discharge
Menstrual abnormalities (amenorrhea)
Sexual activity
Delayed sexual development (chronic pain)
Anemia
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated stool calprotectin
Specific physical findings (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, absent
bowel sounds, adnexal tenderness, palpable mass, involuntary
guarding, focal or diffuse tenderness, positive rectal examination
results, perianal disease, joint swelling, rashes)
*Consider 5 Fs: fat, feces, flatus (aerophagia, obstruction), fluid (ascites, hydronephrosis,
cysts), and fetus (pregnancy or fetal-­like abnormal growth [e.g., tumors]).
†Family history is also positive for chronic pain syndromes (constipation, irritable bowel,
dysmenorrhea, and lactase or sucrase deficiency).
Modified from Miranda A. Abdominal pain. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel
D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2023: Table 13.8, p. 229.

ganglia, and some axons cross the midline and ascend to the medulla,
midbrain, and thalamus. Pain is perceived in the cortex of the postcentral gyrus, which can receive impulses arising from both sides of
the body. In the gut, the usual stimulus provoking pain is tension or
stretching. Inflammatory lesions can lower the pain threshold, but
the mechanisms producing pain or inflammation are not clear. Tissue
metabolites released near nerve endings probably account for the pain
caused by ischemia. Perception of these painful stimuli can be modulated by input from both cerebral and peripheral sources. Psychologic
factors are particularly important. Tables 352.14 and 352.15 list features
of abdominal pain. Pain that suggests a potentially serious organic etiology is associated with age younger than 5 years; fever; weight loss;
bile-­or blood-­stained emesis; jaundice; hepatosplenomegaly; back or
flank pain or pain in a location other than the umbilicus; awakening
from sleep in pain; referred pain to shoulder, groin, or back; elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, white blood cell count, or CRP; anemia; edema; hematochezia; or a strong family history of inflammatory
bowel disease or celiac disease (see Table 352.13).
Visceral pain tends to be dull and aching and is experienced in
the dermatome from which the affected organ receives innervations.
So, most often, the pain and tenderness are not felt over the site of
the disease process. Painful stimuli originating in the liver, pancreas,
biliary tree, stomach, or upper bowel are felt in the epigastrium;
pain from the distal small bowel, cecum, appendix, or proximal
colon is felt at the umbilicus; and pain from the distal large bowel,
urinary tract, or pelvic organs is usually suprapubic. The pain from
the cecum, ascending colon, and descending colon sometimes is felt
at the site of the lesion because of the short mesocecum and corresponding mesocolon. The pain caused by appendicitis is initially
felt in the periumbilical region, and pain from the transverse colon
is usually felt in the suprapubic region. The shifting (localization) of
pain is a pointer toward diagnosis; for example, periumbilical pain
of a few hours localizing to the right lower quadrant suggests appendicitis. Radiation of pain can be helpful in diagnosis; in biliary colic
the radiation of pain is toward the inferior angle of the right scapula,
pancreatic pain is radiated to the back, and the renal colic pain is
radiated to the inguinal region on the same side.
Differentiating abdominal wall pain from visceral pain is important and can prevent unnecessary testing. Nerve entrapment is one
of the more common causes in adults. Costochondritis can be differentiated from underlying pain by palpating the rib margins, which
should reproduce the pain. Treatment with topical anesthetics and
NSAIDs if needed usually resolve pain within a few days. Slipped
rib syndrome can follow overuse or even minor trauma to the ribs
on either side. The name originates from a popping/slipping sensation that is often reported. Slipped rib syndrome may be mistaken
for hepatobiliary, splenic, pancreatic, esophageal, or gastric etiologies, among others. Rib fractures, costochondritis, perichondritis
[Tietze syndrome], and pleuritic pain may also present as an etiology. Anterior (abdominal) cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome
(ACNES) may produce acute, recurrent, or chronic unilateral localized abdominal pain. Nerve entrapment is most common at the lateral border of the rectus muscle.
Somatic pain is intense and usually well localized. When the
inflamed viscus comes in contact with a somatic organ such as the parietal peritoneum or the abdominal wall, pain is localized to that site.
Peritonitis gives rise to generalized abdominal pain with rigidity, involuntary guarding, rebound tenderness, and cutaneous hyperesthesia on
physical examination.
Referred pain from extraintestinal locations, from shared central
projections with the sensory pathway from the abdominal wall, can
give rise to abdominal pain, as in pneumonia when the parietal pleural
pain is referred to the abdomen (Fig. 352.1).

GASTROINTESTINAL HEMORRHAGE

Bleeding can occur anywhere along the GI tract, and identification of
the site may be challenging (Table 352.16). Bleeding that originates
in the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum can cause hematemesis.
When exposed to gastric or intestinal juices, blood quickly darkens to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders
Table 352.14

2235

Chronic Abdominal Pain in Children

DISORDER

CHARACTERISTICS

NONORGANIC
Functional abdominal pain
Irritable bowel syndrome
Nonulcer dyspepsia
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Chronic constipation
Lactose intolerance
Parasite infection (especially Giardia)
Excess fructose or sorbitol ingestion
Crohn disease
Peptic ulcer
Esophagitis
Meckel diverticulum
Recurrent intussusception

KEY EVALUATIONS

Nonspecific pain, often periumbilical
Intermittent cramps, diarrhea, and constipation
Peptic ulcer–like symptoms without abnormalities on
evaluation of the upper GI tract

Hx and PE; tests as indicated
Hx and PE
Hx; esophagogastroduodenoscopy

Hx of stool retention, evidence of constipation on
examination
Symptoms may be associated with lactose ingestion;
bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea
Bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea

Hx and PE; plain x-­ray of abdomen

Nonspecific abdominal pain, bloating, gas, and
diarrhea
See Chapter 382.2
Burning or gnawing epigastric pain; worse on
awakening or before meals; relieved with antacids
Epigastric pain with substernal burning
Periumbilical or lower abdominal pain; may have
blood in stool (usually painless)
Paroxysmal severe cramping abdominal pain; blood
may be present in stool with episode

Trial of lactose-­free diet; lactose breath
hydrogen test
Stool evaluation for O&P; specific
immunoassays for Giardia
Large intake of apples, fruit juice, or candy
or chewing gum sweetened with sorbitol
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, upper GI
contrast x-­rays, or MRI enteroscopy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Meckel scan or enteroclysis
Identify intussusception during episode or
lead point in intestine between episodes
with contrast studies of GI tract
PE, CT of abdominal wall

Internal, inguinal, or abdominal wall hernia

Dull abdomen or abdominal wall pain

Chronic appendicitis or appendiceal
mucocele

Recurrent RLQ pain; often incorrectly diagnosed,
may be rare cause of abdominal pain

Barium enema, CT

RUQ pain, might worsen with meals
RUQ pain, mass ± elevated bilirubin
Persistent boring pain, might radiate to back,
vomiting

Ultrasound of gallbladder
Ultrasound or CT of RUQ
Serum amylase and lipase ± serum
trypsinogen; ultrasound, CT, or MRI-­ERCP
of pancreas

Dull suprapubic pain, flank pain
Unilateral abdominal or flank pain
Progressive, severe pain; flank to inguinal region to
testicle
Suprapubic or lower abdominal pain; genitourinary
symptoms

Urinalysis and urine culture; renal scan
Ultrasound of kidneys
Urinalysis, ultrasound, IVP, CT

See text; nausea, family Hx migraine
Might have seizure prodrome

Hx
EEG (can require >1 study, including
sleep-­deprived EEG)
Serum bilirubin

GALLBLADDER AND PANCREAS
Cholelithiasis
Choledochal cyst
Recurrent pancreatitis

GENITOURINARY TRACT
Urinary tract infection
Hydronephrosis
Urolithiasis
Other genitourinary disorders
MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES
Abdominal migraine
Abdominal epilepsy
Gilbert syndrome
Familial Mediterranean fever
Sickle cell crisis
Lead poisoning
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein purpura)
Angioneurotic edema
Acute intermittent porphyria
Anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment
syndrome (ACNES)

Mild abdominal pain (causal or coincidental?);
slightly elevated unconjugated bilirubin
Paroxysmal episodes of fever, severe abdominal
pain, and tenderness with other evidence of
polyserositis
Anemia
Vague abdominal pain ± constipation
Recurrent, severe crampy abdominal pain, occult
blood in stool, characteristic rash, arthritis
Swelling of face or airway, crampy pain
Severe pain precipitated by drugs, fasting, or
infections
Exquisite localized (∼2 × 2 cm) tenderness that is
replicable, most often RLQ

Ultrasound of kidneys and pelvis;
gynecologic evaluation

Hx and PE during an episode, DNA
diagnosis
Hematologic evaluation
Serum lead level
Hx, PE, urinalysis
Hx, PE, upper GI contrast x-­rays, serum C1
esterase inhibitor
Spot urine for porphyrins
Pain relief within 15 min of abdominal wall
injection of local anesthetic; may need
surgery

ERCP, Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EEG, electroencephalogram; GI, gastrointestinal; Hx, history; IVP, intravenous pyelography; O&P, ova and parasites; PE,
physical exam; RLQ, right lower quadrant; RUQ, right upper quadrant.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2236 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.15  Distinguishing Features of Acute Abdominal Pain in Children
DISEASE

ONSET

LOCATION

REFERRAL

QUALITY

COMMENTS

Pancreatitis

Acute

Epigastric, left upper quadrant

Back

Constant, sharp, boring

Nausea, emesis,
tenderness

Intestinal obstruction

Acute or
gradual

Periumbilical-­lower abdomen

Back

Alternating cramping
(colic) and painless
periods

Distention, obstipation,
emesis, increased
bowel sounds

Appendicitis

Acute (1-­3 days)

Periumbilical, then localized
to lower right quadrant;
generalized with peritonitis

Back or pelvis if
retrocecal

Sharp, steady

Anorexia, nausea, emesis,
local tenderness, fever
with peritonitis

Intussusception

Acute

Periumbilical-­lower abdomen

None

Cramping, with
painless periods

Hematochezia, knees in
pulled-­up position

Urolithiasis

Acute, sudden

Back (unilateral)

Groin

Sharp, intermittent,
cramping

Hematuria

Urinary tract infection

Acute

Back

Bladder

Dull to sharp

Fever, costovertebral
angle tenderness,
dysuria, urinary frequency

Pelvic inflammatory
disease

Acute

Pelvis, lower quadrant

Upper thigh

Aching, peritoneal
signs

Vaginal discharge, fever

Small bowel
obstruction

Acute to
subacute

Periumbilical

None

Cramping diffuse

Emesis and obstipation

Ruptured ectopic
pregnancy

Acute sudden

Pelvis, lower quadrant

None

Sharp, intense,
localized

Vaginal bleeding, shock

Pancreatitis
Liver
Biliary colic

Perforated
duodenal ulcer

Heart
GERD
Peptic
ulcer

Cholecystitis,
pancreatitis,
duodenal ulcer

Penetrating
duodenal ulcer

Cholecystitis
Pancreatitis,
renal colic

Small intestine
pain, appendicitis
Appendicitis
Renal
colic

Colon pain

Rectal
lesions

Ureteral
colic

Fig. 352.1 Common sites of referred pain from the abdominal viscera. When a patient gives a history of referred pain from the viscera, the pain’s
location may not be directly over the impaired organ. Visceral embryologic development is the mechanism of the referred pain pattern. Pain is
referred to the site where the organ was located in fetal development.

resemble coffee grounds; massive bleeding is likely to be red. Red or
maroon blood in stools, hematochezia, signifies either a distal bleeding site or massive hemorrhage above the distal ileum. Moderate to
mild bleeding from sites above the distal ileum tends to cause blackened stools of tarry consistency (melena); major hemorrhages in the
duodenum or above can also cause melena.
Erosive damage to the mucosa of the GI tract is the most common
cause of bleeding, although variceal bleeding secondary to portal
hypertension occurs often enough to require consideration. Prolapse
gastropathy producing subepithelial hemorrhage and Mallory-­Weiss

lesions secondary to mucosal tears associated with emesis are causes
of upper intestinal bleeds. Vascular malformations are a rare cause in
children; they are difficult to identify (Figs. 352.2 and 352.3). Upper
intestinal bleeding is evaluated with esophagogastroduodenoscopy.
Evaluation of the small intestine is facilitated by capsule endoscopy.
The capsule-­sized imaging device is swallowed in older children or
placed endoscopically in younger children. Lower GI bleeding is investigated with a colonoscopy. In brisk intestinal bleeding of unknown
location, a tagged red blood cell scan is helpful in locating the site of the
bleeding, although CT angiography is usually diagnostic. Occult blood

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2237

Table 352.16  Differential Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Childhood
INFANT

CHILD

COMMON
Bacterial enteritis
Milk protein allergy intolerance
Intussusception
Swallowed maternal blood
Anal fissure
Lymphonodular hyperplasia

RARE
Volvulus
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Meckel diverticulum
Stress ulcer, gastritis
Coagulation disorder (hemorrhagic
disease of newborn)
Esophagitis

ADOLESCENT

Bacterial enteritis
Anal fissure
Colonic polyps
Intussusception
Peptic ulcer/gastritis
Swallowed epistaxis
Prolapse (traumatic) gastropathy secondary to emesis
Mallory-­Weiss syndrome

Bacterial enteritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Peptic ulcer/gastritis
Prolapse (traumatic) gastropathy secondary
to emesis
Mallory-­Weiss syndrome
Colonic polyps
Anal fissure

Esophageal varices
Esophagitis
Meckel diverticulum
Lymphonodular hyperplasia
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein purpura)
Foreign body
Hemangioma, arteriovenous malformation
Sexual abuse
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Inflammatory bowel disease
Coagulopathy
Duplication cyst
Angiodysplasia
Angiodysplasia with von Willebrand disease
Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome

Hemorrhoids
Esophageal varices
Esophagitis
Pill ulcer
Telangiectasia-­angiodysplasia
Graft versus host disease
Duplication cyst
Angiodysplasia
Angiodysplasia with von Willebrand disease
Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome

Fig. 352.3 Operative features of blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome.

Fig. 352.2 Intestinal angiodysplasia. A 7-­year-­old boy had tarry stool

for days. Panendoscopy showed multiple cherry red flat spots in the
gastric mucosa, compatible with the findings of angiodysplasia in CT
angiography. (From Chuang F, Lin JS, Yeung C, et al. Intestinal angiodysplasia: an uncommon cause of gastrointestinal bleeding in children.
Pediatr Neonatol. 2011;52:214–218, Fig. 2.)

in stool is usually detected by using commercially available fecal occult
blood testing cards, which are based on a chemical reaction between
the chemical guaiac and oxidizing action of a substrate (hemoglobin),
giving a blue color. The guaiac test is very sensitive, but random testing
can miss chronic blood loss, which can lead to iron-­deficiency anemia.
GI hemorrhage can produce hypotension and tachycardia but rarely
causes GI symptoms; brisk duodenal or gastric bleeding can lead to
nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. The breakdown products of intraluminal blood might tip patients into hepatic coma if liver function is
already compromised and can lead to elevation of serum bilirubin.

These lesions are similar to cutaneous lesions. (From Hasosah MY,
Abdul-­Wahab AA, Bin-­Yahab SA, et al. Blue rubber bled nevus syndrome: extensive small bowel vascular lesions responsible for gastrointestinal bleeding. J Pediatr Child Health. 2010;46:63–65. Fig. 3.)

ABDOMINAL DISTENTION AND ABDOMINAL
MASSES

Enlargement of the abdomen can result from diminished tone of the
wall musculature or from increased content: fluid, gas, or solid. Ascites,
the accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity, distends the abdomen both in the flanks and anteriorly when it is large in volume. This
fluid shifts with movement of the patient and conducts a percussion
wave. Ascitic fluid is usually a transudate with a low protein concentration resulting from reduced plasma colloid osmotic pressure of hypoalbuminemia and/or from raised portal venous pressure. In cases of
portal hypertension, the fluid leak probably occurs from lymphatics
on the liver surface and from visceral peritoneal capillaries, but ascites
does not usually develop until the serum albumin level falls. Sodium
excretion in the urine decreases greatly as the ascitic fluid accumulates, and thus additional dietary sodium goes directly to the peritoneal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2238 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Benign hepatic tumors
Liver abscess
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Metastatic cancer

Bezoar

Choledochal cyst
Splenomegaly
Splenic cyst
Intestinal obstruction
Appendiceal
abscess
Lymphoma

Intestinal
duplication

Ovarian cyst/neoplasm,
abscess

Mesenteric cyst

Tuboovarian
abscess
Hydrometrocolpos

Fig. 352.4 Location of select intrabdominal tumors and masses. (From Densmore JC, Densmore EM. Abdominal masses. In Kliegman RM, Toth H,
Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Fig. 20.1, p. 354.)

space, taking with it more water. When ascitic fluid contains a high
protein concentration, it is usually an exudate caused by an inflammatory or neoplastic lesion.
When fluid distends the gut, either obstruction or imbalance between
absorption and secretion should be suspected. The factors causing fluid
accumulation in the bowel lumen often cause gas to accumulate too.
The result may be audible gurgling noises. The source of gas is usually
swallowed air, but endogenous flora can increase considerably in malabsorptive states and produce excessive gas when substrate reaches the
lower intestine. Gas in the peritoneal cavity (pneumoperitoneum) is usually caused by a perforated viscus and can cause abdominal distention
depending on the amount of gas leak. A tympanitic percussion note,
even over solid organs such as the liver, indicates a large collection of gas
in the peritoneum.

An abdominal organ can enlarge diffusely or be affected by a discrete mass (Fig. 352.4). In the digestive tract, such discrete masses can
occur in the lumen, wall, omentum, or mesentery. In a constipated child,
mobile, nontender fecal masses are often found. Congenital anomalies,
cysts, or inflammatory processes can affect the wall of the gut. Gut wall
neoplasms are extremely rare in children. The pathologic enlargement of
liver, spleen, bladder, and kidneys can give rise to abdominal distention.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Thanks to Astrela Moore, PharmD, Clinical Pharmacy Specialist at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, for reviewing, verifying, and updating
the pharmacotherapy table.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 353 u Development and Developmental Anomalies of the Teeth

Section 2

The Oral Cavity

Table 353.1  Calcification, Crown Completion,
and Eruption

Development and
Developmental Anomalies
of the Teeth
Vineet K. Dhar
Newborn infants do not have teeth for about first 6 months after birth
(predentate period). At this stage, the upper and lower alveolar ridges in
the mouth, also known as gum pads, house the primary (deciduous) and
some permanent tooth buds. The primary dentition period starts with
eruption of the first primary tooth; all 20 primary teeth erupt by 3 years
of age. The permanent teeth start erupting around 6 years of age, and the
transition to full permanent dentition is completed by 13 years of age. The
transition time between primary and permanent dentition, when a mix of
primary and permanent teeth are present, is referred to as mixed dentition.

DEVELOPMENT OF TEETH
Initiation

The primary teeth form in dental crypts that arise from a band of epithelial cells incorporated into each developing jaw. By 12 weeks of fetal
life, each of these epithelial bands (dental laminae) has five areas of
rapid growth on each side of the maxilla and the mandible, seen as
rounded, budlike enlargements. Organization of adjacent mesenchyme
takes place in each area of epithelial growth, and the two elements
together are the beginning of a tooth.
After the formation of these crypts for the 20 primary teeth, another generation of tooth buds forms lingually (toward the tongue); these will develop
into the succeeding permanent incisors, canines, and premolars that eventually replace the primary teeth. This process takes place from approximately 3-­4 months of gestation for the central incisors to approximately
24-­30 months of age for the second premolars. On the other hand, the permanent first, second, and third molars arise from extension of the dental
laminae distal to the second primary molars; buds for these teeth develop
approximately at birth, 3 years of age, and 7-­10 years of age, respectively.

Histodifferentiation–Morphodifferentiation

As the epithelial bud proliferates, the deeper surface invaginates and a
mass of mesenchyme becomes partially enclosed. The epithelial cells
differentiate into the ameloblasts that lay down an organic matrix that
forms enamel; the mesenchyme forms the dentin and dental pulp.

Calcification

After the organic matrix has been laid down, the deposition of the inorganic mineral crystals takes place from several sites of calcification that
later coalesce. The characteristics of the inorganic portions of a tooth
can be altered by disturbances in formation of the matrix, decreased
availability of minerals, or the incorporation of foreign materials. Such
disturbances can affect the color, texture, or thickness of the tooth surface. Calcification of primary teeth begins at 3-­4 months in utero and
concludes postnatally at approximately 12 months, with mineralization
of the second primary molars (Table 353.1).

Eruption

At the time of tooth bud formation, each tooth begins a continuous
movement toward the oral cavity. Table 353.1 lists the times of eruption

FIRST
EVIDENCE OF
CALCIFICATION

CROWN
COMPLETED

ERUPTION

PRIMARY DENTITION
Maxillary
Central incisor
3-­4 mo in utero
Lateral incisor
4.5 mo in utero
Canine
5.5 mo in utero
First molar
5 mo in utero
Second molar
6 mo in utero

4 mo
5 mo
9 mo
6 mo
10-­12 mo

7.5 mo
8 mo
16-­20 mo
12-­16 mo
20-­30 mo

Mandibular
Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Canine
First molar
Second molar

4 mo
4½ mo
9 mo
6 mo
10-­12 mo

6.5 mo
7 mo
16-­20 mo
12-­16 mo
20-­30 mo

PERMANENT DENTITION
Maxillary
Central incisor
3-­4 mo
Lateral incisor
10 mo
Canine
4-­5 mo
First premolar
1½ -­1¾ yr
Second premolar
2-­2¼ yr
First molar
At birth
Second molar
2½ -­3 yr
Third molar
7-­9 yr

4-­5 yr
4-­5 yr
6-­7 yr
5-­6 yr
6-­7 yr
2½ -­3 yr
7-­8 yr
12-­16 yr

7-­8 yr
8-­9 yr
11-­12 yr
10-­11 yr
10-­12 yr
6-­7 yr
12-­13 yr
17-­21 yr

Mandibular
Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Canine
First premolar
Second premolar
First molar
Second molar
Third molar

4-­5 yr
4-­5 yr
6-­7 yr
5-­6 yr
6-­7 yr
2½ -­3 yr
7-­8 yr
12-­16 yr

6-­7 yr
7-­8 yr
9-­10 yr
10-­12 yr
11-­12 yr
6-­7 yr
11-­13 yr
17-­21 yr

TOOTH

Chapter 353

2239

4.5 mo in utero
4.5 mo in utero
5 mo in utero
5 mo in utero
6 mo in utero

3-­4 mo
3-­4 mo
4-­5 mo
1¾-­2 yr
2¼-­2 ½ yr
At birth
2½-­3 yr
8-­10 yr

Modified from Logan WHG, Kronfeld R. Development of the human jaws and
surrounding structures from birth to age 15 years. J Am Dent Assoc. 1993;20:379.

of the primary and permanent teeth. Occasionally the permanent teeth
may erupt behind the primary teeth (“shark tooth”); this usually causes
no problems.

Anomalies Associated with Eruption Pattern

Delayed eruption of the 20 primary teeth can be familial or indicate
systemic or nutritional disturbances such as hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, cleidocranial dysplasia, trisomy 21, and multiple other
syndromes. Failure of eruption of single or small groups of teeth can
arise from local causes such as malpositioned teeth, supernumerary
teeth, cysts, or retained primary teeth. Premature loss of primary teeth
is commonly caused by premature eruption of the permanent teeth. If
the entire dentition is advanced for age and gender, precocious puberty
or hyperthyroidism should be considered.
Natal teeth are observed in approximately 1 in 2,000 newborn
infants, usually in the position of the mandibular central incisors.
Natal teeth are present at birth, whereas neonatal teeth erupt in the
first month of life. Attachment of natal and neonatal teeth is generally limited to the gingival margin, with little root formation or bony
support. They may be a supernumerary or a prematurely erupted primary tooth. A radiograph can easily differentiate between the two
conditions. Natal teeth are associated with cleft palate, Pierre Robin
syndrome, mesoectodermal dysplasia syndrome (Ellis-­van Creveld),
oculomandibulofacial syndrome (Hallermann-­Streiff), pachyonychia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2240 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 353.2  Syndromes with Natal Teeth
SYNDROME

ASSOCIATED ANOMALIES

INHERITANCE/GENE ABNORMALITY/
PREVALENCE

Ellis-­van Creveld (chondroectodermal
dysplasia)

Bilateral postaxial polydactyly of hands, chondrodysplasia
of long bones resulting in dwarfism, ectodermal dysplasia
affecting nails/teeth, congenital heart malformation

Autosomal-­recessive
EVC, EVC2
7/1 × 106

Hallermann-­Streiff

Dyscephaly, hypotrichosis, micro-­ophthalmia, cataracts,
beaked nose, micrognathia, proportionate short stature

Sporadic
Not known
>150 cases to date

Pachyonychia congenita
(1: Jadassohn-­Lewandowsky)
(2: Jackson-­Lawler)

Dystrophic nails, palmoplantar keratosis, hyperhidrosis,
follicular keratosis, oral leukokeratosis, cutaneous cysts

Autosomal-­dominant
Keratin gene variants: type I:
6a/16, type 2:6b/17
0.071/1 × 106
9:5 male to female

Pallister-­Hall (hypothalamic
hamartoblastoma)

Hypothalamic hamartoblastoma, craniofacial abnormalities,
postaxial polydactyly, cardiac and renal defects

Autosomal-­dominant
GLI3
>13 cases to date
8:5 male to female

Wiedemann-­Rautenstrauch

Endocrine dysfunction, aged facies, frontal and biparietal
bossing, small facial bones, sparse scalp hair, prominent
scalp veins, small beaked nose, low-­set ears

Autosomal-­recessive
POLR3A
>30 cases to date

Natal teeth, patent ductus arteriosus,
intestinal pseudoobstruction

Dilatation/hypermobility of small bowel, short or microcolon
without obstruction, incomplete rotation of midgut, patent
ductus arteriosus

X-­linked recessive
Not known
2 cases to date, brothers

Modified from Hebert AA. Mucous membrane disorders. In Schachner LA, Hansen RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2011: Table 9.2, p. 654.

congenita, and other anomalies (Table 353.2). A family history of natal
teeth or premature eruption is present in 15–20% of affected children.
Natal or neonatal teeth occasionally result in pain and refusal to
feed and can produce maternal discomfort because of abrasion or
biting of the nipple during nursing. If the tooth is mobile, there
is a danger of detachment, with aspiration of the tooth. Because
the tongue lies between the alveolar processes during birth, it can
become lacerated (Riga-­Fede disease). Decisions regarding extraction of prematurely erupted primary teeth must be made on an individual basis.
Exfoliation failure occurs when a primary tooth is not shed before
the eruption of its permanent successor. Most often the primary tooth
exfoliates eventually, but in some cases the primary tooth needs to
be extracted. This occurs most commonly in the mandibular incisor
region.

Anomalies Associated with Tooth Development

Both failures and excesses of tooth initiation are observed. Developmentally missing teeth can result from environmental insult, a genetic
defect involving only teeth, or the manifestation of a syndrome.

Anomalies of Number

Anodontia, or absence of teeth, occurs when no tooth buds form
(ectodermal dysplasia, or familial missing teeth) or when there is a disturbance of a normal site of initiation (the area of a palatal cleft). The
teeth that are most commonly absent are the third molars, the maxillary lateral incisors, and the mandibular second premolars.
If the dental lamina produces more than the normal number of
buds, supernumerary teeth occur, most often in the area between
the maxillary central incisors. Because they tend to disrupt the position and eruption of the adjacent normal teeth, their identification
by radiographic examination is important. Supernumerary teeth also
occur with cleidocranial dysplasia (see Chapter 356) and in the area of
cleft palates.

Anomalies of Size

Twinning, in which two teeth are joined together, is most often
observed in the mandibular incisors of the primary dentition. It can
result from gemination, fusion, or concrescence. Gemination is the
result of the division of one tooth germ to form a bifid crown on a single root with a common pulp canal; an extra tooth appears to be present in the dental arch. Fusion is the joining of incompletely developed
teeth that, due to pressure, trauma, or crowding, continue to develop as
one tooth. Fused teeth are sometimes joined along their entire length;
in other cases, a single wide crown is supported on two roots. Concrescence is the attachment of the roots of closely approximated adjacent teeth by an excessive deposit of cementum. This type of twinning,
unlike the others, is found most often in the maxillary molar region.
Disturbances during differentiation can result in alterations in
dental morphology, such as macrodontia (large teeth) or microdontia (small teeth). The maxillary lateral incisors can assume a slender,
tapering shape (peg-­shaped laterals).

Anomalies of Shape

Dens in dente or dens invaginatus presents as tooth within tooth
appearance, which results from invagination of inner enamel epithelium caused by disruption during morphodifferentiation. Dens evaginatus presents as an extra cusp on anterior or posterior teeth, which
contains enamel, dentin, and sometimes even pulp tissue. In the anterior teeth the cusp is talon shaped and presents in the cingulum area.
Taurodontism is more common in permanent molars and is characterized by elongated pulp chamber with short-­stunted roots due to
failure or late invagination of Hertwig epithelial root sheath. It may be
associated with several syndromic conditions such as Down syndrome,
tricho-­dento-­osseous syndrome, ectodermal dysplasia (hypohidrotic),
and amelogenesis imperfecta (hypomaturation-­hypoplastic type).
Dilaceration is an abnormal bend or curve in root possibly due to
trauma. It may be subsequent to injury to the primary predecessor
tooth.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 353 u Development and Developmental Anomalies of the Teeth

2241

Fig. 353.2 Dentinogenesis imperfecta. The bluish, opalescent sheen
Fig. 353.1 Amelogenesis imperfecta, hypoplastic type. The enamel

defect results in areas of missing or thin enamel, as well as grooves
and pits.

Anomalies of Structure

Amelogenesis imperfecta represents a group of hereditary conditions
that manifest in enamel defects of the primary and permanent teeth
without evidence of systemic disorders (Fig. 353.1). There are four
subtypes: hypoplastic (type I), hypomaturation (type II), hypocalcified
(type III), and hypomaturation-­hypoplastic-­taurodontism (type IV).
Of the multiple subtypes, there are 19 genes inherited predominantly
as autosomal dominant or recessive traits. The teeth are covered by
only a thin layer of abnormally formed enamel through which the yellow underlying dentin is seen. The primary teeth are generally affected
more than the permanent teeth. Susceptibility to caries is low, but the
enamel is subject to destruction from abrasion. Complete coverage of
the crown may be indicated for dentin protection, to reduce tooth sensitivity, and for improved appearance.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta, or hereditary opalescent dentin, is a
condition analogous to amelogenesis imperfecta in which the odontoblasts fail to differentiate normally, resulting in poorly calcified dentin (Fig. 353.2). This autosomal dominant disorder can also occur in
patients with osteogenesis imperfecta. The enamel-­dentin junction is
altered, causing enamel to break away. The exposed dentin is then susceptible to abrasion, in some cases worn to the gingiva. The teeth are
opaque and pearly, and the pulp chambers are generally obliterated by
calcification. Both primary and permanent teeth are usually involved.
If there is excessive wear of the teeth, selected complete coverage of
the teeth may be indicated to prevent further tooth loss and improve
appearance.
Localized disturbances of calcification that correlate with periods of
illness, malnutrition, premature birth, or birth trauma are common.
Hypocalcification appears as opaque white patches or horizontal lines
on the tooth; hypoplasia is more severe and manifests as pitting or
areas devoid of enamel. Systemic conditions, such as renal failure and
cystic fibrosis, are associated with enamel defects. Local trauma to the
primary incisors can also affect calcification of permanent incisors.

on several of these teeth results from genetically defective dentin. This
condition may be associated with osteogenesis imperfecta. (From Nazif
MM, Martin BS, McKibben DH, et al. Oral disorders. In Zitelli BJ, Davis HW, eds. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby; 2002: p. 703.)

Fluorosis (mottled enamel) can result from systemic fluoride consumption >0.05 mg/kg/day during enamel formation. This high fluoride consumption can be caused by residing in an area of high fluoride
content of the drinking water (>2.0 ppm), swallowing excessive fluoridated toothpaste, or inappropriate fluoride prescriptions. Excessive fluoride during enamel formation affects ameloblastic function, resulting
in inconspicuous white, lacy patches on the enamel to severe brownish
discoloration and hypoplasia. The latter changes are usually seen with
fluoride concentrations in the drinking water >5.0 ppm.

Anomalies of Color

Discolored teeth can result from incorporation of foreign substances
into developing enamel. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia can produce blue
to black discoloration of the primary teeth. Porphyria produces a red-­
brown discoloration. Tetracyclines are extensively incorporated into
bones and teeth and, if administered during the period of formation
of enamel, can result in brown-­yellow discoloration and hypoplasia of
the enamel. Such teeth fluoresce under ultraviolet light. The period at
risk extends from approximately 4 months of gestation to 7 years of age.
Repeated or prolonged therapy with tetracycline carries the highest risk.
Teething is associated with primary tooth eruption and may manifest with benign symptoms such as gingival hyperemia, irritability, sucking fingers, and drooling; some infants have no symptoms
or symptoms not identified by their parents. Low-­grade fever is an
inconsistent finding. The treatment of symptoms of teething is often
unnecessary but could include oral analgesics and iced teething rings.
Teething remedies containing benzocaine may cause methemoglobinemia and are not recommended. “Natural” (homeopathic) teething
remedies may contain toxic additives and should be avoided. In addition, teething necklaces and bracelets are a risk for foreign body aspiration and choking.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2242 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 354

Chapter 355

Disorders of the Oral
Cavity Associated with
Other Conditions

Malocclusion

Vineet K. Dhar
Disorders of the teeth and surrounding structures can occur in isolation or in combination with other systemic conditions (Table 354.1).
Most commonly, medical conditions that occur during tooth development can affect tooth formation or appearance. Damage to teeth during their development is permanent.

Table 354.1  Dental Problems Associated with Selected
Medical Conditions
MEDICAL CONDITION

COMMON ASSOCIATED
DENTAL OR ORAL FINDINGS

Cleft lip and palate

Missing teeth, extra (supernumerary)
teeth, shifting of arch segments,
feeding difficulties, speech
problems

Kidney failure

Mottled enamel (permanent teeth),
facial dysmorphology

Cystic fibrosis

Stained teeth with extensive
medication, mottled enamel

Immunosuppression

Oral candidiasis with potential for
systemic candidiasis,
cyclosporine-­induced gingival
hyperplasia

Low birthweight

Palatal groove, narrow arch with
prolonged oral intubation; enamel
defects of primary teeth

Heart defects with susceptibility
to bacterial endocarditis

Bacteremia from dental procedures
or trauma

Neutrophil chemotactic
deficiency

Aggressive periodontitis (loss of
supporting bone around teeth)

Diabetes mellitus type 1
(uncontrolled)

Aggressive periodontitis

Neuromotor dysfunction

Oral trauma from falling; malocclusion
(open bite); gingivitis from lack of
hygiene

Prolonged illness (generalized)
during tooth formation

Enamel hypoplasia of crown portions
forming during illness

Seizures

Gingival enlargement if phenytoin
is used

Maternal infections

Syphilis: abnormally shaped teeth

Vitamin D–dependent rickets

Enamel hypoplasia

Vineet K. Dhar
The oral cavity is essentially a masticatory instrument. The purpose of
the anterior teeth is to bite off large portions of food. The posterior
teeth reduce foodstuff to a soft, moist bolus. The cheeks and tongue
force the food onto the areas of tooth contact. Establishing a proper
relationship between the mandibular and maxillary teeth is important
for both physiologic and cosmetic reasons.

VARIATIONS IN GROWTH PATTERNS

Growth patterns are classified into three main types of occlusion,
determined when the jaws are closed and the teeth are held together
(Fig. 355.1). According to the Angle classification of malocclusion,
in class I occlusion (normal), the cusps of the posterior mandibular teeth interdigitate ahead of and inside of the corresponding cusps
of the opposing maxillary teeth. This relationship provides a normal
facial profile.
In class II malocclusion, buck teeth, the cusps of the posterior
mandibular teeth are behind and inside the corresponding cusps of
the maxillary teeth. This common occlusal disharmony is found in
approximately 45% of the population. The facial profile can give the
appearance of a receding chin (retrognathia) (mandibular deficiency)
or protruding front teeth. The resultant increased space between upper
and lower anterior teeth encourage finger sucking and tongue-­thrust
habits. In addition, children with pronounced class II malocclusions
are at greater risks of damage to the incisors as a consequence of
trauma. Treatment includes orthodontic retraction of the maxilla or
stimulation of the mandible.
In class III malocclusion, underbite, the cusps of the posterior
mandibular teeth interdigitate a tooth or more ahead of their opposing maxillary counterparts. The anterior teeth appear in crossbite with
the mandibular incisors protruding beyond the maxillary incisors. The
facial profile gives the appearance of a protruding chin (prognathia)
with or without an appearance of maxillary deficiency. If necessary,

Class II

Class I

Class III

Fig. 355.1 Angle classification of occlusion. The typical correspondence between the facial-­jaw profile and molar relationship is shown.
(Data from Borrie FR, Bearn DR, Innes NP, et al. Interventions for the
cessation of non-­nutritive sucking habits in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;31:CD008694.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 356 u Cleft Lip and Palate 2243
treatment includes mandibular excess reduction osteotomy or orthodontic maxillary facial protrusion.
The molar relationship in primary dentition/baby teeth also has
three main types. The flush terminal plane relationship, where the
distal surface of mandibular second primary molar is flush with the
distal surface of maxillary second primary molar, is most common
and can translate into class I occlusion or class II malocclusion in
permanent dentition. The mesial step relationship, where the distal
surface of mandibular second primary molar lies mesial to the distal surface of maxillary second primary molar, is the second most
common and often translates into class I occlusion or sometimes
into class III malocclusion in permanent dentition. Lastly, the distal
step relationship, where the distal surface of the mandibular second
primary molar lies distal to the distal surface of maxillary second
primary molar, almost always translates into class II occlusion in permanent dentition.

CROSSBITE

Normally, the mandibular teeth are in a position just inside the maxillary teeth so that the outside mandibular cusps or incisal edges meet
the central portion of the opposing maxillary teeth. A reversal of this
relation is referred to as a crossbite. Crossbites can be anterior, involving the incisors; can be posterior, involving the molars; or can involve
single or multiple teeth; or can be unilateral or bilateral. Functional
posterior crossbites that involve lateral shift of the mandible during
closure may result in dental, skeletal adjustments, and even asymmetric condylar positioning; therefore an early diagnosis and correction is
recommended.

OPEN AND CLOSED BITES

If the posterior mandibular and maxillary teeth make contact with
each other, but the anterior teeth are still apart, the condition is
called an open bite. Open bites can result from skeletal growth pattern or digit sucking. If digit sucking is terminated before skeletal
and dental growth is complete, the open bite might resolve naturally.
If mandibular anterior teeth occlude inside the maxillary anterior
teeth in an overclosed position, the condition is referred to as a
closed or deep bite.
Treatment of open and closed bites consists of orthodontic correction, generally performed in the preteen or teenage years. Some severe
cases require orthognathic surgery to position the jaws optimally in a
vertical direction.

DENTAL CROWDING

Overlap of incisors can result when the jaws are too small, or the teeth
are too large for adequate alignment of the teeth. Growth of the jaws is
mostly in the posterior aspects of the mandible and maxilla; therefore
inadequate space for the teeth at 7 or 8 years of age will not resolve with
growth of the jaws. Spacing in the primary dentition is normal and
favorable for adequate alignment of successor teeth.

DIGIT SUCKING

Various and conflicting etiologic theories and recommendations for
correction have been proposed for digit sucking in children. Prolonged digit sucking can cause flaring of the maxillary incisor teeth,
an open bite, and a posterior crossbite. The prevalence of digit sucking
decreases steadily from the age of 2 years to approximately 10% by the
age of 5 years. The earlier the habit is discontinued after the eruption of
the permanent maxillary incisors (age 7-­8 years), the greater the likelihood that there will be lessening effects on the dentition.
A variety of treatments have been suggested, from behavioral
modification to insertion of an appliance with extensions that
serves as a reminder when the child attempts to insert the digit.
Unfortunately, a systematic review has found only low-­
quality
evidence of the effectiveness of interventions such as orthodontic
appliances and psychologic interventions. The greatest likelihood of
success occurs in cases in which the child desires to stop. Stopping
of the habit will not rectify a malocclusion caused by a prior deviant
growth pattern.

Chapter 356

Cleft Lip and Palate
Vineet K. Dhar
Clefts of the lip and palate are distinct entities that are closely related
embryologically, functionally, and genetically. It is thought that cleft of
the lip appears because of hypoplasia of the mesenchymal layer, resulting in a failure of the medial nasal and maxillary processes to join. Cleft
of the palate results from failure of palatal shelves to approximate or
fuse.

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of cleft lip with or without cleft palate is approximately
1 in 1,000 births. The reported incidence of cleft palate alone in the
United States is 1 in 1,687 births. Clefts of the lip are more common in
males. Possible causes include maternal drug exposure, a syndrome-­
malformation complex, or genetic factors. Although clefts of lips and
palates appear to occur sporadically, the presence of susceptible genes
appears important. There are approximately 400 syndromes associated
with cleft lip and palates. There are families in which a cleft lip or palate, or both, is inherited in a dominant fashion (van der Woude syndrome), and careful examination of parents is important to distinguish
this type from others, because the recurrence risk is 50%. Ethnic factors
also affect the incidence of cleft lip and palate; the incidence varies by
race, with Asian children most likely to be affected. Cleft lip may be
associated with other cranial facial anomalies, whereas cleft palate may
be associated with central nervous system anomalies.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cleft lip can vary from a small notch in the vermilion border to a
complete separation involving skin, muscle, mucosa, tooth, and bone.
Clefts of the lip may be unilateral (more often on the left side) or bilateral and can involve the alveolar ridge (Fig. 356.1).
Isolated cleft palate occurs in the midline and might involve only
the uvula or can extend into or through the soft and hard palates to
the incisive foramen. When associated with cleft lip, the defect can
involve the midline of the soft palate and extend into the hard palate
on one or both sides, exposing one or both of the nasal cavities as
a unilateral or bilateral cleft palate. The palate can also have a submucosal cleft indicated by a bifid uvula, partial separation of muscle
with intact mucosa, or a palpable notch at the posterior of the palate
(see Fig. 356.1).

TREATMENT

A complete program of habilitation for the child with a cleft lip or
palate can require years of special treatment by a team consisting of a
pediatrician, plastic surgeon, otolaryngologist, oral and maxillofacial
surgeon, pediatric dentist, prosthodontist, orthodontist, speech therapist, geneticist, medical social worker, psychologist, and public health
nurse.
The immediate problem in an infant born with a cleft lip or palate is
feeding. Although some advocate the construction of a plastic obturator to assist in feedings, most believe that, with the use of soft artificial
nipples with large openings, a squeezable bottle, and proper instruction, feeding of infants with clefts can be achieved.
Surgical closure of a cleft lip is usually performed by 3 months of
age, when the infant has shown satisfactory weight gain and is free of
any oral, respiratory, or systemic infection. Modification of the Millard rotation–advancement technique is the most commonly used
technique; a staggered suture line minimizes notching of the lip from
retraction of scar tissue. The initial repair may be revised at 4 or 5
years of age. Corrective surgery on the nose may be delayed until adolescence. Nasal surgery can also be performed at the time of the lip
repair. Cosmetic results depend on the extent of the original deformity,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2244 Part XVI u The Digestive System

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 356.1 Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts. A, Cleft lip and alveolus. B, Cleft palate. C, Incomplete unilateral cleft lip and palate. D, Complete
unilateral cleft lip and palate. E, Complete bilateral cleft lip and palate. (From Shaw WC. Orthodontics and Occlusal Management. Oxford, UK:
Butterworth-­Heinemann; 1993.)

healing potential of the individual patient, absence of infection, and the
skill of the surgeon.
Because clefts of the palate vary considerably in size, shape, and
degree of deformity, the timing of surgical correction should be individualized. Criteria such as width of the cleft, adequacy of the existing
palatal segments, morphology of the surrounding areas (width of the
oropharynx), and neuromuscular function of the soft palate and pharyngeal walls affect the decision. The goals of surgery are the union of
the cleft segments, intelligible and pleasant speech, reduction of nasal
regurgitation, and avoidance of injury to the growing maxilla.
In an otherwise healthy child, closure of the palate is usually done
before 1 year of age to enhance normal speech development. When
surgical correction is delayed beyond the third year, a contoured
speech bulb can be attached to the posterior of a maxillary denture
so that contraction of the pharyngeal and velopharyngeal muscles can
bring tissues into contact with the bulb to accomplish occlusion of the
nasopharynx and help the child to develop intelligible speech.
A cleft palate usually crosses the alveolar ridge and interferes with
the formation of teeth in the maxillary anterior region. Teeth in the
cleft area may be displaced, malformed, or missing. Missing teeth or
teeth that are nonfunctional are replaced by prosthetic devices.

POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT

During the immediate postoperative period, special nursing care
is essential. Gentle aspiration of the nasopharynx minimizes the
chances of the common complications of atelectasis or pneumonia.
The primary considerations in postoperative care are maintenance of
a clean suture line and avoidance of tension on the sutures. The infant
is fed with a specially designed bottle, and the arms are restrained
with elbow cuffs. A fluid or semifluid diet is maintained for 3 weeks.
The patient’s hands, toys, and other foreign bodies must be kept away
from the surgical site.

SEQUELAE

Recurrent otitis media and subsequent hearing loss are frequent with
cleft palate. Displacement of the maxillary arches and malposition of
the teeth usually require orthodontic correction. Misarticulations and
velopharyngeal dysfunction are often associated with cleft lip and palate and may be present or persist because of physiologic dysfunction,
anatomic insufficiency, malocclusion, or inadequate surgical closure of
the palate. Such speech is characterized by the emission of air from the
nose and by a hypernasal quality with certain sounds, or by compensatory misarticulations (glottal stops). Before and sometimes after palatal
surgery, the speech defect is caused by inadequacies in function of the
palatal and pharyngeal muscles. The muscles of the soft palate and the
lateral and posterior walls of the nasopharynx constitute a valve that
separates the nasopharynx from the oropharynx during swallowing

and in the production of certain sounds. If the valve does not function
adequately, it is difficult to build up enough pressure in the mouth to
make such explosive sounds as p, b, d, t, h, y, or the sibilants s, sh, and
ch, and such words as “cats,” “boats,” and “sisters” are not intelligible.
After operation or the insertion of a speech appliance, speech therapy
is necessary.

VELOPHARYNGEAL DYSFUNCTION

The speech disturbance characteristic of the child with a cleft palate
can also be produced by other osseous or neuromuscular abnormalities
where there is an inability to form an effective seal between oropharynx and nasopharynx during swallowing or phonation. In a child who
has the potential for abnormal speech, adenoidectomy can precipitate
overt hypernasality. If the neuromuscular function is adequate, compensation in palatopharyngeal movement might take place and the
speech defect might improve, although speech therapy is necessary. In
other cases, slow involution of the adenoids can allow gradual compensation in palatal and pharyngeal muscular function. This might explain
why a speech defect does not become apparent in some children who
have a submucous cleft palate or similar anomaly predisposing to palatopharyngeal incompetence.

Clinical Manifestations

Although clinical signs vary, the symptoms of velopharyngeal dysfunction are similar to those of a cleft palate. There may be hypernasal speech (especially noted in the articulation of pressure consonants
such as p, b, d, t, h, v, f, and s); conspicuous constricting movement
of the nares during speech; inability to whistle, gargle, blow out a
candle, or inflate a balloon; loss of liquid through the nose when
drinking with the head down; otitis media; and hearing loss. Oral
inspection might reveal a cleft palate or a relatively short palate with
a large oropharynx; absent, grossly asymmetric, or minimal muscular
activity of the soft palate and pharynx during phonation or gagging;
or a submucous cleft.
Velopharyngeal dysfunction may also be demonstrated radiographically. The head should be carefully positioned to obtain a true lateral
view; one film is obtained with the patient at rest and another during continuous phonation of the vowel u as in “boom.” The soft palate
contacts the posterior pharyngeal wall in normal function, whereas in
velopharyngeal dysfunction such contact is absent.
In selected cases of velopharyngeal dysfunction, the palate may be
retropositioned or pharyngoplasty may be performed using a flap of
tissue from the posterior pharyngeal wall. Dental speech appliances
have also been used successfully. The type of surgery used is best tailored to the findings on nasoendoscopy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 357 u Syndromes with Oral Manifestations 2245

Chapter 357

Syndromes with Oral
Manifestations
Vineet K. Dhar
Many syndromes have distinct or accompanying facial, oral, and dental
manifestations (see Apert syndrome, Chapter 631.9; Crouzon disease,
Chapter 631.9; Down syndrome, Chapter 99.2).
Osteogenesis imperfecta is often accompanied by effects on the
teeth, termed dentinogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 353, Fig. 353.2).
Depending on the severity of presentation, treatment of the dentition
varies from routine preventive and restorative monitoring to covering
affected posterior teeth with stainless steel crowns to prevent further
tooth loss and improve appearance. Dentinogenesis imperfecta can
also occur in isolation without the bony effects.
Another syndrome, cleidocranial dysplasia, has orofacial features
such as frontal bossing, hypoplastic maxilla, and supernumerary
teeth. The primary teeth can be overretained, and the permanent teeth
remain unerupted. Supernumerary teeth are common, especially in the
premolar area. Extensive dental rehabilitation may be needed to correct severe tooth crowding and unerupted and supernumerary teeth.
Ectodermal dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of conditions in
which oral manifestations range from little or no involvement (the dentition is completely normal) to cases in which the teeth can be totally
or partially absent or malformed (see Chapter 690). Because alveolar
bone does not develop in the absence of teeth, the alveolar processes
can be either totally or partially absent, and the resultant overclosure
of the mandible causes the lips to protrude. Facial development is otherwise not disturbed. Teeth, when present, can range from normal to
small and conical. If aplasia of the buccal and labial salivary glands is
present, dryness and irritation of the oral mucosa can occur. People
with ectodermal dysplasia might need partial or full dentures, even at
a very young age. The vertical height between the jaws is thus restored,
improving the position of the lips and facial contours, as well as restoring masticatory function.
Pierre Robin syndrome consists of micrognathia and is usually
accompanied by a high arched or cleft palate (Fig. 357.1). The tongue
is usually of normal size, but the floor of the mouth is foreshortened.
The air passages can become obstructed, particularly on inspiration,
usually requiring treatment to prevent suffocation. The infant should
be maintained in a prone or partially prone position so that the tongue
falls forward to relieve respiratory obstruction. Some patients require
tracheostomy. Mandibular distraction procedures in the neonate can
improve mandibular size, enhance respiration, and facilitate oral
feedings.
Sufficient spontaneous mandibular growth can take place within
a few months to relieve the potential airway obstruction. Often the
growth of the mandible achieves a normal profile in 4-­6 years. Of children with Pierre Robin syndrome, 30–50% have Stickler syndrome
(types I-­VI), an autosomal dominant condition that includes other
findings such as prominent joints, arthritis, hypotonia, hypermobile
joints, mitral valve prolapse, hearing loss, spine problems (scoliosis,
kyphosis, platyspondyly), and ocular problems (high myopia, glaucoma, cataracts, retinal detachment). Symptoms may vary greatly even
within a family. Pathogenic variants are noted in the genes that produce
collagen (COL2A1 in most; COL11A1 in others) in many, but not all,
patients with Stickler syndrome. Other syndromes are associated with
Pierre Robin syndrome, including 22Q11.2 deletion syndrome (velocardiofacial syndrome).
Mandibulofacial dysostosis (Treacher Collins syndrome or
Franceschetti syndrome) is an autosomal dominant syndrome that

primarily affects the face. The facial appearance varies but is characterized by downward-­sloping palpebral fissures, colobomas of the
lower eyelids, sunken cheekbones, blind fistulas opening between
the angles of the mouth and the ears, malformed pinnae, atypical
hair growth extending toward the cheeks, receding chin, and large
mouth. Facial clefts, abnormalities of the ears, and deafness are
common. The mandible is usually hypoplastic; the ramus may be
deficient, and the coronoid and condylar processes are flat or even
aplastic. The palatal vault may be either high or cleft. Dental malocclusions are common. The teeth may be missing, hypoplastic, or
displaced or be in an open bite position. Initially, the primary concern is breathing and feeding problems. Surgery to restore normal
structure of the face can be performed, which may include repair
of cleft palate, zygomatic and orbit reconstruction, reconstruction
of the lower eyelid, external ear reconstruction, and orthognathic
surgery.
Hemifacial microsomia presentation can be quite variable but
is usually characterized by unilateral hypoplasia of the mandible
and can be associated with partial paralysis of the facial nerve,
underdeveloped ear, and blind fistulas between the angles of the
mouth and the ears. Severe facial asymmetry and malocclusion can
develop because of the absence or hypoplasia of the mandibular
condyle on the affected side. Congenital condylar deformity tends
to increase with age. Early craniofacial surgery may be indicated to
minimize the deformity. This disorder can be associated with ocular
and vertebral anomalies (oculoauriculovertebral spectrum, including Goldenhar syndrome); therefore radiographs of the vertebrae
and ribs should be considered to determine the extent of skeletal
involvement.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 357.1 Pierre Robin syndrome. (From Clark DA. Atlas of Neonatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000. p. 144.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2246 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 358

Dental Caries
Vineet K. Dhar

this situation is initiated earlier and consequently can affect the maxillary incisors first and then progress to the molars as they erupt.
The prevalence of untreated caries was significantly higher in children between 3 and 9 years of age living at or below 100% of federal
poverty level compared with those above the poverty level. Along with
100
30

ETIOLOGY

EPIDEMIOLOGY

As per the 2011–2012 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), approximately 15% of children ranging from 2 to 8
years of age had one or more primary teeth affected by dental caries
(Fig. 358.2). In the permanent dentition, over 10% of children age 12-­
15 years had dental caries and one fourth of children were affected by
age 16-­19 years (Fig. 358.3).

25
Percentage

The development of dental caries depends on interrelationships among
the tooth surface, dietary carbohydrates, and specific oral bacteria.
Organic acids produced by bacterial fermentation of dietary carbohydrates reduce the pH of dental plaque adjacent to the tooth to a point
where demineralization occurs. The initial demineralization appears as
an opaque white spot lesion on the enamel, and with progressive loss
of tooth mineral, cavitation of the tooth occurs (Fig. 358.1).
The group of microorganisms, Streptococcus mutans, is the main
bacteria associated with the development of dental caries. These bacteria have the ability to adhere to enamel, produce abundant acid,
and survive at low pH. Once the enamel surface cavitates, other oral
bacteria (lactobacilli) can colonize the tooth, produce acid, and foster
further tooth demineralization. Demineralization from bacterial acid
production is determined by the frequency of carbohydrate consumption and by the type of carbohydrate. Sucrose is the most cariogenic
sugar because one of its by-­products during bacterial metabolism is
glucan, a polymer that enables bacteria to adhere more readily to tooth
structures. Dietary behaviors, such as consuming sweetened beverages
in a nursing bottle or frequently consuming sticky candies, increase
the cariogenic potential of foods because of the long retention of sugar
in the mouth.

20
15
10
5
0
Total

2−5

6−8

Overall

Age group (yrs)

White

Black

Asian

Hispanic

Fig. 358.2 Prevalence* of untreated dental caries† in primary teeth‡

among children age 2-­8 yr, by age group, and race/Hispanic origin—
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2011–2014. *With
95% confidence intervals indicated with error bars. †Untreated dental
caries is defined as tooth decay (dental cavities) that has not received
appropriate treatment. Data were collected by dentists in the mobile
examination center as part of the oral health component of the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. ‡Primary teeth are the first
teeth (baby teeth), that are shed and replaced by permanent teeth.
(From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevalence of untreated dental caries in primary teeth among children aged 2-­8 years,
by age group and race/Hispanic origin—National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, 2011–2014. MMWR. 2017;66[9]:261.)

100
30

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

25
Percentage

Dental caries of the primary dentition usually begins in the pits and
fissures. Small lesions may be difficult to diagnose by visual inspection,
but larger lesions are evident as darkened or cavitated lesions on the
tooth surfaces (Fig. 358.4). Rampant dental caries in infants and toddlers, referred to as early childhood caries, is the result of early colonization of the child with cariogenic bacteria and the frequent ingestion
of sugar, either in the bottle or in solid foods. The carious process in

20
15
10
5
0
Overall

6−11

12−15

16−19

Age group (yrs)

Fig. 358.3 Prevalence* of untreated dental caries† in permanent teeth

Fig. 358.1 Initial carious lesions (white spot lesions) around the necks
of the maxillary central incisors.

among children and adolescents age 6-­19 yr, by age group—National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, United States, 2011-­2014.
*With 95% confidence intervals indicated with error bars. †Untreated
dental caries (i.e., dental cavities) are defined as tooth decay that has
not received appropriate treatment. Data were collected by dentists in
the mobile examination center as part of the oral health component
of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevalence of untreated dental
caries in permanent teeth among children and adolescents aged 6-­19
years, by age group—National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, United States, 2011–2014. MMWR. 2017;66[1]:36.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 358 u Dental Caries

2247

1
2

3
4
5

Fig. 358.4 Rampant caries in a 3-­yr-­old child. Note darkened and

6

cavitated lesions on the fissure surfaces of mandibular molars.

high frequency of sugar consumption and colonization with cariogenic
bacteria, other enabling factors include low socioeconomic status of
the family, other family members with carious teeth, recent immigrant
status of the child, and the visual presence of dental plaque on the
child’s teeth. Children who develop caries at a young age are known to
be at high risk for developing further caries as they get older. Therefore
the appropriate prevention of early childhood caries can result in the
elimination of major dental problems in toddlers and less decay in later
childhood.
Among adolescents, the prevalence of dental caries was higher in age
group 16-­19 years (67%) compared with age group 12-­15 years (50%).
Overall, the caries experience did not significantly differ by race, Hispanic origin, and poverty levels.

COMPLICATIONS

Left untreated, dental caries usually destroy most of the tooth and
invade the dental pulp (Fig. 358.5), leading to an inflammation of
the pulp (pulpitis) and significant pain. Pulpitis can progress to pulp
necrosis, with bacterial invasion of the alveolar bone causing a dental
abscess (Fig. 358.6). Red flags for serious spreading of dental infection
are noted in Table 358.1. Infection of a primary tooth can disrupt normal development of the successor permanent tooth. In some cases, this
process leads to spread of infection to other facial spaces (Fig. 358.7;
Table 358.2).

7

8

Fig. 358.5 Basic dental anatomy: 1, enamel; 2, dentin; 3, gingival

margin; 4, pulp; 5, cementum; 6, periodontal ligament; 7, alveolar
bone; 8, neurovascular bundle.

TREATMENT

The age at which dental caries occurs is important in dental management. Children younger than 3 years of age lack the developmental
ability to cooperate with dental treatment and often require sedation or
general anesthesia to repair carious teeth. After 4 years of age, children
can generally cope with dental restorative care with the use of local
anesthesia. Children with neurologic impairment or developmental
delay may require general anesthesia for dental procedures at older
ages.
Current evidence supports the use of a chronic disease management
model to modify risk factors and manage dental caries. The disease
management includes at-­home strategies and in-­office preventive, minimally invasive, and invasive interventions for treating dental caries.
Minimally invasive strategies such as interim therapeutic restorations
and silver diamine fluoride application can be used to arrest active carious lesions. Conventional dental treatment, using silver amalgam, plastic composite, or stainless steel crowns, can restore most teeth affected
with dental caries. If caries involves the dental pulp, a partial removal
of the pulp (pulpotomy) or complete removal of the pulp (pulpectomy)
may be required. If a tooth requires extraction, a space maintainer may
be indicated to prevent migration of teeth, which subsequently leads to
malposition of permanent successor teeth.
Clinical management of the pain and infection associated with
untreated dental caries varies with the extent of involvement and the
medical status of the patient. Dental infection localized to the dentoalveolar unit can be managed by local measures (extraction, pulpectomy).

Fig. 358.6 Facial swelling from an abscessed primary molar. Resolu-

tion of the inflammation can be achieved by a course of antibiotics,
followed by either extraction or root canal of the offending tooth.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2248 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 358.1  Red Flags Suggestive of a Spreading Dental
Infection

Table 358.2  Clinical Presentation of Odontogenic
Infections by Location

• Pyrexia

TYPE OF INFECTION

• Tachycardia or tachypnea

Dentoalveolar

• Trismus; may be relative due to pain or absolute due to a
collection within the muscle causing muscle spasm in cases of
masticator space involvement

Swelling of the alveolar ridge with
periodontal, periapical, and subperiosteal
abscess

Submental space

Firm midline swelling beneath the chin;
caused by infection from the mandibular
incisors

Submandibular space

Swelling of the submandibular triangle
of the neck around the angle of the
mandible; caused by mandibular molar
infections; trismus typical

Sublingual space

Swelling of the floor of the mouth with
possible elevation of the tongue and
dysphagia

Retropharyngeal space

Stiff neck, sore throat, dysphagia, raspy
voice; caused by infections of the
molars; infection of retropharyngeal
space has a high potential to spread to
the mediastinum

Buccal space

Swelling of the cheek; caused by infection
of premolar or molar tooth

Masticator space

Swelling on either side of the mandibular
ramus; caused by infection of the
mandibular third molar; trismus present

Canine space

Swelling of the anterior cheek with loss
of the nasolabial fold and possible
extension to the infraorbital region

• Raised tongue and floor of mouth, drooling
• Periorbital cellulitis
• Difficulty with speaking, swallowing, and breathing
• Hypotension
• Increased white blood cell count
• Lymphadenopathy
• Dehydration
From Robertson DP, Keys W, Rautemaa-­Richardson R, et al. Management of severe
acute dental infections. BMJ. 2015;350:h1300. Box 3, p. 151.

Orbit

Nasal passage

Maxilla

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

From Ogle OE. Odontogenic infections. Dent Clin North Am. 2017;61:235–252. Table 1.

Maxillary sinus

Oral cavity

Buccal sulcus

Tongue
Buccinator
muscle
Floor of mouth
Buccal sulcus

Mylohyoid
muscle

Mandible

Fig. 358.7 Spread of infection in the maxillofacial region is compli-

cated by the variety of vital structures. Routes of spread are determined
by fascial planes and this affects the presentation and management of
each subdivision of cervicofacial infection. (From Robertson DP, Keys
W, Rautemaa-­Richardson R, et al. Management of severe acute dental
infections. BMJ. 2015;350:h1300. Fig. 3, p. 151.)

Oral antibiotics are indicated for dental infections associated with fever,
cellulitis, and facial swelling or if it is difficult to anesthetize the tooth
in the presence of inflammation. Penicillin is the antibiotic of choice,
except in patients with a history of allergy to this agent. Clindamycin
and erythromycin are suitable alternatives. Oral analgesics, such as ibuprofen, are usually adequate for pain control.

PREVENTION

Dental caries screening, risk assessment, and preventive management
in young children need to be part of the scope of medical providers because children younger than 3 years of age often are not under
the care of a dentist. Prevention of early childhood caries is critical
because, if primary dental care is not initiated or does not succeed,
teeth may develop dental caries requiring restorative care. Dental
restorative care to treat caries in young children may require the use
of sedation or general anesthesia with its associated high costs and
possible health risks, and there is high recurrence of carious lesions
once they develop.
Because they are seeing infants and toddlers on a periodicity schedule, physicians have an important role in screening children younger
than 3 years of age for dental caries; providing preventive instructions;
applying preventive measures, such as fluoride varnish; and referring
the child to a dentist if problems exist.

Fluoride

The most effective preventive measure against dental caries is communal water supplies with optimal fluoride content. Water fluoridation at
the level of 0.7-­1.2 mg fluoride per liter (ppm F) was introduced in the
United States in the 1940s. Because fluoride from water supplies is now
one of several sources of fluoride, the Department of Health and Human
Services proposes to not have a fluoride range, but instead to limit the
recommendation to the lower limit of 0.7 ppm F. The rationale is to balance the benefits of preventing dental caries with reducing the chance
of fluorosis. Children who reside in areas with fluoride-­deficient water
supplies or who consume primarily bottled water, and are at risk for caries, benefit from dietary fluoride supplements (Table 358.3). If the patient

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 359 u Periodontal Diseases
Table 358.3  Supplemental Fluoride Dosage Schedule
FLUORIDE IN HOME WATER
AGE

<0.3 (PPM)

0.3-­0.6 (PPM)

>0.6 (PPM)

6 mo-­3 yr

0.25*

0

0

3-­6 yr

0.50

0.25

0

6-­16 yr

1.00

0.50

0

*Milligrams of fluoride per day.

2249

Chapter 359

Periodontal Diseases
Vineet K. Dhar
The periodontium includes the gingiva, alveolar bone, cementum, and
periodontal ligament (see Fig. 358.5).

GINGIVITIS
uses a private water supply, it is necessary to get the water tested for fluoride levels before prescribing fluoride supplements. To avoid potential
overdoses, no fluoride prescription should be written for more than a
total of 1 mg/day of fluoride. However, because of confusion regarding
fluoride supplements among practitioners and parents, association of
supplements with fluorosis, and lack of parent compliance with the daily
administration, supplements may no longer be the first-­line approach for
preventing caries in preschool-­age children.
Topical fluoride on a daily basis can be achieved by using fluoridated toothpaste. Supervised use of less than a pea-­sized amount
of toothpaste (approximately 0.25 g) on the toothbrush in children
between 3 and 6 years of age reduces the risk of fluorosis. Children
younger than 3 years of age should brush with less than a smear or
grain-­sized amount of fluoridated toothpaste. Professional topical
fluoride applications performed semiannually reportedly reduce
caries by approximately 30%. Fluoride varnish is ideal for professional applications in preschool children because of ease of use,
even with non–dental health providers, and its safety because of
single-­dose dispensers. Products that are available come in containers of 0.25, 0.4, or 0.6 mL of varnish, corresponding to 5.6, 9.0, and
13.6 mg fluoride, respectively. Fluoride varnish should be administered twice a year for preschool children at moderate caries risk and
4 times a year for children at high caries risk.

Oral Hygiene

Daily brushing, especially with fluoridated toothpaste, helps prevent
dental caries. Most children younger than 8 years of age do not have
the coordination required for adequate tooth brushing. Accordingly,
parents should assume responsibility for the child’s oral hygiene, with
the degree of parental involvement appropriate to the child’s changing
abilities.

Diet

Frequent consumption of sweetened fruit drinks is not generally
recognized by parents for its high cariogenic potential. Consuming sweetened beverages in a nursing bottle or sippy cup should be
discouraged and special efforts made to instruct parents that their
child should consume sweetened beverages only at meal times and
not exceed 6 oz/day.

Dental Sealant

Plastic dental sealants have been shown to be effective in preventing
caries on the pit and fissure of the primary and permanent molars.
Sealants are most effective when placed soon after teeth erupt and
used in children with deep grooves and fissures in the molar teeth.
Sealants have been shown to reduce the incidence of caries by 85%
over 7 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Poor oral hygiene results in the accumulation of dental plaque at the tooth-­
gingival interface that activates an inflammatory response, expressed as
localized or generalized reddening and swelling of the gingiva. More than
half of American school children experience gingivitis. In severe cases, the
gingiva spontaneously bleeds and there is oral malodor. With proper oral
hygiene (careful tooth brushing and flossing) complete resolution can be
expected. Fluctuations in hormonal levels during the onset of puberty can
increase inflammatory responses to plaque. Gingivitis in healthy children
is unlikely to progress to periodontitis (inflammation of the periodontal
ligament resulting in loss of alveolar bone).

AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS IN CHILDREN
(­ PREPUBERTAL PERIODONTITIS)

Periodontitis in children before puberty is a rare disease that often
begins between the time of eruption of the primary teeth and the
age of 4 or 5 years. The disease occurs in localized and generalized forms. There is rapid bone loss, often leading to premature
loss of primary teeth. It is often associated with systemic problems, including neutropenia, leukocyte adhesion or migration
defects, hypophosphatasia, Papillon-­Lefèvre syndrome, leukemia,
and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. However, in many cases, there is
no apparent underlying medical problem. Nonetheless, diagnostic
workups are necessary to rule out underlying systemic disease.
Treatment includes aggressive professional teeth cleaning, strategic extraction of affected teeth, and antibiotic therapy. There are few
reports of long-­term successful treatment to reverse bone loss surrounding primary teeth.

AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS IN ADOLESCENTS

Localized aggressive periodontitis (LAgP) in adolescents is characterized by rapid attachment and alveolar bone loss, on at least
two first molars and incisors. Overall prevalence in the United
States is <1%, but the prevalence among Black people is reportedly 2.5%. This form of periodontitis is associated with a strain of
Aggregatibacter (Actinobacillus) bacteria. In addition, the neutrophils of patients with aggressive periodontitis can have chemotactic or phagocytic defects. If left untreated, affected teeth lose their
attachment and can exfoliate. Treatment varies with the degree of
involvement. Patients whose disease is diagnosed at onset are usually managed by surgical or nonsurgical debridement in conjunction with antibiotic therapy. Prognosis depends on the degree of
initial involvement and compliance with therapy.
Generalized aggressive periodontitis (GAgP) occurs more in adolescents and young adults and is characterized by generalized interproximal attachment loss and bone loss, including three teeth that are not
first molars and incisors.

CYCLOSPORINE-­ OR PHENYTOIN-­INDUCED
­ INGIVAL OVERGROWTH
G

The use of cyclosporine to suppress organ rejection or phenytoin
for anticonvulsant therapy, and in some cases calcium channel
blockers, is associated with generalized enlargement of the gingiva.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2250 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Phenytoin and its metabolites have a direct stimulatory action on
gingival fibroblasts, resulting in accelerated synthesis of collagen.
Phenytoin induces less gingival hyperplasia in patients who maintain
meticulous oral hygiene.
Gingival hyperplasia occurs in 10–30% of patients treated with
phenytoin. Severe manifestations can include gross enlargement
of the gingiva, sometimes covering the teeth; edema and erythema
of the gingiva; secondary infection, resulting in abscess formation;
migration of teeth; and inhibition of exfoliation of primary teeth
and subsequent impaction of permanent teeth. Treatment should
be directed toward prevention and, if possible, discontinuation of
cyclosporine or phenytoin. Patients undergoing long-­term treatment with these drugs should receive frequent dental examinations and oral hygiene care. Severe forms of gingival overgrowth
are treated by gingivectomy, but the lesion recurs if drug use is
continued.

ACUTE PERICORONITIS

Acute inflammation of the flap of gingiva that partially covers the
crown of an incompletely erupted tooth is common in mandibular
permanent molars. Accumulation of debris and bacteria between
the gingival flap and tooth precipitates the inflammatory response.
A variant of this condition is a gingival abscess caused by entrapment of bacteria because of orthodontic bands or crowns. Trismus
and severe pain may be associated with the inflammation. Untreated
cases can result in facial space infections and facial cellulitis.
Treatment includes local debridement and irrigation, warm
saline rinses, and antibiotic therapy. When the acute phase has subsided, resection of the gingival flap prevents recurrence. Early recognition of the partial impaction of mandibular third molars and
their subsequent extraction prevents these areas from developing
pericoronitis.

NECROTIZING PERIODONTAL DISEASE (ACUTE
NECROTIZING ULCERATIVE GINGIVITIS)

Necrotizing periodontal disease, in the past sometimes referred to
as “trench mouth,” is a distinct periodontal disease associated with
oral spirochetes and fusobacteria. However, it is not clear whether
bacteria initiate the disease or are secondary. It rarely develops in
healthy children in developed countries, with a prevalence in the
United States of <1%, but is seen more often in children and adolescents from developing areas of Africa, Asia, and South America.
In certain African countries, where affected children usually have
protein malnutrition, the lesion can extend into adjacent tissues,
causing necrosis of facial structures (cancrum oris, or noma).
Clinical manifestations of necrotizing periodontal disease include
necrosis and ulceration of gingiva between the teeth, an adherent grayish pseudomembrane over the affected gingiva, oral malodor, cervical
lymphadenopathy, malaise, and fever. The condition may be mistaken
for acute herpetic gingivostomatitis. Dark-­field microscopy of debris
obtained from necrotizing lesions demonstrates dense spirochete
populations.
Treatment of necrotizing periodontal disease is divided into an
acute management with local debridement, oxygenating agents
(direct application of 10% carbamide peroxide in anhydrous glycerol
qid), and analgesics. Dramatic resolution usually occurs within 48
hours. If a patient is febrile, antibiotics (penicillin or metronidazole)
may be an important adjunctive therapy. A second phase of treatment may be necessary if the acute phase of the disease has caused
irreversible morphologic damage to the periodontium. The disease is
not contagious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 360

Dental Trauma
Vineet K. Dhar
Traumatic oral injuries may be categorized into three groups: injuries to teeth, injuries to soft tissue (contusions, abrasions, lacerations,
punctures, avulsions, and burns), and injuries to jaw (mandibular and/
or maxillary fractures).

INJURIES TO TEETH

Approximately 10% of children between 18 months and 18 years of age
sustain significant tooth trauma. Oral injuries are second most common,
covering 18% of all somatic injuries in the age-­group 0-­6 years. Among
oral injuries, injuries to teeth are most common, followed by soft tissue
injuries. There appear to be three age periods of greatest predilection:
toddlers (1-­3 years), usually from falls or child abuse; school-­age children (7-­10 years), usually from bicycle and playground accidents; and
adolescents (16-­18 years), often the result of fights, athletic injuries, and
automobile accidents. Injuries to teeth are more common among children with protruding front teeth. Children with craniofacial abnormalities or neuromuscular deficits are also at increased risk for dental injury.
Injuries to teeth can involve the hard dental tissues, the dental pulp
(nerve), and injuries to the periodontal structure (surrounding bone and
attachment apparatus) (Fig. 360.1; Table 360.1).
Fractures of teeth may be uncomplicated (confined to the hard dental tissues) or complicated (involving the pulp). Exposure of the pulp
results in its bacterial contamination, which can lead to infection and
pulp necrosis. Such pulp exposure complicates therapy and can lower
the likelihood of a favorable outcome.
The teeth most often affected are the maxillary incisors. Uncomplicated crown fractures are treated by covering exposed dentin and by

Root
PDL

Pulp
Dentin

Enamel

Fig. 360.1 Tooth fractures can involve enamel, dentin, or pulp and

can occur in the crown or root of a tooth. PDL, Periodontal ligament.
(From Pinkham JR. Pediatric Dentistry: Infancy Through Adolescence.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1988. p. 172.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2250 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Phenytoin and its metabolites have a direct stimulatory action on
gingival fibroblasts, resulting in accelerated synthesis of collagen.
Phenytoin induces less gingival hyperplasia in patients who maintain
meticulous oral hygiene.
Gingival hyperplasia occurs in 10–30% of patients treated with
phenytoin. Severe manifestations can include gross enlargement
of the gingiva, sometimes covering the teeth; edema and erythema
of the gingiva; secondary infection, resulting in abscess formation;
migration of teeth; and inhibition of exfoliation of primary teeth
and subsequent impaction of permanent teeth. Treatment should
be directed toward prevention and, if possible, discontinuation of
cyclosporine or phenytoin. Patients undergoing long-­term treatment with these drugs should receive frequent dental examinations and oral hygiene care. Severe forms of gingival overgrowth
are treated by gingivectomy, but the lesion recurs if drug use is
continued.

ACUTE PERICORONITIS

Acute inflammation of the flap of gingiva that partially covers the
crown of an incompletely erupted tooth is common in mandibular
permanent molars. Accumulation of debris and bacteria between
the gingival flap and tooth precipitates the inflammatory response.
A variant of this condition is a gingival abscess caused by entrapment of bacteria because of orthodontic bands or crowns. Trismus
and severe pain may be associated with the inflammation. Untreated
cases can result in facial space infections and facial cellulitis.
Treatment includes local debridement and irrigation, warm
saline rinses, and antibiotic therapy. When the acute phase has subsided, resection of the gingival flap prevents recurrence. Early recognition of the partial impaction of mandibular third molars and
their subsequent extraction prevents these areas from developing
pericoronitis.

NECROTIZING PERIODONTAL DISEASE (ACUTE
NECROTIZING ULCERATIVE GINGIVITIS)

Necrotizing periodontal disease, in the past sometimes referred to
as “trench mouth,” is a distinct periodontal disease associated with
oral spirochetes and fusobacteria. However, it is not clear whether
bacteria initiate the disease or are secondary. It rarely develops in
healthy children in developed countries, with a prevalence in the
United States of <1%, but is seen more often in children and adolescents from developing areas of Africa, Asia, and South America.
In certain African countries, where affected children usually have
protein malnutrition, the lesion can extend into adjacent tissues,
causing necrosis of facial structures (cancrum oris, or noma).
Clinical manifestations of necrotizing periodontal disease include
necrosis and ulceration of gingiva between the teeth, an adherent grayish pseudomembrane over the affected gingiva, oral malodor, cervical
lymphadenopathy, malaise, and fever. The condition may be mistaken
for acute herpetic gingivostomatitis. Dark-­field microscopy of debris
obtained from necrotizing lesions demonstrates dense spirochete
populations.
Treatment of necrotizing periodontal disease is divided into an
acute management with local debridement, oxygenating agents
(direct application of 10% carbamide peroxide in anhydrous glycerol
qid), and analgesics. Dramatic resolution usually occurs within 48
hours. If a patient is febrile, antibiotics (penicillin or metronidazole)
may be an important adjunctive therapy. A second phase of treatment may be necessary if the acute phase of the disease has caused
irreversible morphologic damage to the periodontium. The disease is
not contagious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 360

Dental Trauma
Vineet K. Dhar
Traumatic oral injuries may be categorized into three groups: injuries to teeth, injuries to soft tissue (contusions, abrasions, lacerations,
punctures, avulsions, and burns), and injuries to jaw (mandibular and/
or maxillary fractures).

INJURIES TO TEETH

Approximately 10% of children between 18 months and 18 years of age
sustain significant tooth trauma. Oral injuries are second most common,
covering 18% of all somatic injuries in the age-­group 0-­6 years. Among
oral injuries, injuries to teeth are most common, followed by soft tissue
injuries. There appear to be three age periods of greatest predilection:
toddlers (1-­3 years), usually from falls or child abuse; school-­age children (7-­10 years), usually from bicycle and playground accidents; and
adolescents (16-­18 years), often the result of fights, athletic injuries, and
automobile accidents. Injuries to teeth are more common among children with protruding front teeth. Children with craniofacial abnormalities or neuromuscular deficits are also at increased risk for dental injury.
Injuries to teeth can involve the hard dental tissues, the dental pulp
(nerve), and injuries to the periodontal structure (surrounding bone and
attachment apparatus) (Fig. 360.1; Table 360.1).
Fractures of teeth may be uncomplicated (confined to the hard dental tissues) or complicated (involving the pulp). Exposure of the pulp
results in its bacterial contamination, which can lead to infection and
pulp necrosis. Such pulp exposure complicates therapy and can lower
the likelihood of a favorable outcome.
The teeth most often affected are the maxillary incisors. Uncomplicated crown fractures are treated by covering exposed dentin and by

Root
PDL

Pulp
Dentin

Enamel

Fig. 360.1 Tooth fractures can involve enamel, dentin, or pulp and

can occur in the crown or root of a tooth. PDL, Periodontal ligament.
(From Pinkham JR. Pediatric Dentistry: Infancy Through Adolescence.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1988. p. 172.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 360 u Dental Trauma 2251
Table 360.1

Injuries to Crowns of Teeth

TYPE OF TRAUMA

DESCRIPTION

TREATMENT AND REFERRAL

Enamel infraction (crazing)

Incomplete fracture of enamel without loss of
tooth structure

Initially might not require therapy but should be assessed
periodically by dentist

Enamel fractures

Fracture of only the tooth enamel

Tooth may be smoothed or treated to replace fragment

Enamel and dentin fracture

Fracture of enamel and dentinal layer of the tooth.
Tooth may be sensitive to cold or air. Pulp may
become necrotic, leading to periapical abscess

Refer as soon as possible. Area should be treated to
preserve the integrity of the underlying pulp

Enamel, dentin fracture
involving the pulp

Bacterial contamination can lead to pulpal necrosis
and periapical abscess. The tooth might have the
appearance of bleeding or might display a small
red spot

Refer immediately. The dental therapy of choice depends
on the extent of injury, the condition of the pulp, the
development of the tooth, time elapsed from injury, and
any other injuries to the supporting structures. Therapy is
directed toward minimizing contamination in an effort to
improve the prognosis

From Josell SD, Abrams RG. Managing common dental problems and emergencies. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1991;38:1325–1342.

placing an aesthetic restoration. Complicated crown fractures involving the tooth pulp usually require endodontic therapy (root canal).
Crown-­root fractures and root fractures usually require extensive dental therapy. Such injuries in the primary dentition can interfere with
normal development of the permanent dentition; therefore significant
injuries of the primary incisor teeth are usually managed by extraction.
Traumatic oral injuries should be referred to a dentist as soon as possible.
Even when the teeth appear intact, a dentist should promptly evaluate the
patient. Baseline data (radiographs, mobility patterns, responses to specific
stimuli) enable the dentist to assess the likelihood of future complications.

INJURIES TO PERIODONTAL STRUCTURES

Trauma to teeth with associated injury to periodontal structures that
hold the teeth usually manifests as mobile or displaced teeth. Categories of trauma to the periodontium include concussion, subluxation,
intrusive luxation, extrusive luxation, and avulsion.

Fig. 360.2 Intruded primary incisor that appears avulsed (knocked
out).

Concussion

Injuries that produce minor damage to the periodontal ligament are
termed concussions. Teeth sustaining such injuries are not mobile or
displaced but react markedly to percussion (gentle hitting of the tooth
with an instrument). This type of injury usually requires no therapy
and resolves without complication. Primary incisors that sustain concussion can change color, which may indicate pulpal degeneration and
should be evaluated by a dentist.

Subluxation

Subluxated teeth exhibit mild to moderate horizontal mobility and/or vertical mobility. Hemorrhage is usually evident around the neck of the tooth
at the gingival margin. There is no displacement of the tooth. Many subluxated teeth need to be immobilized by splints to ensure adequate repair
of the periodontal ligament. Some of these teeth develop pulp necrosis.

Intrusion

Intruded teeth are pushed up into their socket, sometimes to the point
where they are not clinically visible. Intruded primary incisors can give
the false appearance of being avulsed (knocked out). To rule out avulsion, a dental radiograph is indicated (Figs. 360.2 and 360.3). Intruded
primary teeth are usually monitored for spontaneous repositioning or re-­
eruption. Depending on the severity, the intruded permanent teeth may
be monitored for re-­eruption or repositioned surgically or orthodontically.
Some of these teeth develop pulp necrosis and infection requiring further
management.

Extrusion

Extrusion injury is characterized by displacement of the tooth from
its socket. The tooth is usually displaced to the lingual (tongue)
side, with fracture of the wall of the alveolar socket. These teeth
need immediate treatment; the longer the delay, the more likely the

Fig. 360.3 Occlusal radiograph documents intrusion of “missing
tooth” presented in Figure 360.2.

tooth will be fixed in its displaced position. Therapy is directed at
reduction (repositioning the tooth) and fixation (splinting). The
pulp of such teeth often becomes necrotic and requires endodontic
therapy. Extrusive luxation in the primary dentition is usually managed by extraction because complications of reduction and fixation
can result in problems with development of permanent teeth.

Avulsion

If avulsed permanent teeth are replanted as soon as possible after
injury, there is a good chance that normal reattachment will follow
and the tooth will have a good prognosis. However, if the tooth is in
a dry environment for longer than 1 hour, the ligament that holds the
tooth in place has little chance for survival and failure (root resorption,
ankylosis) is common. Parents confronted with this emergency situation can be instructed to do the following:

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2252 Part XVI u The Digestive System
• Find the tooth.
• Briefly rinse the tooth. (Do not scrub the tooth. Do not touch the
root. After plugging the sink drain, hold the tooth by the crown and
rinse it under running tap water.)
• Insert the tooth into the socket. (Gently place it back into its normal
position. Do not be concerned if the tooth extrudes slightly. If the
parent or child is too apprehensive for replantation of the tooth,
the tooth should be placed in cold cow’s milk or other cold isotonic
solution.)
• Go directly to the dentist. (In transit, the child should hold the tooth
in its socket with a finger. The parent should place the child in an
age-­appropriate child seat, buckle a seatbelt around the child, and
drive safely.)
After the tooth is replanted, it must be immobilized to facilitate reattachment; endodontic therapy is always required. The initial signs of
complications associated with replantation can appear as early as 1
week after trauma or as late as several years later. Close dental follow­up is indicated for at least 1 year.

PREVENTION

To minimize the likelihood of dental injuries:
• Every child or adolescent who engages in contact sports should wear
a mouth guard, which may be constructed by a dentist or purchased
at any athletic goods store.
• Helmets with face guards should be worn by children or adolescents
with neuromuscular problems or seizure disorders to protect the
head and face during falls.
• Helmets should also be used during biking, skiing, skating, and
skateboarding.
• All children or adolescents with protruding incisors should be
evaluated by a pediatric dentist or orthodontist.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

Children who experience dental trauma might also have sustained
head or neck trauma, and therefore, neurologic assessment is warranted. Tetanus prophylaxis should be considered with any injury that
disrupts the integrity of the oral tissues. The possibility of child abuse
should always be considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

self-­limited in the healthy newborn infant, but topical application of
nystatin to the oral cavity of the baby and to the nipples of breastfeeding mothers will hasten recovery.
OPC is also a major problem during myelosuppressive therapy.
Systemic candidiasis, a major cause of morbidity and mortality during myelosuppressive therapy, develops almost exclusively in patients
who have had prior oropharyngeal, esophageal, or intestinal candidiasis. This observation implies that prevention of OPC should reduce
the incidence of systemic candidiasis. The use of oral rinses of 0.2%
chlorhexidine gluconate solution along with systemic antifungals
may be effective in preventing OPC, systemic candidiasis, or candidal
esophagitis.

APHTHOUS ULCERS

The aphthous ulcer (canker sore) is a distinct oral lesion (Fig. 361.1),
prone to recurrence; Table 361.1 notes the differential diagnosis. Aphthous ulcers are reported to develop in 20% of the population. Their
etiology is unclear, but allergic or immunologic reactions, emotional
stress, genetics, and injury to the soft tissues in the mouth have been
implicated. Aphthous-­like lesions may be associated with inflammatory bowel disease, Behçet disease, gluten-­sensitive enteropathy, periodic fever-­aphthae-­pharyngitis-­adenitis syndrome, Sweet syndrome,
HIV infection (especially if ulcers are large and slow to heal), and
cyclic neutropenia (see Table 361.1). Clinically, these ulcers are characterized by well-­circumscribed, ulcerative lesions with a white necrotic
base surrounded by a red halo. The lesions generally last 10-­14 days
and heal without scarring. Nonprescription palliative therapies, such
as benzocaine and topical lidocaine, are effective, as are topical steroids.
Use of soft tissue dental lasers may help manage aphthous ulcers by
accelerating wound healing and reducing pain. Tetracycline is beneficial with severe outbreaks, but caution is necessary in pregnant women,
because it is classified as U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
pregnancy category D. In younger children (≤8 years), tetracycline can
affect developing teeth and cause permanent staining of the teeth.

HERPETIC GINGIVOSTOMATITIS

After an initial incubation period of approximately 1 week, the primary infection with herpes simplex virus manifests as fever and malaise, usually in a child younger than 5 years (see Chapter 299). The oral
cavity can show various expressions, including the gingiva becoming
erythematous, mucosal hemorrhages, and clusters of small vesicles
erupting throughout the mouth. There is often involvement of the
mucocutaneous margin and perioral skin (Fig. 361.2). The oral symptoms generally are accompanied by fever, lymphadenopathy, and difficulty eating and drinking. The symptoms usually regress within 2
weeks without scarring. Fluids should be encouraged because the child
may become dehydrated. Analgesics and anesthetic rinses can make

Chapter 361

Common Lesions of the
Oral Soft Tissues
Vineet K. Dhar
OROPHARYNGEAL CANDIDIASIS

Oropharyngeal infection with Candida albicans (thrush, moniliasis)
(see Chapter 280.1) is common in neonates from contact with the
organism in the birth canal or contact with the breast during breastfeeding. The lesions of oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC) appear as
white plaques covering all or part of the oropharyngeal mucosa. These
plaques are removable from the underlying surface, which is characteristically inflamed and has pinpoint hemorrhages. The diagnosis is
confirmed by direct microscopic examination on potassium hydroxide smears and culture of scrapings from lesions. OPC is usually

Fig. 361.1 Major aphthous in a child. (From Gürkan A, Özlü SG,
Altiaylik-­
Özer P, et al. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis in childhood
and adolescence: a single-­
center experience. Pediatr Dermatol.
2015;32[4]:476–480. Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 361 u Common Lesions of the Oral Soft Tissues
Table 361.1

Differential Diagnosis of Oral Ulceration

CONDITION

COMMENT

COMMON
Aphthous ulcers (canker sores)

Painful circumscribed lesions;
recurrences

2253

the child more comfortable. Oral valacyclovir, if taken within the first
3 days of symptoms in immunocompetent patients, is beneficial in
shortening the duration of symptoms. Caution should be exercised to
prevent autoinoculation, especially of the eyes.

RECURRENT HERPES LABIALIS

Traumatic ulcers

Accidents, chronic cheek biter,
after dental local anesthesia

Hand, foot, and mouth disease

Painful; lesions on tongue, anterior
oral cavity, hands, and feet

Herpangina

Painful; lesions confined to soft
palate and oropharynx

Herpetic gingivostomatitis

Vesicles on mucocutaneous
borders; painful, febrile

Recurrent herpes labialis

Vesicles on lips; painful

Approximately 90% of the worldwide population develops antibodies
to herpes simplex virus. In periods of quiescence, the virus is thought
to remain latent in sensory neurons. Unlike primary herpetic gingivostomatitis, which manifests as multiple painful vesicles on the lips,
tongue, palate, gingiva, and mucosa, recurrent herpes is generally limited to the lips. Other than the annoyance of causing pain and being a
cosmetic issue, recurrent episodes generally do not involve systemic
symptoms. Reactivation of the virus is thought to be the result of exposure to ultraviolet light, tissue trauma, stress, or fevers. There is little
advantage of antiviral therapy over palliative therapies in an otherwise
healthy patient affected by recurrent herpes.

Chemical burns

Alkali, acid, aspirin; painful

PARULIS

Heat burns

Hot food, electrical

Medicine effect

NSAIDs, methotrexate, azathioprine,
enalapril, losartan, fluoxetine,
antiretroviral agents

RIME

Mycoplasma and other agents;
predominant oral ulcerations
with scattered cutaneous lesions

UNCOMMON
Neutrophil defects

Agranulocytosis, leukemia, cyclic
neutropenia; painful

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Recurrent; may be painless

Behçet syndrome

Resembles aphthous lesions;
associated with genital ulcers,
uveitis

Necrotizing ulcerative
gingivostomatitis

Vincent stomatitis; painful

Syphilis

Chancre or gumma; painless

Oral Crohn disease

Aphthous-­like; painful

Histoplasmosis

Lingual

Pemphigus

May be isolated to the oral cavity

Stevens-­Johnson syndrome

May be isolated to or appear
initially in the oral cavity

NSAIDs, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; RIME, reactive infectious mucotaneous
eruption.

The parulis (gum boil) is a soft reddish papule located adjacent to the
root of a chronically abscessed tooth. It occurs at the end-­point of a
draining dental sinus tract. Treatment consists of diagnosing which
tooth is abscessed and extracting it or performing root canal treatment
on the offending tooth.

CHEILITIS

Cheilitis, dryness of the lips followed by scaling and cracking and accompanied by a characteristic burning sensation, is common in children. Cheilitis may be caused by sensitivity to contact substances, lip licking, vitamin
deficiency, weakened immune system, or fungal or bacterial infections,
and often occurs in association with fever. Treatment may include antifungal or antibacterial agents and frequent application of petroleum jelly.

ANKYLOGLOSSIA

Ankyloglossia, or tongue-­tie, is characterized by an abnormally short
lingual frenum that can hinder the tongue movement, but rarely interferes with feeding or speech. It is possible that the frenum could spontaneously lengthen as the child gets older. If, in the rare event that the
extent of the ankyloglossia is severe, speech may be affected and surgical correction may be indicated.

GEOGRAPHIC TONGUE

Geographic tongue (migratory glossitis) is a benign and asymptomatic lesion that is characterized by one or more smooth bright red
patches, often showing a yellow, gray, or white membranous margin
on the dorsum of an otherwise normally roughened tongue. The
condition has no known cause, and no treatment is indicated (see
Chapter 705).

FISSURED TONGUE

The fissured tongue (scrotal tongue) is a malformation manifested clinically by numerous small furrows or grooves on the dorsal surface (see
Chapter 705). If the tongue is painful, brushing the tongue or irrigating
with water can reduce the bacteria in the fissures.

DEVELOPMENTAL (NORMAL) VARIATIONS
Bohn Nodules

Bohn nodules are small developmental anomalies located along the
buccal and lingual aspects of the mandibular and maxillary ridges and
in the hard palate of the neonate. These lesions arise from remnants of
mucous gland tissue. Treatment is not necessary as the nodules usually
disappear within a few weeks.

Dental Lamina Cysts
Fig. 361.2 Herpetic gingivostomatitis. Lip erosions with multiple

perioral herpetic lesions involving the mucocutaneous borders. (From
Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006. p. 398.)

Dental lamina cysts are small cystic lesions located along the crest of
the mandibular and maxillary ridges of the neonate. These lesions arise
from epithelial remnants of the dental lamina. Treatment is not necessary; they disappear within a few weeks.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2254 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Epstein Pearls

Epstein pearls are small developmental lesions located in the median
palatal raphe region due to entrapment of epithelial remnants along the
line of fusion of the palatal halves. Treatment is not necessary, as these
slough off on their own within a few weeks.

Fordyce Granules

Fordyce granules are common and almost 80% of adults have these
yellow-­
white granules in clusters or plaquelike areas on the oral
mucosa, most commonly on the buccal mucosa or lips. They are aberrant sebaceous glands. The glands are present at birth, but they can
undergo hypertrophy and first appear as discrete yellowish papules
during the preadolescent period in approximately 50% of children. No
treatment is necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

culture obtained from the Stensen duct or by surgical drainage. Viral
causes of parotitis include mumps (often in epidemics), Epstein-­Barr
virus, human herpesvirus 6, enteroviruses, COVID-­19, and HIV.

RANULA

A ranula is a cyst associated with a major salivary gland in the sublingual area. It is a large, soft, mucus-­containing swelling in the floor of
the mouth. It occurs at any age, including infancy. The cyst should be
excised, and the severed duct should be exteriorized.

MUCOCELE

Mucocele is a salivary gland lesion caused by a blockage of a salivary
gland duct. It is most common on the lower lip and has the appearance
of a fluid-­filled vesicle, or a fluctuant nodule with the overlying mucosa
being normal in color. Treatment is surgical excision, with removal of
the involved accessory salivary gland.

CONGENITAL LIP PITS

Congenital lip pits are caused by fistulous tracts that lead to embedded mucous glands in the lower lip. They leak saliva, especially with
salivary stimulation. Lip pits can be isolated anomalies, or they can be
found in patients with cleft lip or palate. Treatment is surgical excision
of the glandular tissue.

Chapter 362

Diseases of the Salivary
Glands and Jaws
Vineet K. Dhar
With the exception of mumps (see Chapter 295), diseases of the salivary glands are rare in children. Bilateral enlargement of the submaxillary glands can occur in HIV/AIDS, cystic fibrosis, Epstein-­Barr virus
infection, malnutrition, COVID-­19, and transiently during acute asthmatic attacks. Chronic vomiting can be accompanied by enlargement
of the parotid glands. Benign salivary gland hypertrophy has been
associated with endocrinopathies: thyroid disease, diabetes, and Cushing syndrome. Infiltrative disease or tumors are uncommon; red flags
include facial nerve palsy, rapid growth, fixed skin, paresthesias, ulceration, or a history of radiation to the head or neck region.

PAROTITIS

Acute parotitis is often caused by blockage, with further inflammation due to bacterial infection. The blockage may be due to a salivary
stone or mucus plug. Stones can be removed by physical manipulation,
surgery, or lithotripsy. Recurrent parotitis is an idiopathic swelling of
the parotid gland that can occur in otherwise healthy children. The
swelling is usually unilateral, but both glands can be involved simultaneously or alternately. There is little pain; the swelling is limited to the
gland and usually lasts 2-­3 weeks. Treatment may include local heat,
massaging the gland, and antibiotics. Suppurative parotitis is usually
caused by Staphylococcus aureus. It is usually unilateral and may be
accompanied by fever. The gland becomes swollen, tender, and painful. Suppurative parotitis responds to antibacterial therapy based on

ERUPTION CYST

Eruption cyst is a smooth painless swelling over the erupting tooth. If
bleeding occurs in the cyst space, it may appear blue or blue-­black. In
most cases, no treatment is indicated, and the cyst resolves with the full
eruption of the tooth.

XEROSTOMIA

Also known as dry mouth, xerostomia may be associated with fever,
dehydration, anticholinergic drugs, chronic graft-­versus-­host disease,
Mikulicz disease (leukemic infiltrates), Sjögren syndrome, or tumoricidal doses of radiation when the salivary glands are within the field.
Long-­term xerostomia is a high-­risk factor for dental caries.

SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS
See Chapter 549.

HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
See Chapter 556.

TUMORS OF THE JAW

Ossifying fibroma is a common benign tumor of the jaw. It is often
asymptomatic and is usually discovered on routine radiographic examinations. Treatment is resection due to the possibility of recurrence.
Central giant cell granuloma is another common lesion thought to
be reactive, rather than neoplastic. Although usually asymptomatic,
it can be expansile, with or without resorption of the roots of teeth
and perforation of the cortical plate. Treatment is complete curettage
or surgical excision. Dentigerous cysts are common lesions associated
with the crown of an impacted or unerupted tooth. Although usually
asymptomatic, they can become large and destructive. Treatment is
surgical removal.
The malignant primary tumors of the jaw in children include Burkitt
lymphoma, osteogenic sarcoma, lymphosarcoma, ameloblastoma, and,
more rarely, fibrosarcoma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 364 u Embryology, Anatomy, and Function of the Esophagus

Chapter 363

Diagnostic Radiology in
Dental Assessment
Diagnostic dental radiology in children follows the as low as reasonably
achievable (ALARA) principle. In children, intraoral radiographs such as
bitewings and select periapical radiographs are taken during routine dental visits and repeated every 6 months to 2 years based on the caries risk
assessment. Additional radiographs such as panoramic views, cephalometric radiographs, and dental cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) are
taken when indicated. In general, the cumulative radiation exposure due to
routine dental radiographs is minimal. In addition, precautions such as use
of high-­speed film, collimated beam, protective aprons and thyroid collars,
proper technique, and minimizing number of exposures are all taken to
keep radiation exposure minimal.
Intraoral dental radiographs are highly detailed, direct-­
exposure
films that demonstrate sections of the child’s teeth and supporting bone
structures. The film or image receptor is placed lingual to the teeth, and
the x-­ray beam is directed through the teeth and supporting structures.
The resulting images are used to detect dental caries, loss of alveolar bone
(periodontal disease), abscesses at the roots of the teeth, and trauma to the
teeth and alveolar bone. These radiographs are also used to demonstrate
the developmental status of permanent teeth within the bone.
The panoramic radiograph provides a single tomographic image of the
upper and lower jaw, including all teeth and supporting structures. The
x-­ray tube rotates about the patient’s head with reciprocal movement of the
film or image receptor during the exposure. The panoramic image shows
the teeth, mandibular bodies, rami, and condyles; maxillary sinuses; and
a majority of the facial buttresses. Such images are used to show abnormalities of tooth number, development and eruption pattern, cystic and
neoplastic lesions, bone infections, and fracture, as well as dental caries
and periodontal disease (Fig. 363.1).
Cephalometric radiographs are posteroanterior and lateral skull films
that are taken using a cephalostat (head positioner) and employ techniques that clearly demonstrate the facial skeleton and soft facial tissues.
Similar protocols for positioning children are used throughout the world.
From these images, cranial and facial points and planes can be determined
and compared with standards derived from thousands of images. A child’s
facial growth can be assessed serially when cephalometric radiographs
are taken sequentially. Relationships among the maxilla, mandible, cranial base, and facial skeleton can be determined in a quantitative manner.
Additionally, the alignment of the teeth and the relation of the teeth to the
supporting bone can be serially measured.

EI
pc
1st

Dental CBCT is a variation of traditional CT, used mainly to evaluate
oral and maxillofacial regions and teeth. Dental CBCT generally delivers lower radiation exposure than traditional CT, but higher than conventional dental radiography. There are several indications for CBCT,
such as evaluation of oral-­maxillofacial pathologies, diagnosis of dental
trauma, endodontic treatment, visualization of abnormal teeth, orthodontic assessment, or cleft palate assessment, among others.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Vineet K. Dhar

3rd
2nd

2255

pc
UP

Fig. 363.1 A panoramic radiograph of a 10-­yr-­old child showing ex-

tensive dental caries of the first permanent molars (arrows), as well as
normal structures: erupted first permanent molar, unerupted second
molar, and unerupted third molar. EI, Erupted incisors, UP, unerupted
premolars, pc, erupted primary canines.

Section 3

The Esophagus
Chapter 364

Embryology, Anatomy,
and Function of the
Esophagus
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy
Matta
The esophagus is a hollow muscular tube, separated from the pharynx
above and the stomach below by two tonically closed sphincters. Its
primary function is to convey ingested material from the mouth to the
stomach. Largely lacking digestive glands and enzymes, and exposed
only briefly to nutrients, it has no active role in digestion.

EMBRYOLOGY

The esophagus develops from the postpharyngeal foregut and can be
distinguished from the stomach in the 4-­week-­old embryo. At the
same time, the trachea begins to bud just anterior to the developing
esophagus; the resulting laryngotracheal groove extends and becomes
the lung. Disturbance of this stage can result in congenital anomalies
such as tracheoesophageal fistula (see Chapter 365). The length of the
esophagus is 8-­10 cm at birth and doubles in the first 2-­3 years of life,
reaching approximately 25 cm in the adult. The abdominal portion of
the esophagus is as large as the stomach in an 8-­week-­old fetus but
gradually shortens to a few millimeters at birth, attaining a final length
of approximately 3 cm by a few years of age. This intraabdominal location of both the distal esophagus and the lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) is an important antireflux mechanism because an increase in
intraabdominal pressure is also transmitted to the sphincter, augmenting its defense. Swallowing can be seen in utero as early as 16-­20 weeks
of gestation, helping to circulate the amniotic fluid; polyhydramnios
is a hallmark of lack of normal swallowing or of esophageal or upper
gastrointestinal tract obstruction. Sucking and swallowing are not fully
coordinated before 34 weeks of gestation, a contributing factor for feeding difficulties in premature infants.

ANATOMY

The luminal aspect of the esophagus is covered by thick, protective, nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, which abruptly changes to
simple columnar epithelium at the stomach’s upper margin at the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). This squamous epithelium is relatively

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

